
Middletown, RI Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF MIDDLETOWN, RHODE ISLAND
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-33 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through December 31, 2018




 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



THE CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS



         DIVISION 1.   THE CHARTER



         DIVISION 2.   RELATED LAWS



DIVISION 1.  THE CHARTER



   Editor's note.  The Charter set out in this division was prepared and
adopted pursuant to the provisions of the 28th Amendment to the state
Constitution and ratified by the electorate of the Town of Middletown at the
general election held November 5, 1968.  The Charter became effective
December 16, 1968.  The frontal section analysis has been added and a number
of article headings and section catchlines have been amplified by the editors
for the purpose of clarity, and neither the article headings nor section
catchlines are to be regarded as official.  A uniform system of
capitalization has been adopted, and words in brackets have been added;
otherwise, no change has been made in the Charter as ratified by the voters.



   This Charter was ratified, confirmed and validated by the general
assembly by P.L. 1969, ch. 52, set out in art. 1 of div. 2 of this part of
the Code.



Preamble.



Article I.  Basic Provisions.



   § 101.   Inhabitants incorporated as town with powers and duties of
a town.



   § 102.   Form of government.



Article II.  The Town Council.



   § 201.   Number; selection and term of members.



   § 202.   Qualifications of members: vacancy occurs if member
becomes disqualified.



   § 203.   Meetings.



   § 204.   Presiding officer.



   § 205.   Compensation of president and members.



   § 206.   Power to inquire and make investigations.



   § 207.   Power to determine policy; other enumerated powers.



   § 208.   Town budget; expenditures prior to adoption of annual
budget, and loans in anticipation of tax revenues; fiscal year defined.



   § 209.   Filling vacancies in membership.



   § 210.   Rules for conduct of meetings; votes to be public;
executive sessions.



   § 211.   Conflicts of interest.



Article III.  The Town Administrator.



   § 301.   Status, and responsibility generally.



   § 302.   By whom chosen; qualifications; residence.



   § 303.   Appointment, term of office, suspension and removal.



   § 304.   Enumeration of powers and duties.



   § 305.   Non-interference by the council.



   § 306.   Authority to perform duties of other administrative
officers, and to assign duties of two or more administrative officers to one
person.



   § 307.   Who acts in absence of town administrator.



   § 308.   Filling vacancy in office; interim town administrator.



   § 309   Compensation.



Article IV.  Initiative and Referendum.



   § 401.   General provisions.



   § 402.   Initiative procedure; submittal of proposed ordinance to
electorate if not adopted or adopted in altered form.



   § 403.   Referendum upon initiative of council.



   § 404.   Recall/removal.



Article V.  Elections.



   § 501.   Laws and conditions applicable.



   § 502.   Canvassing authority.



Article VI.  Town Officials; Municipal Court; Probate.



   § 601.   Town clerk; deputy town clerk.



   § 602.   (Redesignated as § 704.)



   § 603.   (Redesignated as § 1001.)



   § 604.   Reserved.



   § 605.   (Redesignated as § 711.)



   § 606.   (Redesignated as § 709.)



   § 607.   Town solicitor.



   § 608.   Judge of the Municipal Court.



   § 609.   Appointment of probate judge.



   § 610.   Registry of probate court.



Article VII.  Town Departments.



   § 701.   Police.



   § 702.   Fire.



   § 703.   Public works.



   § 704.   Tax assessor.



   § 705.   Parks and recreation.



   § 706.   Finance.



   § 707.   Middletown Public Library, Board of Trustees.



   § 708.   Senior Citizens' Center.



   § 709.   Building official.



   § 710.   Planning.



   § 711.   Town engineer.



Article VIII.  School Department.



   § 801.   School committee - Established; number and election of
members.



   § 802.   Same - Qualifications of members; disqualification of
member causes vacancy.



   § 803.   Same - Filling vacancies.



   § 804.   Same - Compensation of members; expenses of members.



   § 805.   Same - Powers and duties.



   § 806.   Same - Organization, rules and journal of proceedings.



   § 807.   Same - Regular meetings.



   § 808.   Superintendent of schools; appointment, qualifications,
and powers and duties.



   § 809.   Same - Removal from office.



   § 810.   Department personnel.



   § 811.   Policy making and administration; school committee not to
interfere with superintendent.



   § 812.   Budget; school committee to incur no obligation beyond
amount provided by budget.



   § 813.   Cooperative maintenance of buildings and grounds.



   § 814.   Purchasing; financial records and vouchers.



   § 815.   School committee to hold open meetings, except for
executive sessions; actions required to be done in open meetings.



Article IX.  Personnel.



   § 901.   Personnel board - Established; number, qualifications and
appointment of members.



   § 902.   Same - Compensation of members.



   § 903.   Same - Powers and duties enumerated.



   § 904.   Positions excepted from classified service.



   § 905.   Temporary appointments when no list is available.



   § 906.   Probationary period.



   § 907.   Regular appointment.



   § 908.   Emergency appointments.



   § 909.   Services of other agencies authorized for certain purposes.



   § 910.   Demotions and dismissals.



   § 911.   Personnel review board.



   § 912.   Retirement of town employees.



   § 913.   Right to organize; strikes.



   § 914.   Political activity.



Article X.  Miscellany.



   § 1001.   Board of assessment review.



   § 1002.   Public records.



   § 1003.   Conflicts of interest.



   § 1004.   Codification and revision of ordinances.



   § 1005.   Annual audit.



   § 1006.   Juvenile hearing board.



   § 1007.   Fees, penalties and payments collected by town officials
and agencies.



   § 1008.   Planning board.



   § 1009.   Zoning board of review.



Article XI.  Inauguration and Succession.



   § 1101.   Effective date.



   § 1102.   Transfer of appropriations.



   § 1103.   Ordinances to implement Charter.



   § 1104.   Reserved.



   § 1105.   Continuation of ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations.



   § 1106.   Continuation of tax obligation.



   § 1107.   Actions and proceedings pending when Charter took effect.



   § 1108.   Reserved.



   § 1109.   Reserved.



   § 1110.   Complaints by qualified electors of Charter violations.



   § 1111.   Reserved.



   § 1112.   Continuance of contracts and obligations.



Article XII.  Amendment of Charter; Separability of Provisions of Charter.



   § 1201.   General provisions.



   § 1202.   Form of ballot.



   § 1203.   Separability.



PREAMBLE.



   The people of the town of Middletown, in order to secure the right of
self-government in all local matters, pursuant to the provisions of the
Constitution of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, do
adopt and establish this Charter.



Article I.  Basic Provisions.



Sec. 101.  Inhabitants incorporated as town with powers and duties of a town.



   The inhabitants of the Town of Middletown, within the corporate limits
as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law,
shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity,
under the name of "Town of Middletown," and as such shall continue to have,
exercise and enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers, privileges and
franchises, and shall be subject to all the duties and obligations, now
incumbent upon or appertaining to said town as a municipal corporation, or by
virtue of the laws of this state so far as the same shall not be altered by
this Charter or amendments hereof.  The enumeration of particular powers by
this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive; and in addition to the
powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise
of such powers, it is intended that the town shall have and may exercise all
powers which, under the Constitution of this state, it would be competent for
this Charter specifically to enumerate.



Sec. 102.  Form of government.



   Pursuant to the provisions of this Charter and subject only to the
limitations imposed by the state Constitution and by this Charter, all powers
of the town, including those powers formerly vested in and exercised by the
financial town meeting which is hereby discontinued, shall be vested in an
elected town council, which shall enact local legislation, and in a town
administrator appointed by the town council in the manner provided below, who
shall be responsible to the council for the execution of the laws and the
administration of the town government.



Article II.  The Town Council.



Sec. 201.  Number; selection and term of members.



   The town council shall consist of seven members elected from the town
at large without party designation, each to serve for a term of two years or
until a successor is elected and qualified. (Amended, November 4, 2014.)



Sec. 202.  Qualifications of members; vacancy occurs if member becomes
disqualified.



   Members of the council shall be qualified electors of the Town of
Middletown and shall hold no other paid public office or employment in the
service of the town.  Current service as notary public, justice of the
peace, membership in the national guard or naval, air or military reserve or
employment by any of the educational institutions maintained by the state,
shall not disqualify persons for council membership.  No member of the
council shall be eligible to accept any other paid local town office during
his or her tenure on the council or for a period of one year thereafter. The
office of any council member who shall, during his or her term, cease to meet
the foregoing qualifications, shall be deemed vacant.  (Amended, November 5,
2002; Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 203.  Meetings.



   The first meeting of a newly elected council shall be held on the first
Monday following the certification of election of a majority of its members
by the canvassing authority.  The town clerk shall preside until the
selection of a council president.  The council shall determine the time and
place of its regular meetings, but it must meet at least once each month. 
The president or a majority of the council may call a special meeting, but
only by unanimous consent may the council meet sooner than forty-eight hours
after each member has been notified of a special meeting.  Four members of
the council shall constitute a quorum.



Sec. 204.  Presiding officer.



   The council shall elect one of its members as its president at its
first meeting as defined in section 203, or at its first meeting following
the occurrence of a vacancy in said office.  The president shall preside at
meetings, and shall be recognized as head of the town government for all
ceremonial purposes, and by the governor for purposes of military law.  The
president shall have the same right to speak and vote as any other member.
(Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 205.  Compensation of president and members.



   The president of the council and the members shall receive such annual
compensation as the council shall fix by ordinance; provided, that no change
in compensation shall take effect until after the next biennial election and
installation of town council members. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 206.  Power to inquire and make investigations.



   The council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any
officer, department, or agency of the town, and to make investigations
relating to town affairs.



Sec. 207.  Power to determine policy; other enumerated powers.



   The town council shall be the policy-determining body of the town, and
shall exercise all the powers of the town, except as otherwise provided by
this Charter, or by the Constitution and laws of the state.  Among the
powers of the council, to be exercised in accordance with relevant provisions
of this Charter and of the Constitution and laws of the state, shall be the
power:



   (a)   To judge the qualifications of its members, and for such
purpose it shall have the power to subpoena and require the production of
records.



   (b)   To appoint standing and temporary committees, but no
legislative powers of the council may be delegated to these committees.



   (c)   To create, change and abolish town offices, departments and
agencies not established by this Charter or by the Constitution and state
laws.



   (d)   To fix the amount of official bonds of all officers of the
town who, in its opinion, should be bonded, the premium on such bonds to be
paid by the town.



   (e)   To order the raising by a tax upon real and personal estate of
such sums of money as may be required to pay town debts and defray the
necessary charges and expenses of the town, and to order the assessment,
levying or imposing of any other taxes for the support of the town which
legally may be assessed, levied or imposed under any general or special laws
which are now or may hereafter be in existence.



   (f)   To enact and amend a zoning ordinance.



   (g)   Bond Limitation Without Referendum.  No bonds shall be issued
pledging the credit of the town in excess of one hundred thousand
($100,000.00) dollars in any one fiscal year unless submitted to a vote of
the electors at either a general or special election, and approved by a
majority of the electors voting at said election.



   (h)   To authorize the hiring, pursuant to statutes now or hereafter
in effect, of money in each financial year in anticipation of the receipt of
the proceeds of the annual tax due or to become due in said financial year
upon the ratable property in the town.



   (i)   To provide for the audit at any time of the accounts of the
town or any department, and to provide for an annual audit as prescribed in
section 1005.



   (j)   To provide for a personnel policy system as provided in
article IX.



   (k)   To appoint the town administrator as provided in section 303.



   (l)   To confirm all appointments of the town administrator for
which town council confirmation is required.



   (m)   To enact, amend or repeal ordinances for the preservation of
the public peace, health, safety, comfort and welfare, and for the protection
of persons and property.



   (n)   To provide reasonable penalties for the violation of any
ordinance.



   (o)   To exercise all additional powers, consistent and in
accordance with this Charter and the laws and Constitution of the state,
which have been or may hereafter be granted to the council by the Charter or
to the town by the laws and Constitution of the state.



   (p)   Contracts for materials and services shall be awarded in
accordance with the laws and Constitution of the state, and as established by
town ordinance.



   (q)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter to the
contrary, the Town Council shall have the authority to merge common duties,
functions and/or services of any agency or department of the Town and another
department or agency of the Town including but not limited to any department
or agency established by or enumerated in this Charter or by the Constitution
and state laws.  (Amended, September 15, 1980; Amended, November 4, 2008;
Amended, November 6, 2012.)



Sec. 208.  Town budget; expenditures prior to adoption of annual budget, and
loans in anticipation of tax revenues; fiscal year defined.



   Upon receipt of the consolidated town and school committee budget from
the town administrator, the town council shall give to said budget two
preliminary readings.  Coincident with such consideration it shall set dates
for two successive public hearings regarding the budget, one hearing to
follow the first reading, and one to follow the second reading.  Notice of
the time and place of said hearings shall be posted in three or more public
places in the town and advertised in at least one newspaper of local
circulation at least ten days in advance of each hearing.  The council shall
take final action on the consolidated budget following the second hearing
before the start of the next fiscal year, which shall begin the first day of
each July unless and until changed by ordinance.  The town council can
change only the total amount of the school committee's recommended budget. 
The town council can increase the total amount of either part of the
consolidated budget, as presented by the town administrator, only if it makes
provisions for increasing anticipated revenue to match increases in
expenditures in the budget.  In the event that the annual budget has not
been finally enacted by the town council at the start of the fiscal year for
whatever reason, the town council may authorize expenditures by town
departments and agencies not to exceed the rate of expenditures for the
comparable month of the preceding year.  Such authorization shall be valid
for no more than thirty days without renewal by the council.  The council
may negotiate loans in anticipation of tax revenues repayable in no more than
twelve months' time, in order to provide funds to cover such expenditures. 
(Amended, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 209.  Filling vacancies in membership.



   If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the council, for whatever
reason, the remaining members of the council shall select a qualified person
to fill the vacancy until the next regularly scheduled state or town
election, at which time the electors shall elect a qualified person to
complete any unexpired portion of the term.



Sec. 210.  Rules for conduct of meetings; votes to be public; executive
sessions.



   The council may adopt rules and regulations regarding the conduct of
its meetings, but all votes shall be public.  The council may meet in
executive session only for the purposes of discussion and investigation.



Sec. 211.  Conflicts of interest.



   No member of the town council shall vote on any matter which will,
directly or indirectly, bring personal benefit to the member. In accordance
with RIGL § 36-14-1 et seq. as well as any rules or regulations promulgated
by the RI Ethics Commission, no official of the town elected or appointed,
shall utilize his/her position to forward, directly or indirectly, his/her
personal interest. Personal interest includes the interests of any person
within his or her family as defined by RIGL § 36-14-2(1) as well as any
business in which the official has a financial interest. (Amended, November
4, 2008.)



Article III.  The Town Administrator.



Sec. 301.  Status, and responsibilities generally.



   The town administrator shall be the chief executive officer and head of
the administrative branch of the government.  He or she shall be responsible
to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the town.
(Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 302.  By whom chosen; qualifications; residence.



   The town administrator shall be chosen by the council solely on the
basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with special
reference to actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice in
respect to the duties of the office as hereinafter set forth.  At the time
of his or her appointment, the administrator need not be a resident of the
town or state, but during his or her tenure of office he or she shall reside
within the town. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 303.  Appointment, term of office, suspension and removal.



   The council shall appoint the town administrator for an indefinite term
and may remove him or her by a majority vote of its members.  At least
thirty days before such removal shall become effective, the council shall by
a majority vote of its members adopt a preliminary resolution stating the
reasons for his or her removal.  The town administrator may reply in writing
and may request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than twenty
days nor later than thirty days after the filing of such request.  After
such public hearing, if one be requested, and after full consideration, the
council by majority vote of its members may adopt a final resolution of
removal.  By the preliminary resolution the council may suspend the town
administrator from duty, but shall in any case cause to be paid him or her
forthwith any unpaid balance of his or her salary then due.  (Amended,
November 5, 2002; Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 304.  Enumeration of power and duties.



   The town administrator shall have the power and shall be required:



   (a)   To submit to the council, not later than ninety days prior to
the start of the next fiscal year, a proposed budget of receipts and
expenditures and an explanatory budget message.  For such purpose the town
administrator shall obtain from the head of each office, department and
agency except the school committee, estimates of its revenues and
expenditures and such supporting data as he or she may request.  In
preparing the proposed budget, the town administrator shall review the
estimates and may revise them as he or she may deem advisable.  The budget
as proposed by the town administrator shall show all anticipated revenue and
all proposed expenditures except those for school purposes, and the total of
such expenditures shall not be greater than the total of anticipated
revenue.  The town administrator shall request from the school committee its
budget of estimated expenditures and revenues for transmission to the
council.  He or she shall incorporate the total of these expenditures and
revenues with the total he or she has arrived at for general town purposes,
but shall not have the authority to increase or decrease any item in the
school committee's budget.



   (b)   To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced.



   (c)   To appoint, subject to the confirmation of the town council,
the heads of all administrative departments of town government provided for
in this Charter or which shall be provided for in the future, but not
including the superintendent of schools.  He or she may remove any of the
aforementioned department heads for whom he or she is the appointing
authority; provided, that any person so removed shall have the right, within
ten days of receipt of written notice of his or her removal, to petition the
town council for a hearing before that body.  Following any such hearing,
the council shall convey its conclusions to the town administrator, but his
or her decision to confirm or rescind the dismissal shall be final.



   (d)   To determine the compensation of all officers and employees
under his or her jurisdiction subject to the approval of the council.



   (e)   To assign additional duties to officers, agencies or
departments established by the Charter, but he or she may not discontinue or
reassign duties assigned to specific organs under this Charter.



   (f)    To prepare and submit to the council, as of the end of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities
of the town for the preceding year, which report shall be printed and made
available to the citizens.



   (g)   To coordinate the activities and programs of all departments
and agencies of the town including any and all boards or commissions whose
members are chosen by the town council.  All such departments and agencies
shall submit periodic reports to the town administrator as he or she shall
direct, and supply him or her with any and all information regarding their
work which he or she may request.



   (h)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this
Charter or required of him or her by the council. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 305.  Non-interference by the council.



   The council or any of its members shall not direct or request the
appointment of any person to or the removal of any person from office by the
town administrator or by any of the administrator's subordinates.  Except
for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the town administrator; individual
council members shall not seek to direct the actions of the town
administrator and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give
orders to any subordinates of the town administrator, either publicly or
privately. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 306.  Authority to perform duties of other administrative officers, and
to assign duties of two or more administrative officers to one person.



   The town administrator may exercise and perform the powers and duties
of one or more administrative officers instead of appointing some other
person or persons so to do, but he or she shall not be entitled to receive
any additional compensation therefor.  He or she may, with the approval of
the council, assign the duties of two or more administrative officers to one
person or divide the duties of any office among two or more persons.
(Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 307.  Who acts in absence of town administrator.



   The town administrator may designate by letter filed with the town
clerk a qualified administrative officer of the town to perform his or her
duties during his or her temporary absence or disability.  In the event of
failure of the town administrator to make such designation, the council may
appoint an officer of the town to perform the duties of the town
administrator until he or she shall return or his or her disability shall
cease. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 308.  Filling vacancy in office; interim town administrator.



   Whenever the office of town administrator shall be declared vacant by
the council, an interim town administrator shall be elected by a majority
vote of the council.  He or she shall have all the duties and powers of the
town administrator, except he or she shall not serve longer than six months,
and may be summarily removed by majority vote of the council without charges
or a hearing.  Nothing shall prevent an interim town administrator from
applying to be appointed town administrator. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 309.  Compensation.



   The town council shall set the compensation of the town administrator.



Article IV.  Initiative and Referendum.



Sec. 401.  General provisions.



   In order to preserve direct participation in government to the voters
of Middletown, there are hereby established procedures whereby they may
initiate legislative proposals for consideration by the town council and the
voters.



Sec. 402.  Initiative procedure; submittal of proposed ordinance to
electorate if not adopted or adopted in altered form.



   Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the town council by a
petition signed by qualified electors of the town equal in number to at least
ten per cent of the number of persons registered to vote at the time of the
last regular town election.  Whenever the council receives a certified
initiative petition from the town clerk, it shall proceed at once to consider
the proposed ordinance transmitted therewith, and shall take a final vote on
the enactment of same no more than thirty days following receipt of the
petition from the town clerk.  If the council shall fail to pass an
ordinance thus proposed by initiative petition, or shall pass it in altered
form, the said ordinance as originally proposed by the petitioners shall be
submitted to the electors for their approval or rejection, not less than
thirty days nor more than one year from the date the council takes its final
vote thereon.  The council may, and if no regular election is to be held
within such period shall, provide for a special election.



Sec. 403.  Referendum upon initiative of council.



   The council may provide in the terms of any ordinance it enacts that
the same be submitted to the electors for their approval or rejection.  In
the event it makes such provisions, the vote thereon by the electors shall be
called in accordance with the provisions set forth for voting upon initiative
proposals in section 402.  Pending the decision of the voters the ordinance
in question shall remain inoperative.



Sec. 404.  Recall/removal.



   Any elected official of the Town of Middletown may be recalled or
removed from office through a process that includes the petition of at least
20% of persons registered to vote at the last election and notarized
signature of each collector. Within seven (7) days after receipt of the
petition, the board of canvassers having certified the petition, the town
clerk shall notify the official involved by certified mail. If the board of
canvassers determines that a petition does not contain the names of at least
20% of persons registered to vote at the last election, the petitioners may
within 30 days submit a supplemental petition containing additional names of
persons registered to vote at the last election, whereupon the board of
canvassers shall then redetermine whether to certify the petition. The recall
vote shall be taken no earlier than thirty (30) days and no later than
forty-five (45) days after certification of the petition by the board of
canvassers, but in no case shall a recall vote be taken within the last 180
days of a term. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Article V.  Elections.



Sec. 501.  Laws and conditions applicable.



   The provisions of the Constitution and the general laws of the State of
Rhode Island now or hereafter in effect pertaining to elections, special,
general and primary, and also all special acts pertaining to elections in the
Town of Middletown now or hereafter in effect shall govern all town
elections, special, general and primary, so far as they may be applicable,
excepting those provisions which are inconsistent with the provisions of this
Charter affecting the form of government.



Sec. 502.  Canvassing authority.



   There shall be a bi-partisan canvassing authority elected by the
council as provided by the Constitution and laws of the state.  Said
canvassing authority shall be vested with all the powers and duties now or
hereafter vested by law in the canvassing authority or board of registration
of the town.  All members of said authority or board now in office shall
continue in said positions as members thereof until the expiration of the
terms for which respectively they were chosen.



   Editor's note.  For constitutional provisions relating to canvassing
authority, see Const., amendment no. 28, § 4, as amended by no. 29, § 4,
and 35, § 1.  For general law as to local canvassing authorities, see R.I.
Gen. Laws, § 17-8-1 et seq.



Article VI.  Town Officials; Municipal Court; Probate.



Sec. 601.  Town clerk; deputy town clerk.



   There shall be a town clerk, who shall be appointed by the town
administrator and shall have those powers and perform those duties prescribed
now or in the future by this Charter and the Constitution and laws of the
state, and such additional powers and duties as may be assigned to the clerk
by the town administrator.  The clerk shall have charge of such personnel as
may be provided by the town council to assist the clerk in the discharge of
the powers and duties of the clerk's office.  There shall be a deputy town
clerk who shall be appointed by the town administrator in accordance with
article IX and shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of the office
of town clerk in case of the absence or inability of the town clerk.
(Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 602.



(Redesignated as § 704, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 603.



(Redesignated as § 1001, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 604.  Reserved.



(Deleted, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 605.



(Redesignated as § 711, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 606.



(Redesignated as § 709, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 607.  Town solicitor.



   There shall be a town solicitor appointed by the town council at its
first meeting following its election, to serve for a term of two years or
until his or her successor is appointed.  Any person so appointed shall be a
member of the bar of the State of Rhode Island in good standing but need not
be a resident of Middletown.  The town solicitor need not devote full time
to the duties of the office.  The town solicitor shall receive such
compensation for services as may be determined by the council.  The town
solicitor shall be the attorney for the town and legal advisor to the
council, town administrator, and all other offices, departments and agencies
of the town.  The town solicitor shall appear for and protect the rights of
the town in all actions, suits or proceedings, civil or criminal, brought by
or against it or for or against any of its officers, departments or agencies,
and shall perform such other duties as the council may require.  All written
legal opinions furnished to the council and to all town officers, departments
or agencies shall be filed with the town clerk and become a public record. 
The town solicitor shall examine and approve the forms of all ordinances and
resolutions and the forms of all invitations for bids, contracts and other
legal documents sent out by any office, department or agency of the town.
(Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 608.  Judge of the Municipal Court.



   The town council may appoint a member in good standing of the bar of
the State of Rhode Island, with no fewer than 5 years experience in the
active practice of law, to sit as judge of the municipal court for a term of
2 years and subject to re-appointment. (Added, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 609.  Appointment of probate judge.



   The town council shall appoint, at its first meeting following its
election, a member of the bar of the State of Rhode Island to sit as judge of
the probate court.  Said judge shall serve for a two-year term or until a
successor is appointed, or the office abolished.  Any person so appointed
need not be a resident of Middletown.  Whenever such judge of the probate
court is a party or interested in any proceeding about to be heard in his or
her court, or is absent or unable to perform his or her duties, or there is a
vacancy in the office of judge, the council shall designate a qualified
member of the bar of the State of Rhode Island to act as a probate judge. 
The fact of such interest, absence, inability or vacancy shall be recorded in
the records of said court.  (Amended, November 5, 2002; Amended, November 4,
2008.)



Sec. 610.  Registry of probate court.



   Money and other property now or hereafter deposited in the registry of
the probate court pursuant to statutes now or hereafter in effect shall be
held, administered and disposed of pursuant to said statutes.



   Editor's note.  For state law as to deposit of money paid into
registry of probate court, see R.I. Gen. Laws, § 33-22-20.  As to practice
in probate court generally, see Gen. Laws, § 33-22-1 et seq.



Article VII.  Town Departments.



Sec. 701.  Police.



   There shall be a police department, the head of which shall be the
chief of police, who shall be a police officer with at least ten years
experience above the rank of patrolman in any organized police department or
equivalent experience in a state or federal law enforcement agency.  The
chief of police shall be appointed by the town administrator.  In addition
to the chief of police, there shall be a deputy chief and such other
subordinate officers and patrolmen, all of the aforesaid serving full time,
as shall from time to time be determined by the town council.  The further
organization of the department into divisions or offices or grades shall be
made by the town council on recommendation of the town administrator after
conferring with the chief of police.  The police department shall be
responsible for the preservation of the public peace, prevention of crime,
apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property,
regulation of traffic, and the enforcement of the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the town and rules and regulations in accordance therewith. 
The chief of police and other members of the department shall have all the
powers and duties as are now and hereafter vested in such police officers by
the laws of the state and the town ordinances.  The chief of police shall be
in direct command of the police force and shall, subject to the approval of
the town administrator and town council, make rules and regulations
concerning the conduct of all officers and subordinates. (Amended, November
5, 2002; Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 702.  Fire.



   There shall be a fire department, the head of which shall be the fire
chief, who shall be a firefighter with at least ten years experience in the
fields of fire fighting and fire prevention.  The fire chief shall be
appointed by the town administrator.  In addition to the fire chief, there
shall be a deputy chief and such other subordinate officers and firefighters,
all of the aforesaid serving full time, as shall from time to time be
determined by the town council.  In addition to the members of the permanent
fire department, the fire chief may from time to time appoint additional
special firefighters for occasional services and for limited terms who shall
serve at the pleasure of the fire chief.  The further organization of the
department into divisions or offices or grades shall be made by the town
council on recommendation of the town administrator after conferring with the
fire chief.  The fire department shall have all the powers and duties as are
now and hereafter vested in it by the laws of the State of Rhode Island and
town ordinances.  The fire department shall, subject to the approval of the
town administrator and town council, make rules and regulations concerning
the conduct of all subordinates.



(Amended, November 5, 2002; Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 703.  Public works.



   There shall be a department of public works, the head of which shall be
the director of public works, who shall be appointed by the town
administrator.  The director shall be responsible for the efficient
operation of all the activities of the department of public works.  The
department of public works shall be responsible for the functions and
services of the town relating to highways, street lighting, public parking
lots, waste disposal, sewers, water supply, parks, public buildings and such
other public works activities as may be defined by ordinance. (Amended,
November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 704.  Tax assessor.



   There shall be a tax assessor, who shall be appointed by the town
administrator and shall have those powers and perform those duties prescribed
now or in the future by this Charter and the Constitution and laws of the
state, and such additional powers and duties as may be assigned to the tax
assessor by the town administrator or town council. The tax assessor shall
have charge of such personnel as may be provided by the town council to
assist the tax assessor in the discharge of the powers and duties of the tax
assessor's office. (Added, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 705.  Parks and recreation.



   The town council may establish a department of parks and recreation
when, in its judgment, the effective provision of these important services
and the proper management of recreation facilities in the town require such
action.  The department shall be headed by a director appointed by the town
administrator.  All recreation services and facilities, including parks,
beaches and playgrounds, shall be placed under the jurisdiction of said
department with the exception of those properly within the jurisdiction of
the school committee.  (Amended, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 706.  Finance.



   There shall be a department of finance headed by a finance director,
who shall have ten years prior financial management experience in the public
or private sectors and be appointed by the town administrator.  There shall
also be a deputy finance director, appointed by the town administrator, who
shall assist the finance director and shall exercise the powers and perform
the duties of the office of finance director in case of the absence or
disability of the finance director.  The finance director shall act as town
treasurer, town tax collector, purchasing agent, and human resources manager,
and shall exercise those powers and perform those duties prescribed for these
offices now or in the future by this Charter and the Constitution and laws of
the state.  The finance director shall also have such additional powers and
duties as may be assigned to him or her by the town administrator. 
(Amended, November 5, 2002; Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 707.  Middletown Public Library, Board of Trustees.



   There shall be a board of trustees of the Middletown Public Library,
the governance and powers of which shall be in accordance with Rhode Island
General Laws Title 29, Chapter 4.  (Added, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 708.  Senior Citizens' Center.



   Middletown shall have a Senior Citizen's Center to provide services to
the residents of the town of Middletown who have attained the age of fifty
five (55) or older.



   The Center shall have an Executive Director, appointed by the Town
Administrator, and confirmed by the Town Council, whose primary
responsibilities will be to develop and administer all Senior Citizens'
Center programs, prepare necessary budgets for Center operations and initiate
broad based programs to serve the senior community.  A nine (9) member
advisory Board of Directors, all of whom shall be residents of Middletown,
shall be appointed by the Town Council.  (Added, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 709.  Building official.



   There shall be a building department that is headed by a building
official who shall be appointed by the town administrator and shall be
responsible for the supervision and enforcement of ordinances relating to
buildings, zoning, trailer parks, and other matters assigned to him or her by
the town administrator or the town council. (Added, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 710.  Planning.



   There shall be a person designated to fulfill the function of director
of planning who shall be appointed by the town administrator and confirmed by
the town council. (Added, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 711.  Town engineer.



   There shall be a town engineer appointed by the town administrator. The
town engineer shall be a civil engineer, and need not be a resident of the
Town of Middletown. He or she may be appointed to serve either full time or
part time. He or she shall be available to provide engineering advice and
services to the town administrator, the town council, and all other
departments, offices and agencies of the town government. He or she shall be
responsible for the custody and proper maintenance of all the files and
records that pertain to his or her office, including surveys, plans, maps and
the like. He or she shall maintain these files and records in the Town of
Middletown. The results of all engineering studies or similar work he or she
performs for the town shall become the property of the town. (Added, November
4, 2008.)



Article VIII.  School Department.



Sec. 801.  School committee - Established; number and election of members.



   There shall be a school committee consisting of five members, each of
whom shall be elected from the town at large by the electors of the Town of
Middletown, to serve for a term of four years and until a successor is
elected and qualified.  Three members of the committee shall be elected at
the first election after the adoption of this Charter and at said elections
every fourth year thereafter and two members shall be elected at the
subsequent biennial election and at said elections every fourth year 
thereafter.  The election of school committee members shall be by
nonpartisan election, an election without designation or identification of
political affiliation.  (Amended, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 802.  Same - Qualifications of members; disqualification of member
causes vacancy.



   Members of the school committee shall be qualified electors of the Town
of Middletown and shall hold no other paid public office or employment in the
service of the town.  Current service as notary public, justice of the
peace, membership in the national guard or naval, air or military reserve or
employment by any of the educational institutions maintained by the state,
shall not disqualify persons for school committee membership.  No member of
the school committee shall be eligible to accept any other paid local town
office during his or her tenure on the school committee or for a period of
one year thereafter.  The office of any school committee member who shall,
during his or her term, cease to meet the foregoing qualifications, shall be
deemed vacant.  (Amended, November 5, 2002; Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 803.  Same - Filling vacancies.



   If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the School Committee, for
other than the expiration of the member's term the town council shall select
a qualified person to fill the vacancy, to serve until the next regularly
scheduled state or town election, at which time the electors shall select a
qualified person to complete any unexpired portion of the term.  (Amended,
November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 804.  Same - Compensation of members; expenses of members.



   The Chairman of the School Committee and the members shall receive
annual compensation as the council shall fix by ordinance; provided, that no
change in compensation shall take effect until after the next biennial
election and installation of school committee members.  (Amended, November
5, 2002; Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 805.  Same - Powers and duties.



   The school committee shall determine and control all policies affecting
the administration, maintenance and operation of the public schools and shall
have all the powers and be subject to all duties prescribed by the laws of
the state and may provide rules and regulations for the use, operation, and
maintenance of public school properties, and for vacations of all officials
and employees of the school department.



Sec. 806.  Same - Organization, rules and journal of proceedings.



   The school committee shall elect from its membership a chairman and a
vice-chairman, both of whom shall serve at the pleasure of the school
committee.  The school committee shall also appoint a clerk, who need not be
a member of the school committee and shall serve at the committee's
pleasure.  The chairman or the clerk may sign any orders and official
papers, and the clerk, under the direction of the school committee, shall
keep a journal of the proceedings of the committee.  The school committee
shall adopt its own rules and order of business.



Sec. 807.  Same - Regular meetings.



   The school committee shall hold at least ten regular meetings in every
year at such time and place within the town as the school committee shall by
general order fix and determine.



Sec. 808.  Superintendent of schools; Appointment, qualifications and powers
and duties.



   The school committee shall appoint a superintendent of schools as its
chief administrative agent who shall have under the direction of the school
committee the care and supervision of the public schools and shall have and
exercise such duties and authority as are vested in the office by the laws of
the state, the state board of education and the commissioner of education. 
No person shall be employed as the superintendent of schools unless such
person holds a certificate of qualification for said office issued by or
under the authority of the state board of education.



Sec. 809.  Same - Removal from office.



   The superintendent [of schools] shall be subject to removal at the
discretion of the school committee by vote of a majority of all members of
the school committee with or without a public hearing, as the school
committee in its discretion shall determine.  There shall be no right of
appeal from the decision of the school committee.  Except in cases of moral
turpitude in which removal may take effect immediately, such removal shall
not become effective until at least ninety days following the vote of the
school committee, and the superintendent shall continue to receive his or her
usual compensation until the date upon which removal does take effect.
(Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 810.  Department personnel.



   The school committee shall have the power to determine the number and
duties of all employees in the department subordinate to the superintendent
of schools and shall have the power to remove all such employees upon
recommendation of the superintendent of schools, except as otherwise provided
by the laws of the state.  (Amended, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 811.  Policy making and administration; school committee not to
interfere with superintendent.



   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the school committee, as far as is
consistent with the laws of the state, shall deal with the administration of
the public schools solely through the superintendent of schools and neither
the school committee nor any member thereof shall give orders to any
subordinate of the superintendent either publicly or privately.  All details
of administration shall be handled by the superintendent or other
administrative officers delegated by him or her. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 812.  Budget; school committee to incur no obligation beyond amount
provided by budget.



   The school committee shall submit its proposed budget to the town
administrator not later than one hundred days prior to the start of the next
fiscal year.



Estimates of sums expected to become available from federal and state grants
for the support of the public schools shall be included in the total
requested for school expenditures.  The council shall appropriate these
funds for expenditure by the school committee, and shall appropriate such
additional funds from local tax revenues as may be required to meet the total
school budget which the council approves.  The school committee shall not
have the authority to obligate the town financially beyond the total
budgetary amount voted by the council.



Sec. 813.  Cooperative maintenance of buildings and grounds.



   At the request of the school committee the town administrator may
direct appropriate departments under his or her jurisdiction and control to
maintain, care for or otherwise provide services for school buildings,
grounds, motor vehicles and equipment; provided, that the costs be charged
against the appropriation for the public schools, such costs to be determined
by the town administrator and paid at the direction of the school committee.
(Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 814.  Purchasing; financial records and vouchers.



   The school committee shall do all purchasing pertaining to the public
schools and shall maintain records of receipts and expenditures in such
manner as shall be required by the state and by the department of finance of
the town.  Records shall at all times be available showing receipts,
expenditures and encumbrances upon unexpended appropriations. Expenditures of
funds allocated to the public schools shall be made only by authorized
vouchers signed by the superintendent of schools, and the chairman or clerk
or such member of the school committee as may be designated by the school
committee for that specific purpose.  All purchases shall conform with town
ordinances for bidding and awarding contracts unless the school committee
determines that the purchase at bid is not practicable or consistent with its
educational policy. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 815.  School committee to hold open meetings, except for executive
sessions; actions required to be done in open meetings.



   The meetings of the school committee, except when in executive session,
shall be open and accessible to the public.  Final action shall be taken
only in open meeting, except on disciplinary and other personal matters, the
disclosure of which, in the opinion of the school committee would be
detrimental to any pupil or member of the school department involved.  Where
the school committee considers the disclosure in such cases detrimental as
aforesaid, its action shall be recorded separately and may be kept
confidential and shall not be considered a public record.



Article IX.  Personnel.



Sec. 901.  Personnel board - Established; number, qualifications and
appointment of members.



   There shall be a personnel board consisting of three members who shall
be appointed by the town council for terms of three years (except that the
initial appointments under this Charter shall provide that one member serve
for a one-year term and another member for a two-year term).  No member
shall hold or be a candidate for any other public office or position and
shall not be or have been for at least two years prior to his or her
appointment, a member of any national, state or local committee of a
political party, or an officer in any partisan political club or
organization.  They shall be qualified electors of the town. (Amended,
November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 902.  Same - Compensation of members.



   Compensation, if any, of members of the personnel board shall be
determined by the town council.



Sec. 903.  Same - Powers and duties enumerated.



   It shall be the duty of the personnel board:



   (a)   To formulate, maintain, and recommend to the town council for
adoption or modification:



      (1)   A position classification plan for all town employees,
excepting those noted hereinafter.  Such plan shall define generally the
duties, responsibilities and types of work involved for each class of
position; the skills and knowledge necessary for each position, and the
minimum qualifications necessary to qualify for appointment to each position;
and the positions or classes of positions to which competitive or qualifying
examinations shall apply;



      (2)   A plan embodying appropriate recommended pay scales for
all town employees in the classification plan.  Such pay plan shall state a
recommended salary or wage for each position established by the
classification plan, and define the method for granting step advancements in
pay in those instances where a minimum and maximum pay range is established
for a position.  The personnel board shall work closely with the town
administrator in the adjustment of pay scales where such adjustments are
required due to compensation changes the administrator plans to include in
the budget, or are found necessary in connection with the recruitment of
personnel or the negotiation of collective bargaining agreements;



      (3)   Personnel policies regarding vacation, sick leave,
overtime pay and the discipline of classified employees.



   (b)   Upon the adoption of the position classification plan, to
assign to the appropriate position classification all persons employed by the
town, subject to such plan.



   (c)   To authorize the Town Administrator or his/her  designee to
formulate and administer such tests, and assemble such other forms of
evidence as may be required, to determine the qualifications and eligibility
of candidates for positions in the classified service.



   (d)   To certify to the appointing authority that persons who are
candidates or applicants for positions in the classified service, possess the
qualifications required by the classification plan.  Such certification
lists shall show the names of the three persons standing highest thereon who
are available for appointment or promotion, if there be as many as three such
names thereon, or all the names on the list if there are less than three. 
The appointing authority shall appoint one of the persons so certified to the
position in accordance with the provisions of the personnel rules.  Except
in the case of employees of the school department, who shall be appointed by
the school committee, the head of the office, department or agency in which a
vacancy exists shall make a recommendation to the appointing authority, who
shall be the town administrator.



   (e)   To examine all payrolls at least twice a year covering
classified employees, for the purpose of determining that all persons to whom
payments are to be made are properly employed and have been approved and
certified to the appointing officers by the personnel board as to
eligibility.  (Amended, November 5, 2002; Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 904.  Positions excepted from classified service.



   There shall be excepted from classified service of the town:



   (a)   All officials elected by the voters of the town, and all
persons appointed to fill vacancies in such elective positions.



   (b)   Heads of departments, offices and agencies appointed by the
town administrator.



   (c)   Employees of the school department for whom state
certification is required.



   (d)   Persons engaged by contract to perform special services for
the town where such contracts are certified by the personnel board to be for
employment which should not be performed by persons in the classified service.



   (e)   Persons temporarily appointed or designated to make or conduct
a special inquiry, investigation or examination, or to perform a special
service where such appointment or designation is certified by the personnel
board to be for employment which because of its expert nature or character
could not or should not be performed by persons in the classified service.



   (f)   Such temporary seasonal workers paid on an hourly basis as the
personnel board may determine.



   (g)   Persons who in times of public emergency may be appointed
special employees.



   (h)   All members of boards, commissions, and committees.



Sec. 905.  Temporary appointments when no list is available.



   Whenever it is not possible to certify the required number of eligible
persons for appointment to a vacancy in the classified service because no
appropriate list exists, the appointing authority may nominate a person to
the personnel board and, if such nominee is found by the personnel board to
have had experience and education which appear to qualify him or her for the
position and meets such other requirements as are established by the
personnel rules, he or she may be temporarily appointed to fill such vacancy.
(Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 906.  Probationary period.



   All original appointments to and promotional appointments within the
classified service shall be for a probationary period of one year, during
which time the appointing committee may report to the personnel board
periodically concerning the work of the employee.  Any employee may be
dismissed from an original appointment or demoted to previous rank by the
appointing authority during the probationary period for reasons relating to
the employee's qualifications or for the good of the service stated by the
appointing authority in writing and filed with the personnel board.  The
employee shall have no appeal privileges.  (Amended, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 907.  Regular appointment.



   All employees having been promoted or appointed in accordance with the
above procedures and having satisfactorily served the probationary period
will be considered regular in their position until vacated by retirement,
resignation, promotion or death, except as hereinafter provided.  Nothing
herein shall be construed as prohibiting the town administrator or school
committee from terminating the employment of any employee when a decrease in
the number of regular employees is made necessary by the failure of the town
council to make an adequate appropriation for the retention of all the
regular employees.  (Amended, November 5, 2002; Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 908.  Emergency appointments.



   In case of emergency, an appointing authority may make an emergency
appointment of any persons to any position without regard to provisions of
this article to carry on work that must be continued in the public interest,
but any such emergency appointment shall be reported immediately to the
personnel board.



(Amended, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 909.  Services of other agencies authorized for certain purposes.



   The personnel board, subject to the approval of the town council, may
enter or authorize the appointing authority to enter into arrangements with
any government agency, quasi-governmental agency or educational institution
for determining qualifications of employees and applicants for employment in
the classified service, and for aid in the preparation of the personnel
regulations.  (Amended, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 910.  Demotions and dismissals.



   All classified employees shall be subject to suspension, demotion,
removal from employment, and other appropriate disciplinary action by the
appointing authority for misconduct, incapacity, neglect of duty, or
insubordination or other such cause as the appointing authority may deem to
justify the action for the good of the service, and all such suspensions,
demotions or removals or other disciplinary action shall be by the appointing
authority upon charges made in writing to the employee.  The disciplinary
action may become effective immediately at the discretion of the appointing
authority.  (Amended, December 6, 1976; Amended, November 5, 2002; Amended,
November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 911.  Personnel review board.



   There shall be a personnel review board consisting of three qualified
electors of the town appointed by the town council to serve for three- year
terms.  There shall be no more than two board members belonging to the same
political party.  The jurisdiction of the board shall extend to all cases of
appeals from dismissals, suspensions, demotions,  or layoffs of employees of
the town in the classified service, except those provided for otherwise in
the Charter.



   Any such person against whom any disciplinary action is taken by the
appointing authority, may appeal in writing to the personnel review board
within ten days of his receipt of written notification of said action. 
Unless said appeal has been withdrawn, the personnel review board, within ten
days from the filing of said appeal, shall conduct a hearing, at which it
shall give the appellant, the appointing authority, and the department head,
board or other agency involved, an opportunity to be heard.  After said
hearing, which shall be public at the option of the appellant, the personnel
review board may affirm, or if it finds disciplinary action  to be arbitrary
and capricious or based upon erroneous understanding of facts reverse or
modify the disciplinary action taken, and the action of the personnel review
board shall be final and binding.  The review accorded herein shall be
deemed to be alternative to that granted by general and special state laws to
certain classes of town employees.  Upon reinstatement for any reason, the
employee shall be paid in full for the wages lost during the period of said
disciplinary action less all interim earning or amounts reasonably earnable
by the employee, including but not limited to wages and wage substitutes
(such as workers compensation or unemployment compensation).  At any hearing
it shall be the right of the appellant to be represented by counsel. 
(Amended, December 6, 1976; Amended, November 5, 2002; Amended, November 4,
2008; Amended, November 6, 2012.)



Sec. 912.  Retirement of town employees.



   The town council may provide a system of retirement allowance,
including disability retirements,  to augment federal social security or
other pension plan payments, if any, for the town's regular, full-time, paid
employees, whether in the classified service or not, and for the contribution
by said employees and the town to a fund from which such allowance shall be
paid.  The town may enter into a contract with any insurance company
authorized to do business in this state for the purpose of insuring the whole
or any part of its retirement plan.  (Amended, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 913.  Right to organize; strikes.



   The right of municipal employees to associate together and to join any
lawful organization of their own choosing for the purpose of collective
bargaining to the fullest extent authorized and required by the General Laws
of Rhode Island is recognized by this Charter, subject to the terms of this
Charter, the Constitution and laws of this State.  The town council and
school committee are empowered to recognize such organizations, negotiate
with them, and sign written agreements either directly or through the town
administrator or superintendent of schools, as the case may be; provided,
that no right whatsoever of employees to strike against the government of the
town is herein implied or sanctioned, and provided further that no agreement
shall be binding to the extent that it is inconsistent with the terms of this
Charter, the Constitution or laws of this State or the lawful enactments of
the Town. 



   All collective bargaining agreements affecting employees of any
department including but not limited to the School Department, shall have no
force or effect until and unless they are first ratified by a majority vote
of the town council.  No such vote shall be taken until the council has had
a full and complete cost impact study detailing the short-term and long-term
costs of the agreement in its possession for at least seven days.  (Amended,
November 5, 2002; Amended, November 6, 2012.)



Sec. 914.  Political activity.



   No employee of the Town of Middletown shall engage in any inappropriate
political activity or hold any elective office in the Town of Middletown
provided, however, that this section shall not prevent any town employee from
becoming a candidate for any elective office.



   "Inappropriate political activity," for the purpose of this section, is
defined as the use of a town employee's position, or authority, powers or
influence to promote or advance the election of any candidate for elective
office.  'Inappropriate political activity' includes the following conduct
during the employee's working hours and while the employee is on town
property:  directly or indirectly asking for votes or other political
support; making available political petitions, candidacy papers, or other
documents for signature; distributing or making available political leaflets
or other campaign literature; wearing campaign buttons, flags, or other
emblems associated with a political party or candidate; displaying posters,
banners, signs or other political promotions on the employee's desk or at the
employee's work place where they can be seen by others; displaying political
signs other than bumper stickers on their cars while parked on town property;
and other similar conduct.



   Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to the
disciplinary proceedings outlined in Section 910.



(Amended, December 6, 1976; Amended, November 5, 2002; Amended, November 4,
2008.)



Article X.  Miscellany.



Sec. 1001.  Board of assessment review.



   There shall be a board of assessment review consisting of three members
who shall be qualified electors of the town and shall be appointed by the
council for a term of three years. There shall be no more than two board
members belonging to the same political party. If a member of such board
shall cease to be a resident, that office shall thereby become vacant. The
board of assessment review shall hear and consider the appeal of any property
owner concerning the amount of the taxpayer's assessed valuation as
determined by the [tax] assessor. The board shall keep an accurate record of
its proceedings which shall be available for public inspection. If it shall
appear that the valuation of any property has been erroneously or incorrectly
assessed, the board shall have authority to order a correction. Such
determination shall be certified by the board to the [tax] assessor whose
duty it shall be to make such corrections in the valuation as the board may
determine. If the tax roll has been certified by the [tax] assessor, the tax
assessor shall transmit the findings of the board to the council, which may
cancel in whole or in part the tax based on such valuation in order to effect
a correction. The council shall provide by ordinance for the organization and
procedure of the board of assessment review and for the manner of receiving,
considering, and disposing of appeals. The taking of an appeal to the board
of assessment review of any action thereon shall not be construed to limit or
restrict the right of any taxpayer to apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for relief from any assessed valuation or tax. (Added, November
4, 2008.)



Sec. 1002.  Public records.



   All records and accounts of every department and agency of the town,
except as hereinbefore provided for with respect to certain school matters,
shall be deemed to be public records and shall be open to inspection at a
central repository by any citizen of the state without giving any reason
therefor, at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations
established by the council, except those records and documents the disclosure
of which, in the opinion of the council, would tend to defeat the lawful
purpose which they are intended to accomplish, and except such records as are
required or permitted by the laws of the state to be kept confidential. 
(Amended, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 1003.  Conflicts of interest.



   No official of the town, elected or appointed, shall utilize his or her
position to forward, directly or indirectly, his or her personal benefit. 
In case of personal interest in a proposition before him or her as a town
official, he or she shall notify in writing the town administrator of the
fact and nature of this personal interest. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 1004.  Codification and revision of ordinances.



   The council, within two years following the effective date of this
Charter, and every tenth year thereafter, shall cause to be prepared a
revision or codification of the ordinances of the town which are appropriate
for continuation as local laws of the town.  Such revision or codification
shall be prepared under the supervision of the town solicitor, but the
council may authorize the solicitor to contract for the services of persons
or organizations experienced in the revision and codification of ordinances
and statutes.



Sec. 1005.  Annual audit.



   Within three months after the beginning of each fiscal year, the
council by resolution shall arrange for an annual independent audit of the
books, accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the town, as
of the close of the preceding fiscal year, to be conducted either by state
auditors or by a certified public accountant holding a certificate from this
state and having no personal interest therein.  Such examinations shall
conform with generally accepted auditing standards.  A copy of the audit
report shall be filed with the town clerk and shall be a public record.



Sec. 1006.  Juvenile Hearing Board.



   The town council may provide for the creation of a juvenile hearing
board consisting of 5 members and 2 auxiliary members appointed by the town
council for a term of 3 years and subject to re-appointment. (Added, November
4, 2008.)



Sec. 1007.  Fees, penalties and payments collected by town officials and
agencies.



   All fees, penalties and payments collected by town officials or
agencies in their official capacities shall be transmitted to the town
treasurer to be deposited in the general funds of the town, and the
compensation paid to each town official shall be in lieu of all fees,
penalties and payments payable to such official in the performance of his or
her duties. (Amended, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 1008.  Planning board.



   The town council shall by ordinance provide for the creation of a
planning board, consisting of seven qualified electors appointed by the town
council for terms of three years.  No member shall serve for more than three
consecutive terms without at least a one-year interval before being appointed
for an additional term.  Persons appointed to the board shall hold no other
office in the service of the town.  (Amended, November 5, 2002.)



   Editor's note.  For state law as to municipal planning boards
generally, see R.I. Gen. Laws, §§ 45-22-1, 45-22-2.  As to subdivisions,
see R.I. Gen. Laws, § 45-23-1 et seq.



Sec. 1009.  Zoning board of review.



   The town council may by ordinance, in accordance with state laws now or
hereafter in effect, provide for the creation and selection of a zoning board
of review, to perform the duties and exercise the powers of such a board
under laws and ordinances relating to zoning now or hereafter in effect.  No
member shall serve for more than two consecutive terms without at least a one
year interval before being appointed for an additional term.  The council
may, in accordance with laws now or hereafter in effect, provide for the
appointment of alternate members of said zoning board of review.  The town
council shall, at least every five years, review the Zoning Ordinance and Map
to determine whether any changes are necessary, or said review may be made by
a committee or commission authorized by the council, in accordance with laws
now or hereafter in effect, to investigate and make recommendations for any
proposed amendments of said ordinance and map deemed necessary.  (Amendment,
November 5, 2002.)



   Editor's note.  For state law as to creation, powers, and duties of
municipal zoning boards of review, see R.I. Gen. Laws, §§ 45-24-13 through
45-24-19.  As to zoning generally, see R.I. Gen. Laws, § 45-24-1 et seq. 
For state laws as to auxiliary member of municipal zoning board of review,
see R.I. Gen. Laws, § 45-24-14.



Article XI.  Inauguration and Succession.



Sec. 1101.  Effective date.



   All of the provisions of this Charter which do not require validation
by the general assembly shall become effective on the first Monday following
the certification by the board of canvassers of the adoption of this Charter
by the qualified electors of the Town of Middletown; and all officers,
including the town administrator, town officers, and heads of departments and
agencies, shall be appointed and qualified pursuant to the provisions of this
Charter as promptly as possible.  Upon the validation of the election
procedures by the general assembly the first election of a town council and
school committee pursuant to the provisions of this Charter shall be held on
the first Tuesday next after the first Monday in November, 1969.



   Editor's note.  For validation of Charter by general assembly, see
P.L. 1969, ch. 52, approved May 2, 1969, set out in div. 2, art. 1 of this
part of this Code.  Otherwise, the Charter became effective on December 16,
1968.



Sec. 1102.  Transfer of appropriations.



   The council shall have authority to make any changes or transfers in
appropriations existing when this Charter takes effect which may be required
for the operation of the town government under the provisions of this Charter.



Sec. 1103.  Ordinances to implement Charter.



   The town council shall proceed to enact or adopt as promptly as
possible all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations which may be
necessary to implement the provisions of this Charter.



Sec. 1104.  Reserved.



(Deleted, November 4, 2008.)



Sec. 1105.  Continuation of ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations.



   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the town in force
at the time when this Charter takes effect, not inconsistent with this
Charter, shall continue in force until amended or repealed.



Sec. 1106.  Continuation of tax obligation.



   All taxes levied or assessed by the town prior to the effective date of
this Charter, which have not been collected by the town, shall be collected
with any interest and penalties thereon, by the town government hereby
established, in accordance with law.



Sec. 1107.  Actions and proceedings pending when Charter took effect.



   No action or proceedings, civil or criminal, in law or in equity,
pending at the time when this Charter shall take effect, brought by or
against the town, or any office, department or agency or officer thereof,
shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything in
this Charter contained.



Sec. 1108.  Reserved.



(Deleted, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 1109.  Reserved.



(Deleted, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 1110.  Complaints by qualified electors of Charter violations.



   (a)   The qualified electors of the town shall have the right to
demand a hearing before the Town Council regarding alleged violations of the
Charter. A qualified elector of the town may file a sworn statement in the
office of the town clerk charging that:



      (1)   An elected or appointed official or member of a board or
commission of the town is serving in office in violation of the provisions of
the Charter; or



      (2)   That any elected or appointed official or member of any
board or commission, or that any official body, board or commission in its
corporate capacity, or any town employee, has knowingly taken an action in
his/her official capacity in violation of any of the terms or provisions of
the Charter, or of any ordinance, rule, or regulation adopted under the
authority thereof.



      (3)   Any such statement shall set forth the particulars as to
the charges made. A "sufficiently set forth" complaint shall specify: (1) the
section or sections of the Charter which are alleged to have been violated;
(2) the nature of the violation; and, (3) the person, persons, or body
alleged to have committed the violation.



      (4)   If the Town Solicitor determines that the charges are
"sufficiently set forth," or, if the statement referred to above is
accompanied by a petition signed by two hundred fifty (250) qualified
electors of the town, the Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before
the Town Council acting in its capacity as the Charter Monitoring and
Complaint Review Board (the "Review Board"), such hearing to be held no later
than sixty (60) days from the date on which the charges were filed. If the
Town Solicitor fails to find that the charges are "sufficiently set forth,"
or if the statement is not accompanied by a petition signed by two hundred
fifty (250) qualified electors of the town, he/she shall so notify the
complainant in writing, providing the reason(s) for dismissal of the
complaint.



      (5)   If the complaint is against the Town Clerk, the Town
Administrator shall fulfill the duties of the Town Clerk regarding scheduling
of the public hearing as presented above.



   (b)   Action by the town:



      (1)   At the public hearing, the Town Council, acting as the
Review Board, shall receive testimony from the complainant and from the
official, board, or commission, or members of the official body against whom
or which the charges were made, and from such witnesses as either party may
bring forward. In the event that the complaint is against a member of the
Town Council, such member shall not take part in the review of the complaint.



      (2)   If, following the hearing, the Review Board, by no fewer
than the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members present and
voting, concludes that the charges have been supported by the testimony and
evidence, it shall consider an appropriate sanction. Such a sanction may
include public censure, and for appointees and employees of the town,
termination or suspension from employment. Further, a violation of this
Charter may be punishable by a fine not to exceed Five Hundred ($500.00)
Dollars the limit set by state law.



   (c)   Construction of this article:  The provisions of this article
are in addition to, and do not supplant, any rights, duties or obligations
provided by the laws of the United States, or the State of Rhode Island.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to limit or affect any
constitutional, statutory, or common law right or protection granted to the
qualified electors of the town.



(Amended November 8, 2016.)



Sec. 1111.  Reserved.



(Deleted, November 5, 2002.)



Sec. 1112.  Continuance of contracts and obligations.



   All contracts or obligations entered into by the town prior to the
effective date of this Charter, or any amendments thereto, shall continue in
full force and effect.  (Amended, November 5, 2002.)



Article XII.  Amendment of Charter; Separability of Provisions of Charter.



Sec. 1201. General provisions.



    This Charter may be amended at any time, and shall be reviewed at least
every ten years in the manner provided by the Constitution.  Should two or
more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the
one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail.  The sections of
any amendments in addition to this Charter shall be numbered by the town
clerk and inserted in their appropriate places or added to the Charter. 
(Amended, November 5, 2002; Amended, November 4, 2008.)



   Editor's note.  For constitutional provisions relating to amendment of
municipal charters, see Const., amend. No. 28, § 8.



Sec. 1202.  Form of ballot.



   It shall not be necessary for the full text of a charter or amendments
to a charter to be printed upon the ballot.  Any digest or description
thereof or any question or statement which substantially expresses the
purpose or identifies the subject matter to be voted upon shall be
sufficient.  When any question is to be submitted to the voters, the council
shall approve the statement of the question as it shall appear on the ballot.



Sec. 1203.  Separability.



   If any section or part of a section of this Charter shall be held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect
the remainder of this Charter, nor the context in which such section or part
of a section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire
section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and
effect with the section or part of a section to which such holdings shall
directly apply; and if any section or part of a section concerned with
election procedures shall be held invalid by such court, the pertinent
election procedures set forth in the laws of the State of Rhode Island shall
apply.



DIVISION 2.  RELATED LAWS



   Editor's note.  This division contains selected acts of the general
assembly which relate especially to Middletown, arranged into articles
according to their subject matter.  Each article begins with a section "1,"
so that any reference to a section in this division should include the
article number thereof. The historical citation at the end of each section
denotes the year, chapter and section number of the public law from which the
section derives.



   The frontal section analysis and the article headings are supplied by
the editors and are not official; and some of the section catchlines have
been altered or supplied by the editors for the purpose of clarification.  A
uniform system of capitalization has been adopted, words in brackets have
been supplied by the editors, punctuation has been supplied in some
instances, and some sections have been divided into subsections or paragraphs
for which catchlines have been supplied.  No change in substance has been
made.



Article I.  Public Laws 1969, Chapter 52, Validation of Certain Provisions
of Home Rule Charter.



   §  1.   Town's home rule Charter validated.



   §  2.   Severability.



   §  3.   When article effective.



Article II.  Public Laws 1969, Chapter 110, Aquidneck Island, Regional
Disposal Authority.



   §  1.   Regional disposal authority authorized, etc.



   §  2.   Directors and officers.



   §  3.   Purposes.



   §  4.   Specific powers of the authority.



   §  5.   Award of contracts by competitive bidding.



   §  6.   Federal land; certain authority vested in governor.



   §  7.   Loans, contributions and guarantees by member
municipalities.



   §  8.   Disposal contracts.



   §  9.   Obligations of member municipalities.



   §  10.   Temporary borrowing.



   §  11.   Bonds.



   §  12.   Exemptions from taxation.



   §  13.   Severability; constitutional requirements to be met.



   §  14.   Referenda.



   §  15.   Effective date.



Article III.  Public Laws 1959, Chapter 72, Building Inspections,
Demolitions and Repairs.



   §  1.   Periodic inspections of buildings, and procedure when
hazards are found.



   §  2.   Time and place for hearing relating to hazards.



   §  3.   Findings of board; order to remove hazard and enforcement
thereof; lien for costs incurred.



   §  4.   Assessment of costs against property owner, and recovery
thereof by town.



   §  5.   Service of notices.



   §  6.   Judicial review of order of board, and procedure therefor;
authority of court.



   §  7.   Effective date; repealing clause.



Article IV.  Public Laws 1918, Chapter 1692, as Amended, Elections.



   §  1.   Times for election of members of town council and school
committee.



Article V.  Public Laws 1958, Chapter 5, Fiscal Year.



   §  1.   Established as from July first through next succeeding
June Thirtieth.



Article VI.  Public Laws 1962, Chapter 74, Pension Plan Authorized.



   §  1.   Authority of town council to establish pension plan.



   §  2.   Referendum.



   §  3.   Effective date.



Article VII.  Public Laws 1958, Chapter 138, as Amended, Sanitary Sewers.



   §  1.   Town authorized to construct, maintain and operate
sewerage works; what included; eminent domain.



   §  2.   Authority of council as to construction, operation,
maintenance and repair of sewerage works.



   §  3.   Authority to issue bonds.



   §  4.   Execution and sale of bonds; interest; premiums; proceeds.



   §  5.   Authority to issue temporary notes.



   §  6.   Bonds and notes as valid obligation of town; exception
from General Laws § 45-12-2; amortization of bonds.



   §  7.   Bonds and notes not affected by change in town officers.



   §  8.   Issuance of bonds or notes requires prior approval of
electors present at financial town meeting.



   §  9.   Imposition, collection and enforcement of charges for use
of sewers.



   §  10.   Costs of construction of sewerage works and laterals;
annual assessments; liens created.



   §  11.   Annual charges may fluctuate; special assessments to meet
deficiency in revenue.



   §  11A.   Procedures relating to collection, correction and
cancellation of charges and assessments.



   §  12.   Apportionment of assessments among joint tenants and
tenants in common.



   §  13.   Adjustment of inequitable charges.



   §  14.   Exemptions for religious societies and cemeteries.



   §  15.   Acquisition of property necessary for sewage purposes.



   §  16.   Contracts with federal and municipal governments.



   §  17.   Ordinances, etc., relative to use of sewer system, and
penalties for violation thereof.



   §  18.   Plats of common sewers to be filed with town clerk as
public records.



   §  19.   Acceptance by town of federal and state funds.



   §  20.   Severability clause.



   §  21.   Article not to affect any other power of town.



   §  22.   Validation of prior actions taken and bonds and notes
previously issued.



   §  23.   Referendum.



   §  24.   Effective date.



Article VIII.  Public Laws 1979, Chapter 335, Taxation.



   §  1.   Property exempt.



Article I.  Public Laws 1969, Chapter 52, Validation of Certain Provisions
of Home Rule Charter.



Sec. 1.  Town's home rule Charter validated.



   In all respects in which the home rule Charter of the Town of
Middletown, approved on November 5, 1968, may require ratification,
confirmation, validation or enactment by the general assembly, but in no
other respects, the provisions of the home rule Charter so adopted are hereby
ratified, confirmed, validated and enacted.  It is the express intention of
the general assembly by the passage of this act, [this article], to give
effect to, ratify, confirm, validate and enact those certain provisions of
the home rule Charter of the Town of Middletown approved on November 5, 1968,
which require ratification, confirmation, validation, or enactment, but
nothing in this act shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers now
or hereafter granted to towns by article XXVIII of the amendments to the
Constitution and other applicable laws of the State of Rhode Island or those
rights retained by said town in said Charter.  Any act or thing heretofore
done or purported to be done under the provisions of said home rule Charter
is hereby ratified and confirmed.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 52, § 1.)



Sec. 2.  Severability.



   If any provision of this act, [this article], or the application
thereof to the Town of Middletown or to any person or circumstance is held
invalid by reason of being deemed in violation of any provision of the
Constitution of the State of Rhode Island or otherwise, the remainder of this
act, or the application of such provision to said town or to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 52, § 2.)



Sec. 3.  When article effective.



   This act [this article] shall take effect upon its passage and all acts
and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.  (P.L. 1969,
ch. 52, § 3.)



   Editor's note.  The act codified in this article was approved May 2,
1969.



Article II. Public Laws 1969, Chapter 110, Aquidneck Island, Regional
Disposal Authority.



Sec. 1.  Regional disposal authority authorized, etc.



   (a)   Agreement to form; Newport and Middletown.  The City of
Newport and the Town of Middletown may agree to form and be members of a
regional disposal authority.  Such agreement shall be approved by
resolutions of the city council of the City of Newport and of the town
council of the Town of Middletown.  The agreement shall set forth (1) the
composition of the board of directors of the authority, which shall be
composed of not less than five members, nor more than eleven members, method
of selection and terms of office, (2) the method of apportioning the debt
service and other expenses of the authority among the member municipalities,
(3) the time or times of payment of the shares thereof, and (4) any other
provisions or limitations on the powers of the authority which the
contracting parties may deem advisable.



   (b)   Portsmouth may join.  The Town of Portsmouth may also be a
party to the agreement and a member of the authority, in which case the
agreement shall be approved by resolution of its town council.  If the Town
of Portsmouth is not an original member, it may be admitted to membership in
the authority upon the amendment of the agreement as provided below and upon
approval of the agreement (as so amended) by resolution of the Portsmouth
town council.



   (c)   Separation from membership.  Any member city or town may be
separated from membership in the authority by amendment of the agreement as
provided below.



   (d)   Amendments to agreement.  The agreement may be amended from
time to time by an amendatory agreement approved by resolution of the city or
town council of each member city or town, and, if required by the agreement,
by the board of directors of the authority.  No amendment shall be made
which shall substantially impair the right of the holders of any bonds, notes
or coupons of the authority then outstanding or the rights of the authority
to procure the means for payment thereof.



   (e)   Regional disposal authority made body politic.  Upon the
making of an agreement under this section, the regional disposal authority
shall be a body politic and corporate and a political subdivision of the
state.  Its territory shall consist of the territories of the member
municipalities. (P.L. 1969, ch. 110, § 1.)



   Editor's note.  Chapter 10, P.L. 1969, was rejected by the voters of
Portsmouth at a financial town meeting on January 24, 1970.



Sec. 2.  Directors and officers.



   (a)   Directors.  The powers of the authority shall be exercised by
or under the supervision of its board of directors.  A majority of the full
number of the board shall constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of
such majority shall be necessary and shall suffice for any action taken by
the board.  No vacancy in the membership of the board shall impair the right
of a quorum to exercise the powers of the board.



The members of the board shall not be entitled to compensation by the
authority for their services as members or officers but they shall be
reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance
of their duties.



   (b)   Officers.  Forthwith upon the appointment or election of the
original board, and annually thereafter, the board shall choose one of its
own members as chairman and another as vice chairman and shall also choose a
secretary and a treasurer, who may be the same person and who need not be a
member or members of the board.  Each such officer shall serve until his
successor is chosen and qualified unless sooner removed by the board, with or
without cause.  In the event of a vacancy in the office of chairman, vice
chairman, secretary or treasurer, the board shall fill the vacancy for the
unexpired term.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 110, § 2.)



Sec. 3.  Purposes.



   The purposes of the authority shall be to establish, operate and
maintain facilities and equipment for the disposal of refuse, garbage and
waste by incineration or other means for the member municipalities and for
others in accordance with this act [this article].  (P.L. 1969, ch. 110, §
3.)



Sec. 4.  Specific powers of the authority.



   In carrying out its purposes, the authority shall have the following
powers:



   (a)   To adopt a name and seal and to alter the same from time to
time;



   (b)   To sue and be sued;



   (c)   To acquire, hold and dispose of real and personal property, or
interests therein, within or without its territory, and to establish, operate
and maintain facilities on any such real property, whether a fee simple or
leasehold or other interest is acquired; provided, that no property shall be
acquired as a site for disposal facilities without the consent of the city or
town council of the city or town in which such property is located, which
consent may not be revoked, and provided further that a rental obligation
shall not be deemed indebtedness subject to the limit set forth in section
11(b) [subsec. (b) of § 11] hereof;



   (d)   To make or cause to be made such surveys and borings as it may
deem necessary;



   (e)   To engage architectural, engineering, legal, accounting and
other professional services;



   (f)   To make contracts;



   (g)   To employ personnel and fix their rates of compensation;



   (h)   To retain firms or corporations to provide management or
operating services to the authority; provided, that any contract for services
under this subparagraph shall be for a term of not more than two years or
shall be subject to annual or biennial renewal or cancellation by the
authority;



   (I)   To borrow money and issue its bonds and notes as hereinafter
provided;



   (j)   To apply and contract for and to expend assistance from the
United States or other sources, whether in the form of a grant or loan or
otherwise;



   (k)   To adopt and amend by-laws for the regulation of its affairs
and the conduct of its business;



   (l)   To adopt a fiscal year and to alter the same from time to
time; and



   (m)   To exercise such other powers as may be necessary or
incidental to the exercise of the foregoing powers or to the accomplishment
of the purposes of the authority.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 110, § 4.)



Sec. 5.  Award of contracts by competitive bidding.



   All contracts for construction or for the purchase of supplies,
materials or equipment in excess of one thousand dollars shall be awarded to
the lowest responsible bidder after such public notice as the authority may
prescribe.  The authority may reject all bids and advertise for new bids. 
Alterations in any such contract may be made when authorized by the
authority.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 110, § 5.)



Sec 6.  Federal land; certain authority vested in governor.



   If any land or interest therein is acquired by the authority from the
United States as a site for disposal facilities, and jurisdiction of such
land shall have previously been held by the United States, whether by cession
by this state or by operation of law, jurisdiction thereof shall be restored
to this state to the extent provided or permitted by federal law and the
governor is authorized on behalf of the state to execute, deliver and file or
to cause to be executed, delivered and filed any instruments which may be
needed to evidence the consent of the state to such to restoration.  (P.L.
1969, ch. 110, § 6.)



Sec. 7.  Loans, contributions and guarantees by member municipalities.



   Any member city or town may lend or contribute funds, plans, services
or property to the authority.  When authorized by resolution of its city or
town council, a member city or town may guarantee temporary notes of the
authority in whole or in part.  No such guarantee shall at any time be
included in the indebtedness of the city or town for the purpose of
ascertaining its borrowing capacity.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 110, § 7.)



Sec. 8.  Disposal contracts.



   (a)   Generally.  The authority may enter into contracts with its
member municipalities in regard to disposal service to the extent deemed
necessary or desirable to supplement the agreement establishing the authority
and the member municipalities are authorized to enter into such contracts
with the authority.  Nothing in this act [this article] shall preclude any
member municipality from furnishing disposal service itself or from otherwise
obtaining such service except as its right to do so may be expressly limited
by the agreement establishing the authority or by a contract made by it under
this section.



   (b)   Disposal service to other municipalities. The authority may
also provide disposal service to other cities and towns and to other parties,
both governmental and private, with or without contracts therefor.



   (c)   Terms of contracts.  The term of any contract under this
section may be limited or indefinite.  A contract made by a member
municipality under this section shall be approved by resolution of its city
or town council.  A contract made under this section by a city or town other
than a member municipality shall be approved or authorized in the manner
provided by its charter or applicable law.  A contract may be made under
this section by a member or a non-member city or town either prior or
subsequent to the making of appropriations to carry out the obligations of
the city or town under the contract.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 110, § 8.)



Sec. 9.  Obligations of member municipalities.



   The obligations of member municipalities to the authority shall
constitute general obligations thereof and they shall annually appropriate a
sum sufficient to meet the same.  Neither the obligations of the authority
nor such obligations of the member municipalities shall be included in
computing the borrowing capacities of the member municipalities.  But the
authority's debt service, to the extent apportioned to the member
municipalities, shall be considered indebtedness of the member municipalities
for the purpose of any law relating to the levy of taxes.  (P.L. 1969, ch.
110, § 9.)



Sec. 10.  Temporary borrowing.



   (a)   The authority may borrow money temporarily for current
purposes or for capital purposes as described in the following section and
may issue and from time to time refund its notes therefor.  Notes issued for
current purposes may not be refunded beyond one year from the date of their
original issue and notes issued for capital purposes may not be refunded
beyond five years from the date of their original issue.



   (b)   Notes may not be issued hereunder for current purposes if the
amount of such notes outstanding immediately after such issue would exceed
the current expenses of the authority for the then current fiscal year as
estimated by the authority.  For this purpose, the current expenses of the
authority shall be deemed to include debt service on its bonds.  In the
event the then current fiscal year is less than twelve months by reason of a
change of fiscal years, the foregoing limitation may be based upon the
current expenses of the following fiscal year as estimated by the authority.



   (c)   The foregoing limitation shall not apply to the issue of
refunding notes.  When original notes are issued for current purposes,
refunding notes shall be included in the computation of the limitation, but
notes which have been refunded shall not be included.



   (d)   Notes may be issued for capital purposes in anticipation of
federal or state aid as estimated by the authority and refunded from time to
time as provided in this section without being subject to the limitation set
forth in the following section.  The issue of other notes for capital
purposes shall be subject to the limitation.  (P.L. 1969, Ch. 110, § 10.)



Sec. 11.  Bonds.



   (a)   Authorized.  The authority may borrow money for capital
purposes and issue its bonds therefor.  Such capital purposes may include
all relevant costs (whether incurred prior to or after the issue of bonds or
notes hereunder) of acquisition, site development, construction, improvement,
enlargement, reconstruction, alteration, equipment, furnishings, demolition
or removal of existing buildings or structures (including the cost of
acquiring any lands to which such buildings or structures may be moved),
financing charges, interest prior to and during the carrying out of any
project, interest for up to one year after the completion or estimated
completion date of any project, planning, engineering and legal services,
allocated administrative expenses, the funding of notes issued for capital
purposes, and all other expenses incidental to the determination of the
feasibility of any project or to carrying out the project or to placing the
project in operation.



   (b)   Limitations on issue.  Bonds may not be issued under this
section, and notes may not be issued for capital purposes under the foregoing
sections (except notes in anticipation of federal or state aid), if the
amount of bonds and of such notes outstanding immediately after such issue
would exceed ten per cent of the full market values of the taxable property
of the member municipalities as most recently determined pursuant to state
law.  This limitation shall not apply to the issue of refunding notes or to
the issue of bonds for the purpose of funding any outstanding notes.  When
other bonds or notes are issued for capital purposes, such refunding notes
and funding bonds shall be included in the computation of the limitation, but
notes which have been funded or refunded shall not be included.



   (c)   Maturity.  The bonds of each issue shall mature in annual
installments of principal beginning not later than three years and ending not
later than thirty years after the date of the bonds.  No installment of
principal of any issue shall exceed any prior installment by more than six
per cent of the total principal amount of the issue.  The authority shall
determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be
attached thereto, and the manner of their execution, and shall fix the
denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment
of the principal and interest, which may be at any bank or trust company
within or without the state.  The bonds shall bear the seal of the authority
or a facsimile thereof.



   (d)   Validity not affected by change in office.  In case any
officer whose signature or a facsimile of whose signature shall appear on any
bonds, coupons or notes issued by the authority shall cease to be such
officer before the delivery thereof, such signature or such facsimile shall
nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had
remained in office until after such delivery.



   (e)   How issued and sold.  The bonds may be issued in coupon or in
registered form, or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may
be made for the registration of any coupon bonds as to principal alone and
also as to both principal and interest, for the reconversion into coupon
bonds of any bonds registered as to both principal and interest, and for the
interchange of registered and coupon bonds.  The bonds may be sold at public
sale at not less than par and accrued interest after solicitation of bids by
advertisement in a newspaper or financial journal or by mailed circular or
both, except that bonds may be sold without public offering to any agency
acting on behalf of the United States.



   (f)   Temporary bonds.  Prior to the preparation of definitive
bonds, the authority may issue interim receipts or temporary bonds, with or
without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds when such bonds shall have
been executed and are available for delivery.  The authority may also
provide for the replacement of any bonds, notes or coupons which shall become
mutilated or shall be destroyed or lost.



   (g)   Consent of state not required before issue.  Except as
otherwise provided in the agreement establishing the authority, bonds and
notes may be issued under this act [this article] without obtaining the
consent of any department, division, commission, board, bureau or agency of
the state, and without any other proceedings or the happening of any other
conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions or things which are
specifically required by this act for the issue of such bonds or notes.



   (h)   Application of premiums, profits and earnings.  Any premiums
arising from the sale of bonds or notes for capital purposes, any net
earnings or profits from the deposit or investment of the proceeds of such
bonds or notes and any surplus of such proceeds may be applied to capital
purposes or to the payment of bonds or notes issued for capital purposes, as
determined by the authority.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 110, § 11.)



Sec. 12.  Exemption from taxation.



   (a)   The exercise of the powers granted by this act [this article]
shall be in all respects for the benefit of the people of the state of Rhode
Island, and for the improvement of their health and living conditions, and as
the acquisition, operation and maintenance of projects by the authority will
constitute the performance of essential governmental functions, the authority
shall not at any time be required to pay any taxes or assessments upon such
projects, or upon any property acquired or used by the authority under the
provisions of this act or upon its income, and the bonds and notes issued by
the authority, their transfer and the income therefrom (including any profit
made on the sale thereof) shall at all times be free from taxation within the
state of Rhode Island.



   (b)   Payments in lieu of taxes.  The authority is authorized to
enter into contracts with any political subdivision of the state in which
property of the authority is situated providing for payments in lieu of taxes
or assessments on such property.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 110, § 12.)



Sec. 13.  Severability; constitutional requirements to be met.



   (a)   If any provision of this act [this article] shall be held
invalid in any circumstance, such invalidity shall not affect any other
provisions or circumstances.



   (b)   This act [this article] shall be construed in all respects so
as to meet all constitutional requirements.  In carrying out the purposes
and provisions of this act, all steps shall be taken which are necessary to
meet constitutional requirements whether or not such steps are required by
statute.



(P.L. 1969, ch. 110, § 13.) 



Sec. 14.  Referenda.



   (a)   Newport and Middletown.  The question of the approval of this
act [this article] shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the City
of Newport and the Town of Middletown at the next general or special election
to be held in said city and town; but if a special state election, other than
a primary, is called for an earlier date which occurs at least thirty days
after the passage of this act, the question of the approval of this act shall
be submitted at the first such special election.  The question shall be
submitted in substantially the following form:  "Shall an act passed at the
January 1969 session of the general assembly, entitled `An act authorizing
the establishment of a regional disposal authority for Aquidneck Island' be
approved?"  The warning for the election shall contain the question to be
submitted.  From the time the election is warned and until it is held, it
shall be the duty of the city clerk and the town clerk to keep a copy of the
act available at his office for public inspection, but any failure of either
clerk to perform this duty shall not affect the validity of the election.



   (b)   Portsmouth.  The town council of the Town of Portsmouth is
authorized to place on the warrant for action at a regular or special
financial town meeting the proposition to approve this act [this article] or
to submit such questions with reference to this act which require town
meeting approval.  The council shall submit the question only if and when
the council deems it practicable for the town to join the authority but the
council need not make an express finding to this effect.  The manner of
submitting the question shall be the same as provided heretofore in this
paragraph.  The Town of Portsmouth shall not become a member of the
authority, either as a party to the original agreement or as an additional
member, unless this act shall have been approved by a majority of those
voting on the question pursuant to this paragraph.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 110, §
14.)



   Editors note.  Chapter 10, Public Laws 1969, was ratified by the
voters of Middletown at a special election held June 24, 1969, and by the
voters of Newport at a special election on the same day, but was rejected by
the voters of Portsmouth at a financial town meeting held January 24, 1970.



Sec. 15.  Effective date.



   This section and the foregoing section shall take effect upon the
passage of this act [this article]; and the remainder of this act shall take
effect upon the approval of this act by a majority of those voting on the
question in each municipality at the election prescribed by paragraph (a) of
the foregoing section.



(P.L. 1969, ch. 110, § 15.)



   Editor's note.  The act codified in this article was approved May 14,
1969.



Article III.  Public Laws 1959, Chapter 72, Building Inspections,
Demolitions and Repairs.



Sec. 1.  Periodic inspections of buildings, and procedure when hazards are
found.



   It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department, the health
officer, and the inspector of buildings of the Town of Middletown, each six
months and at such other times as he or they shall deem it necessary, to make
an inspection of all buildings within the town of Middletown.  Whenever they
shall find any building which, either for lack of repair, neglect,
accumulation of materials, or for any cause whatsoever, constitutes an
especial fire hazard, or a menace to the health of any person, or endangers
other property, or the occupants thereof, or any other person, any one of
said officers shall immediately report the same to the board of review of the
said town of Middletown.  Said board shall forthwith notify the owner of the
findings of said officer, and also of the time and place at which said owner
may appear before said board to show cause why said board should not order
the immediate removal of said cause of especial fire hazard, menace to
health, and danger.



(P.L. 1969, ch. 72, § 1.)



   Editor's note.  Reference here appears to be the zoning board of
review.



Sec. 2.  Time and place for hearing relating to hazards.



   Upon receipt by the said board of any report of the aforesaid officers,
or any of them, indicating that any building within said town of Middletown
for any cause constitutes an especial fire hazard, or a menace to the health
of any person, or endangers other property, or the occupants thereof or any
other person, the board shall fix a time and place for hearing thereon,
provided said board shall give the owner of said building at least five days'
notice before said hearing shall be held.  (P.L. 1959, ch. 72, § 2.)



Sec. 3.  Findings of board; order to remove hazard and enforcement thereof;
lien for costs incurred.



   After any hearing, the board of review may determine whether said
building constitutes an especial fire hazard, or a menace to the health of
any person, or endangers other property or the occupants thereof or any other
person, and if said board shall so find it may order said owner immediately
to remove the cause of especial fire hazard, menace to health or danger, and
may fix the time in which such removal shall be completed, and shall file a
copy of its order in the office of the town clerk of the said Town of
Middletown, who shall record the same in a book to be kept for that purpose,
and upon the filing thereof, a lien to the amount of any costs or expenses
which may be incurred by said board, or the inspector of buildings of said
town, acting hereunder, shall attach to the lot of land whereon said building
is located which said lien shall remain on said land until discharged by law,
but in any event until the order of said board shall have been complied with
by said owner.  The board shall serve the owner of said building with its
order.  In the event that said owner shall not comply with the order of said
board, the board shall direct the inspector of buildings in said town of
Middletown forthwith to remove said cause of especial fire hazard, and/or
menace to the health of any person, and/or danger to other property or any
occupants thereof or any other person.  Said inspector of buildings shall
immediately remove said cause of especial fire hazard, and/or menace to the
health of any person, and/or danger to other property or any occupants
thereof or any other person, and such costs and expenses incurred by said
board and/or the inspector of buildings acting hereunder, shall be paid by
the Town of Middletown.  The said town shall appropriate from time to time
such sum of money as shall be necessary to carry out the purposes of this
act.  (P.L. 1969, ch. 72, § 3.)



Sec. 4.  Assessment of costs against property owner, and recovery thereof by
town.



   All proper costs and expenses incurred under the authority of this act
[this article] by said board or inspector of buildings shall be certified by
them to the town treasurer of said town who shall assess the same against the
owner of said real estate, and the said town treasurer may recover the said
costs and expenses for the use of the Town of Middletown in a suit at law
against said owner.  After judgment in said suit, said real estate may be
sold under the aforesaid lien in the same manner as in the case of attachment
of real estate, and all costs and expenses incurred by said board, and the
said inspector of buildings, including all costs and reasonable fees, for the
prosecution of said suit shall be deducted from the proceeds of said sale,
and the balance thereof, if any, paid over to the rightful owner thereof. 
(P.L. 1959, ch. 72, § 4.)



Sec. 5.  Service of notices.



   Whenever notice is required to be given and service to be made upon the
owner of said building it shall be given in the following manner:



   (a)   By leaving said notice or order in the hands or possession of
said owner; or,



   (b)   By mailing said notice or order by certified mail, to the last
known address of the said owner, and time shall be computed from the time the
order is so mailed; or,



   (c)   By posting said order or notice on said building in a
conspicuous place.  (P.L. 1959, ch. 72, § 5.)



Sec. 6.  Judicial review of order of board, and procedure therefor;
authority of court.



   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of review may present
to the supreme court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such
decision is illegal in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the
illegality.  Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty
days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board.  Upon the
presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari
directed to the board of review to review such decision of the board of
review and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto
must be made, which shall be not less than ten days and may be extended by
the court.  The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the
decision appeal[ed] from, but the court may, on application, upon notice to
the board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order.



   The board of review shall not be required to return the original papers
acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn
copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such
writ.  The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be
pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and
shall be verified.



   If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is
necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or
appoint a master to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same
to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall
constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the
court shall be made.  The court may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or
may modify the decision brought up for review.  (P.L. 1959, ch. 72, § 6.)



Sec. 7.  Effective date; repealing clause.



   This act [this article] shall take effect upon its passage, and all
acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.  (P.L.
1969, ch. 72, § 7.)



   Editor's note.  The act codified in this article became effective May
14, 1969.



Article IV.  Public Laws 1918, Chapter 1692, as Amended, Elections.



Sec. 1.  Times for election of members of town council and school committee.



   The electors of the Town of Middletown, on the first Tuesday next after
the first Monday in November, in the year 1971, shall by ballot elect seven
councilmen to hold office for the term of three years and until their
respective successors are elected and qualified; the electors of the town on
the first Tuesday next after the first Monday in November, in the year 1974
and biennially thereafter, shall by ballot elect seven councilmen to hold
office for the term of two years and until their respective successors are
elected and qualified. The electors of the town on the first Tuesday next of
the first Monday in November in the year 1971 shall by ballot elect two
members of the school committee to hold office for the term of five years and
until their respective successors are elected and qualified; the electors of
the town on the first Tuesday next after the first Monday in November 1976
and every four years thereafter shall elect two members of the school
committee to hold office for the term of four years and until their
respective successors are elected and qualified. The electors of the town on
the first Tuesday next after the first Monday in November in the year 1974
and every four years thereafter shall elect three members of the school
committee to hold office for the term of four years and until their
respective successors are elected and qualified. The members of the school
committee elected at the election held in the town in November 1969 shall
continue in office until the first Tuesday next after the first Monday in
November 1974 and until their respective successors are elected and
qualified.  All the officers whose election is provided for in this section
shall be voted for on one ballot and the polls shall be kept open from 10
o'clock in the forenoon until 8 o'clock in the afternoon.  (P.L. 1918, ch.
1692, § 1;  P.L. 1970, ch. 140, § 1; P.L. 1971, ch. 36, § 1)



   Editor's note.  For state law as to appointment of district moderators
and clerks by Middletown town council, see R.I. Gen. Laws, §§ 17-11-7 to
17-11-10. As to opening and closing of polls in Middletown, see R.I. Gen.
Laws, §§ 17-18-10, 17-18-11.



   The current practice in the town is for the polls to be open from 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m., as provided in R.I. Gen. Laws, §§ 17-18-10, 17-18-11;
voting machines are used instead of ballots as provided in R.I. Gen. Laws, §
17-19-2.



Article V.  Public Laws 1958, Chapter 5, Fiscal Year.



Sec. 1.  Established as from July first through next succeeding June
thirtieth.



   During the year 1958, the fiscal year for the Town of Middletown shall
end on the 30th day of June and the new fiscal year shall begin on the 1st
day of July, and thereafter annual fiscal years shall begin respectively on
the 1st day of July and end on the 30th day of June of the succeeding year. 
(P.L. 1958, ch. 5, § 1.)



Article VI.  Public Laws 1962, Chapter 74, Pension Plan Authorized.



Sec 1.  Authority of town council to establish pension plan.



   The town council of the Town of Middletown, subject to the approval of
the financial town meeting at any regular or special meeting, is authorized
to enact an ordinance or ordinances to establish and maintain a pension plan
for town employees and/or to contract therefor with any insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of Rhode Island.  Such ordinance or
ordinances may define the employees eligible to participate in such plan; the
contributions to such plan to be made by such employees and to be
appropriated by the town; the amount and nature of the benefits payable to
such employees, and/or their beneficiaries; the carrying and other charges
for establishing and maintaining such pension plan; and in all other respects
to do any act or thing necessary to properly establish and maintain a pension
plan.  (P.L. 1962, ch. 74, § 1.)



   Editor's note.  For Charter provisions relating to retirement, see
Charter, § 912.



   For Charter provision abolishing financial town meetings and vesting
authority thereof in town council, see Charter, § 102.



Sec. 2.  Referendum.



   At the annual financial town meeting of the Town of Middletown, to be
held on the second Monday in May, 1962, there shall be submitted to the
electors of said town qualified to vote on any proposition for the imposition
of a tax or for the expenditure of money for their approval or rejection the
following proposition:



   "Shall the action of the general assembly by an act passed at the
January session A. D. 1962, entitled `An act authorizing the Town of
Middletown to establish and maintain a pension plan for town employees,' be
approved?"  The town clerk shall forthwith certify to the secretary of state
the results of the vote on the question so submitted.  (P.L. 1962, ch. 74,
§ 2.)



   Editor's note.  Chapter 74, Public Laws 1962, was ratified by the
voters of Middletown at a financial town meeting held May 14, 1962.



Sec. 3.  Effective date.



   This section and section 2 of this act [this article] shall take effect
upon the passage of this act [Act approved April 13, 1962] and section 1
shall take effect when and if the majority of the qualified electors of the
Town of Middletown voting upon the proposition contained in section 2 hereof
shall have voted their approval thereof, and thereupon all acts and parts of
acts inconsistent herewith shall stand repealed.  (P.L. 1962, ch. 74, § 3.)



Article VII.  Public Laws 1958, Chapter 138, as Amended, Sanitary Sewers.



Sec. 1.  Town authorized to construct, maintain and operate sewerage works;
what included; eminent domain.



   The Town of Middletown is authorized and empowered in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter [this article], to lay out, construct,
maintain and operate sewerage works within the territory of said town, and
for such purposes to take by eminent domain or otherwise acquire any lands,
water rights, rights of way or easement, public or private in said town
necessary for accomplishing any purpose mentioned in this chapter.  Such
sewerage works may include sewers and sewer service connections, pumping
stations, disposal and filtration plants and other works essential to the
proper collection and disposal of the sewage in said town.  (P.L. 1958, ch.
138, § 1.)



   Editor's note.  This article codifies P.L. 1941, ch. 1103, as amended
by P.L. 1945, ch. 1574, P.L. 1956, ch. 3647, P.L. 1957, ch. 133, and as
amended in its entirety by P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1, and as thereafter
amended.  Because P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1 constitutes a complete revision
of the 1941 act, as amended, the historical citations herein begin with P.L.
1958, ch. 138, § 1.



   P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 2 provided that the question of approval of ch.
138 be submitted to the electors of the town qualified to vote upon a
proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money; and § 3
provided that the act take effect upon approval thereof by such voters.



   Such act was submitted to the voters so qualified at the election held
November 24, 1958, and was so approved.



Sec. 2.  Authority of council as to construction, operation, maintenance and
repair of sewerage works.



   (a)   Generally.  The construction, operation, maintenance and
repair of such sewerage works shall be vested in the town council.



   (b)   Examination and inspection.  The members of the town council
and their duly authorized agents may enter upon any premises within the town
to examine, inspect or survey the same, whenever necessary for the
performance of their duties under this chapter [this article].



   (c)   Contracts.  The town council shall have authority to make for
and in behalf of the town all necessary contracts for the purchase of
property, materials, supplies and equipment and for the construction of the
sewerage works.  All work, supplies, materials and equipment required by the
town in connection with the construction of the sewerage works shall be
procured by contract made pursuant to and in the manner required by the
provisions hereof; provided, however, that if authorized by vote of a
majority of the electors present, entitled to vote and voting on the question
at an annual or special financial town meeting, the town council may direct
the construction of lateral sewers, including sewer service connections and
any other appurtenances thereto, by employees of the town under the direction
of the commissioner of public works, or other person designated by the town
council, and may obtain on a rental basis any equipment required in said
constructions, if the total cost of each project authorized by said electors
for the work, material and rental of equipment as estimated by the town
council will not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).  In all contracts
involving more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the town council shall
advertise for bids based upon proper specifications to be prepared by the
town council and shall let such contract or contracts to such lowest
responsible bidder or bidders who will give security satisfactory to the town
council for the performance of their contract, after considering the relative
competency and responsibility of the bidders and the amounts of their
respective bids.  No member of the town council nor any employee whose
duties relate to such contracts shall have any interest directly or
indirectly for personal gain or profit in any such contracts and any and all
such contracts made in violation hereof shall be utterly void as to the town
at the option of the electors.



   (d)   Employees, professional advisers, etc.  The town council may
from time to time employ and fix the compensation of such engineers, legal
advisors, surveyors, draftsmen, clerks and other employees as it may find
necessary for the construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the
sewerage works and may at any time discontinue the employment of any or all
such employees.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1; P.L. 1964, ch. 72, § 1.)



Sec. 3.  Authority to issue bonds.



   The Town of Middletown is hereby authorized and empowered, in addition
to authority previously granted, to issue from time to time under its
corporate name and seal, bonds to an amount not exceeding five million
dollars ($5,000,000.00).  The principal of said bonds and interest thereon
shall be payable in any coin or currency of the United States of America
which at the time of payment is legal tender for public and private debts. 
The bonds of each issue shall mature in equal or diminishing annual
installments, the first such installment to be not later than three (3)
years, and the last such installment not later than thirty-three (33) years
after the date of such bonds.  The validity of bonds issued hereunder for
the purpose of funding any temporary notes or renewals thereof shall not be
affected by any invalidity in the temporary notes or renewals thereof to be
refunded.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1; P.L. 1964, ch. 72, § 2; P.L. 1968,
ch. 50, § 1.)



   Editor's note.  P.L. 1968, ch. 50, § 3, provided that the section
here codified be submitted to the electors of the town qualified to vote upon
a proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money, and § 4
provided that the section here codified would take effect upon approval of
such voters.  The question was submitted at the election held May 13, 1968,
and the section here codified was so approved.



Sec. 4.  Execution and sale of bonds; interest; premiums; proceeds.



   Said bonds shall be signed by the town treasurer and countersigned by
the president of the town council and shall be issued and sold at not less
than par at such times, in such manner and in such amounts as the town
council may determine.  They shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding six
(6) per cent per annum.  Coupons shall bear the facsimile signature of the
town treasurer.  The premiums, if any, arising from the sale of said bonds
shall be applied to the cost of preparing, issuing and marketing them, and
any balance of such premiums shall be applied to the payment of the principal
of said bonds in the order of their maturity.  The proceeds arising from the
sale of the bonds shall be delivered to the town treasurer, and such
proceeds, except as hereinbefore provided in respect to the premiums arising
from the sale thereof, shall be expended for the purposes of this chapter
[this article] (other than maintenance, operation and repair) or in payment
of the principal of or interest on temporary notes issued under section 5 of
this chapter [this article] or to replenish general funds as provided in
section 8 of this chapter [this article].  No purchaser of any bonds or
notes issued under this chapter, however, shall be in any way responsible for
the proper application of the proceeds derived from the sale thereof.  (P.L.
1958, ch. 138, § 1.)



Sec. 5.  Authority to issue temporary notes.



   The town through its town council is hereby authorized to issue and
sell from time to time interest bearing or discounted notes to an amount not
exceeding five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) signed by the town treasurer
and countersigned by the president of the town council for the purposes
specified in section 4 of this chapter or for the purpose of replenishing
general funds as provided in section 8 of this chapter.  Temporary notes
issued hereunder shall be payable within three (3) years from their
respective dates, but the principal and interest on notes issued for a
shorter period may be renewed or paid from time to time by the issue of other
notes hereunder provided the period from the date of an original note to the
maturity or any note issued to renew or pay the same debt or the interest
thereon shall not exceed three (3) years.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1; P.L.
1964, ch. 72, § 3; P.L. 1968, ch. 50, § 2.)



   Editor's note.  P.L. 1968, ch. 50, § 3, provided that the section
here codified be submitted to the electors of the town qualified to vote upon
a proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money, and § 4
provided that the section here codified would take effect upon approval of
such voters.  The question was submitted at the election held May 13, 1968,
and the section here codified was so approved.



Sec. 6.  Bonds and notes as valid obligation of town; exception from General
Laws § 45-12-2; amortization of bonds.



   All bonds and all temporary notes issued under the provisions of this
chapter [this article] and the debts evidenced thereby shall be obligatory on
the Town of Middletown in the same manner and to the same extent as other
debts lawfully contracted by it but no pledge of any special funds to their
payment is intended by this chapter.  The bonds and notes issued hereunder
shall be excepted from the operation of section 45-12-2 of the General Laws,
as amended. No such obligation shall at any time be included in the debt of
said town for the purpose of ascertaining its borrowing capacity.  The town
shall annually appropriate a sum sufficient to pay the interest upon bonds
and also to pay the principal of any bonds maturing in such year, until said
bonds and the interest thereon are paid in full.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1.)



Sec. 7.  Bonds and notes not affected by change in town officers.



   Any bonds or notes issued under the provisions of this chapter [this
article] and coupons on any bonds, if properly executed by officers of the
town in office on the date of execution, shall be valid and binding according
to their terms notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payment
therefor, any or all of such officers shall for any reason have ceased to
hold office.  (P.L. 1968, ch. 138, § 1.)



Sec. 8.  Issuance of bonds or notes requires prior approval of electors
present at financial town meeting.



   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter [this article]
no bonds or notes shall be issued hereunder in excess of amounts approved
from time to time by vote of a majority of the electors present, entitled to
vote and voting on the question at an annual or special financial town
meeting.  Upon such vote of approval of an amount of bonds, unless the
issuance of temporary notes shall be specifically prohibited by the terms of
said vote, temporary notes shall be issuable under section 5 hereof to the
same amount.  Pending the issue of bonds so authorized or of the notes,
general funds of the town may be used for the purposes of the bonds to the
extent of the amount of bonds so voted.  The general funds shall be
replenished without interest within one (1) year after such use from the
proceeds of the bonds or notes.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1.)



Sec. 9.  Imposition, collection and enforcement of charges for use of sewers.



   (a)   Fees, charges and assessments generally. The town council
shall prescribe annual just and equitable charges to be charged all users of
the sewerage system, all owners of land abutting upon that portion of any
street or highway or right of way in which sewers have been constructed under
the provisions of this chapter [this article], all owners of land abutting
upon that portion of any public street, highway or right of way in which
sewers have been constructed otherwise than under this chapter, and all users
of such other sewers.  The charges to owners of such abutting land as do not
use the sewers shall be less than those charged to users of the sewers and
shall be at a uniform rate for each front footage of land abutting on such
street or highway or right of way; provided, however, that a minimum rate may
be established for any lot of land having a front footage of less than fifty
(50) feet, which rate may be equal to that charged for a lot with a front
footage of fifty (50) feet; and, provided, further, that a higher rate per
front footage may be charged for a lot of land upon which a dwelling house is
located than for an unimproved lot of land.  Such annual charges shall be
sufficient at all times to pay the cost of and are hereby appropriated to the
operation, maintenance and repair of the sewerage works, including sewers
constructed in public streets, highways or rights of way otherwise than under
this chapter, but not including debt service.



   (b)   Charges on first and second sewer districts. In addition to
the foregoing the annual charges with respect to lands in the first and
second sewer districts subject to annual charges under this chapter [this
article] as in effect prior to its amendment inserting this section shall
include sums of money for debt service determined as hereinafter provided. 
The additional annual charges for debt service in the first and second sewer
districts respectively shall be sufficient to pay and are hereby appropriated
to pay the interest on and principal of those bonds or portions of bonds
outstanding under this chapter [this article] at the time of its amendment
inserting this section and representing the cost of lateral sewers in those
districts respectively or the cost of other sewers in those districts
respectively to the extent of the cost thereof which would have been incurred
if they had been laid as lateral sewers, all as determined by the town
council in accordance with and subject to the provisions of section 10 of
this chapter [this article].



   (c)   Certificate of charges; charges as lien on real estate.  The
town council shall annually on or before the first day of July certify to the
town treasurer all the annual charges made by it under the authority of this
chapter [this article] for the fiscal year than commencing.  Each charge
made by the town council pursuant to this section shall be a lien upon the
lands, buildings and improvements upon which it is made in the same way and
manner as taxes assessed on real estate, but such lien shall not expire until
the charge with all interest, costs and penalties thereon is paid in full,
and, if the charge is not paid as required, it shall be collected in the same
manner that taxes assessed on real estate are by law collected.



   (d)   Time and method of payment.  Such annual charges shall be due
and payable at the time the regular town taxes are first due and payable next
after the date of receipt by the town treasurer of the aforesaid certificate
of said annual charges from the town council and the town treasurer shall
forthwith certify said charges to the tax collector for collection and said
tax collector shall proceed to collect such charges in the same manner and at
the same time the regular taxes of the town are first payable, with provision
for installments as in the case of the regular taxes.  Interest at the rate
per annum fixed for nonpayment of town taxes shall be charged and collected
upon all overdue charges from the date they become payable until paid.



   (e)   Apportionment after annual certification.  If any person
becomes a user after such annual certification, the town council may certify
to the town treasurer a just and equitable charge under this section with
respect to such person based upon the portion of the fiscal year remaining
after the beginning of such use.  A person becoming a user with respect to
land as to which such person was not previously a user shall be deemed a new
user for the purposes of this paragraph.  The town treasurer shall certify
the charge to the tax collector for collection and the charge shall be
payable when the next installment of regular town taxes is payable but may be
paid in equal installments on the remaining installment payment dates for the
regular town taxes for the year in question.  In all other respects the
charge under this paragraph shall be subject to the other provisions of this
section.



   (f)   Use of general funds pending receipt of charges.  Pending the
receipt of charges under this section, general funds of the town may be used
for the purposes for which the charges are appropriated. The general funds
shall be replenished from such receipts without interest within the fiscal
year in which such use occurs.



   (g)   Owner regarded as user.  Where an occupant of land uses the
sewerage system, the owner of the land shall be regarded as the user for the
purposes of this section.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1; P.L. 1960, ch. 205, §
2.)



   Editor's note.  The amendment inserting this section was enacted by
P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1, approved May 23, 1958, which became effective as
stated in the editor's note under the heading of this article.



Sec. 10.  Costs of construction of sewerage works and laterals; annual
assessments; liens created.



   (a)   Generally. The cost of construction of the sewerage works and
the debt service on obligations issued therefor shall be met from the general
funds of the town, except as provided in this section and in the preceding
section.  The cost of construction of each lateral sewer installed after the
effective date of the amendment of this chapter [this article] inserting this
section shall be assessed upon all owners of land abutting upon that portion
of any street or highway or right of way in which such lateral sewer is
constructed.  Such assessment shall be at a uniform rate for each front
footage of land abutting on such street, highway or right of way; provided,
however, that a minimum rate may be established for any lot of land having a
front footage of less than fifty (50) feet, which rate may be equal to that
charged for a lot with a front footage of fifty (50) feet; and provided,
further, that a higher rate per front footage may be charged for a lot of
land upon which a dwelling house is located than for an unimproved lot of
land.  It is hereby determined that assessments made under this section will
not exceed the benefits to the abutting owners.  Lateral sewers shall
include all sewers which are not designed to receive the sewerage from any
other common sewers.  The cost of construction of all sewers installed after
the effective date of the amendment of this chapter [this article] inserting
this section which are not lateral sewers shall also be assessed in the same
manner as lateral sewers but only to the extent of the cost thereof which
would have been incurred if they had been laid as lateral sewers.  The town
council shall determine, consistently with generally accepted engineering
practice, what is a lateral sewer as defined above and the cost thereof and
the partial cost of other sewers to be assessed or charged and its determined
shall be conclusive.  As to any sewer, the town council may provide that the
assessments may be paid in equal annual installments for a period not
exceeding twenty (2O) years with interest thereon at a rate determined by the
town council not exceeding six (6%) percent per annum payable at the time
each installment becomes due.  Any landowner shall have the privilege,
however, of prepaying unpaid  installments with interest to the time of
prepayment.



   (b)   Rate of assessment.  The town council shall from time to time
establish the rate of assessment for each front footage of abutting land
based upon the actual cost of construction.



   (c)   Annual assessments; lien on real estate. The town council
shall annually on or before the 1st day of July certify to the town treasurer
all the assessments made by it under the authority of this section 10.  Each
assessment made by the town council pursuant to this section shall be a lien
upon the lands, buildings and improvements upon which it is made in the same
way and a manner as taxes are assessed on real estate, but such lien shall
not expire until the assessment with all interest, costs and penalties
thereon is paid in full, and if the assessment is not paid as required, it
shall be collected in the same manner that taxes assessed on real estate are
by law collected.  Such assessments shall be due and payable at the time the
regular town taxes are first due and payable next after the date of receipt
by the town treasurer of the aforesaid certificate of assessments from the
town council, except that installment payments shall be due beginning at such
time, and the town treasurer shall forthwith certify said assessments to the
tax collector for collection and said tax collector shall proceed to collect
such assessments in the same manner and at the same time the regular taxes of
the town are first payable, with provision for installments only as provided
in this section.  Interest at the rate per annum fixed for nonpayment of
town taxes shall be charged and collected upon all overdue assessments and
installments of principal of and of interest on assessments from the date
they become payable until paid.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1; P.L. 1960, ch.
205, § 3; P.L. 1967, ch. 110, § 1.)



   Editor's note.  The amendment inserting this section was enacted by
P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1, approved May 23, 1958, which became effective as
stated in editor's note under the heading of this article.



   For a case holding that the expenditures for the installation of house
sewer connections were assessable to the owners of the abutting property as
part of the construction costs of the lateral sewers, see Garcia v.
Falkenholm, 97 R.I. 117, 198 A. 2d 660 (1964).



   For a case construing this sentence and holding that assessment voted
by the town council of $5.25 and $6.00 per front footage as the base rates
respectively for all land abutting upon Forest Avenue and Valley Road, and
assessing a charge of $7.00 per front foot for not in excess of 75 feet of
the frontage of land upon which a dwelling house as located, there was
accomplished pursuant to this section a proper apportionment of the costs of
the improvements between improved and unimproved property, see Garcia v.
Falkenholm, 97 R.I. 117, 198 A. 2d 660 (1964).



   For a case wherein assessments were voted by the town council for
improvements already constructed and abutting property owners alleged that
the assessments exceed the costs of construction, and the case was fully
tried in the superior court except as to a precise fixing of the assessments
over construction costs and the aliquot shares of the abutting owners, the
supreme court allowed the parties to appear before it to show cause why the
case should not be remitted to the superior court with direction to determine
the aggregate by which assessments exceed construction costs.  See Garcia v.
Falkenholm, supra.



   For a case holding that, under the provisions of this section, the
determination of what constitutes a "lateral sewer" is left to the town
council, see Garcia v. Falkenholm, 97 R.I. 117, 198 A. 2d 660 (1964).



   P.L. 1973, ch. 179 and a special town election held on August 7, 1973,
amended paragraph (b) in its entirety.



Sec. 11.  Annual charges may fluctuate; special assessments to meet
deficiency in revenue.



   (a)   Excess or deficiency of receipts.  If the receipts from the
annual charges provided for in section 9 or referred to in section 22 of this
chapter [this article] amount in any year to more than is required for the
purposes thereof, the surplus shall be credited to the annual charges of the
next succeeding year.  If said receipts in any year, including any surplus
added in any preceding year, amount to less than is required for the
aforesaid purposes, the deficiency shall be added to the annual charges of
the next succeeding year unless the electors in town meeting order the town
council to make a special sewer assessment upon those subject to the annual
charges in an amount sufficient to satisfy such deficiency.  Such special
sewer assessment shall be made immediately thereafter by the town council and
shall be at rates proportionate to the annual charges and in an amount
sufficient to satisfy such deficiency.  In prescribing annual charges for
the next succeeding year, any surplus or deficiency under this paragraph
shall be credited or added pro rata among the annual charges for items other
than debt service, the annual charges for district one (1) debt service and
the annual charges for district two (2) debt service and the surplus or
deficiency shall be taken to be in the amount estimated by the town council
at the time of such prescription.



   (b)   Certification and collection of special sewer assessments. 
When the town council shall have completed said special sewer assessments
ordered by the electors as aforesaid, it shall sign and deliver a certified
copy of said special sewer assessments to the town treasurer who shall
forthwith certify said assessments to the tax collector.  Within ten (10)
days thereafter the tax collector shall give notice to the owners of lands so
assessed of such sewer assessment by advertisement in some public newspaper
published in the City of Newport and said tax collector shall without further
warrant collect said sewer assessments at the times directed by this
chapter.  Each special assessment made by the town council pursuant to this
section shall be a lien upon the lands, buildings and improvements upon which
it is made in the same way and manner as taxes assessed on real estate but
such lien shall not expire until the assessment with all interest, costs and
penalties thereon is paid in full, and such special assessments shall be due
and payable at the time regular town taxes or installments thereof are first
due and payable next after receipt by the town treasurer of said certified
copy of said assessment, without provision for installment payment of said
assessments.  If said assessments are not paid as required by this chapter
[this article], they shall be collected in the same manner that regular taxes
assessed on real estate are by law collected.  Interest at the rate per
annum fixed for nonpayment of the regular town taxes shall be charged and
collected upon all overdue assessments from the date they become payable
until they are paid.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1; P.L. 1960, ch. 205, § 4.)



Sec. 11A.  Procedures relating to collection, correction and cancellation of
charges and assessments.



   (a)   Notice of assessment.  The collector, after receiving a list
of charges or assessments under section 9, 10 or 11 hereof, shall forthwith,
at the expense of the town, send to each person assessed or charged notice of
the amount of his assessment or charge.  The notice shall substantially
identify the person assessed, state the amount of the assessment or charge
and refer to the remedy available under section 44-5-26 of the General
Laws.  The notice shall be mailed postpaid and directed to the last known
address of the person assessed.  If there are persons whose addresses are
unknown, a similar notice covering the assessment against such persons shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town and such
published notice may be a single collective notice for all such persons.  No
irregularity in the notice required by this section shall excuse the
non-payment of the assessment or charge or affect its validity or any
proceedings for the collection thereof as long as there is substantia]
compliance with the provisions hereof.  No deficiency in the notice to the
person assessed shall excuse the non-payment by others of the assessment or
charge assessed against them or affect the validity thereof or any
proceedings for the collection thereof.



   (b)   Application of General Laws to collection and levy.  In
proceedings under section 44-5-26 of the General Laws in connection with a
charge or assessment under section 9, 10 or 11 hereof, section 44-5-30 of the
General Laws shall apply without regard to those provisions of said section
dealing with the taxpayer's account.  Section 44-5-31 of the General Laws
shall not apply.  The town council shall be made party to such proceedings
in lieu of the assessors.



   (c)   Corrected assessment or charge.  In the event an assessment
or charge is partially or wholly invalid, the town council may make a
corrected assessment or charge to replace the invalid assessment, charge or
portion and certify the same forthwith to the town treasurer.  The corrected
assessment or charge shall be due and payable at the time regular town taxes
or installments thereof are first due and payable after receipt by the town
treasurer of such certificate.  If it is a corrected charge under section 9
hereof and at least two installment payment dates for the regular town taxes
for the year to which the charge relates have not passed, the charge may be
paid in equal installments on the remaining installment payment dates.  If
it is a corrected assessment under section 10 hereof, the person assessed
shall be entitled to pay in installments to the extent permitted by the town
council under section 10 hereof for the original assessment being corrected,
provided the first installment shall be sufficient to compensate without
interest for all installments which would have become due then or theretofore
in the normal course.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
corrected charge or assessment shall be subject to the same provisions as the
original charge or assessment under section 9, 10 or 11 hereof, as the case
may be.



   (d)   Cancellation of assessment by town council. The town council
may at any time cancel in whole or in part any charge or assessment under
section 9, 10 or 11 to the extent the town council determines such charge or
assessment to have been improperly imposed.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1, as
added by P.L. 1960, ch. 205, § 5; P.L. 1967, ch. 110, § 2.)



Sec. 12.  Apportionment of assessments among joint tenants, and tenants in
common.



   Whenever a joint tenant, or a tenant in common of any land subject to a
charge or assessment under this chapter [this article], shall pay the whole
amount of such charge or assessment, he may recover from the other joint
tenant or tenant in common, as the case may be, such proportional part of
such charge or assessment as the aggregate value of such land bears to the
value of his interest therein, by proceedings in the superior court for the
County of Newport in the nature of an action of account, as provided in
chapter 2 in title 10 of the General Laws and in any acts in amendment
thereof or in addition thereto, and such action is hereby made available for
the purposes of this section.  The provisions of this section shall not be
construed to impair any other right of action which the party paying such
assessment or charge may have at law or in equity to secure a contribution
from the other parties having an interest in the land subject to such
assessment or charge.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1; P.L. 1960, ch. 205, § 6.)



Sec. 13.  Adjustment of inequitable charges.



   Upon the petition of the owner of a lot of land of irregular shape or
which is unduly above or below grade or which for any other reason is deemed
to be inequitably charged or assessed under this chapter [this article], or
on its own initiative, the town council may adjust the charge or assessment
on such lot or exempt such lot from such charge or assessment.



   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) streets, highways
or rights of way in which sewers have been constructed the charge or
assessment on such lot shall be made only for the sewer in one (1) street,
highway or right of way.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1; P.L. 1967, ch. 110, §
3.)



   Editor's note.  For a case holding that this section must be read in
conjunction with section 10 (of this article) and the provisions thereof, see
Garcia v. Falkenholm, 97 R.I. 117, 198 A. 2d 660 (1964).



Sec. 14.  Exemptions for religious societies and cemeteries.



   All lands in said town held by religious corporations, and on which are
located buildings used solely for the purpose of holding religious services
therein, and all lands in said town held by cemetery corporations and used
solely for cemetery purposes, shall be exempt from the payment of any and all
assessments for the construction of sewers made in pursuance of the
provisions of section 10 of this chapter [this article].  (P.L. 1958, ch.
138, §1.)



Sec. 15.  Acquisition of property necessary for sewage purposes.



   (a)   Means for acquisition; funds for payment of compensation. 
The town council in behalf of the town may acquire by agreement, purchase or
condemnation such land as may be necessary for the purposes of this chapter
[this article].  Whenever any property or estate or rights of property shall
be taken hereunder by condemnation, the owner thereof, including all persons
having property rights therein, shall be paid therefor according to their
respective interests by the town.  The town, or the town council to the
extent of funds available to it, shall provide specific funds for such
payment of compensation prior to such taking and the use of such funds for
such purpose shall be a fixed obligation of the town. Any such taking
hereunder shall be made in the manner provided by and subject to the
provisions of sections 39-15-5 through 39-15-10 of the General Laws, as the
same may have been or may be from time to time amended.



   (b)   Authority of council.  The town council shall have general
authority to represent the town and to make any agreements for said town
under the authority of this section and to do any acts or things necessary or
incidental to executing settlements and agreements, and shall have authority
to agree with the owner for the price of the land so taken, and the same
shall be paid by the town treasurer out of the proceeds of bonds or notes
issued hereunder or from general funds as provided in section 8 of this
chapter [this article] upon vouchers approved by the majority of the town
council.



   (c)   Exception for land or right of way of railroad or public
service company.  Nothing in this chapter [this article] shall authorize the
town to condemn any portion of the land or right of way or any railroad or
other public service company, except for the purpose of crossing the same
below grade and of building and maintaining necessary manholes at such
crossing in such manner as not to render unsafe or to impair the usefulness
of such land or right of way for railroad purposes or for the purposes of
such other public service company.  If said town and such railroad or other
public service company are unable to agree as to the method of the
construction and maintenance of such sewer and manholes at any such crossing,
either party may apply to the public utility administrator for a
determination thereof, and, after hearing, such sewer and manholes shall be
constructed and maintained in such method and manner as may be ordered by
said administrator.  These proceedings shall be subject to the provision of
chapters 1 and 5 in title 39 and sections 39-4-7 and 39-4-19 through 24 of
the General Laws, as the same may have been or may from time to time be
amended.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1; P.L. 1960, ch. 205, §7.)



Sec. 16.  Contracts with federal and municipal governments.



   The town, by its town council, when so directed by the electors in town
meeting, is authorized to contract with the United States of America and with
any other city or town in this state, or with the State of Rhode Island, and
any other city or town in this state and the State of Rhode Island are
authorized to contract with the Town of Middletown, on such terms as may be
mutually agreed upon between them, for the purpose of securing adequate sewer
outlets, rights of way and other easements for the Town of Middletown and for
the general purposes of construction, maintenance and operation of a sewerage
works and the utilization or other disposition of the sewage therefrom. 
(P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1.)



Sec. 17.  Ordinances, etc., relative to use of sewer system and penalties
for violation thereof.



   The town council is authorized from time to time to prescribe rules and
orders relative to the use of the sewer system, and by general ordinance to
forbid the introduction or turning into the sewers of any substance injurious
or detrimental thereto or to the public use thereof.  Any person violating
any ordinance, rule or order prescribed by the town council under the
authority of this act [this article] shall be fined not exceeding twenty-five
($25.00) dollars for each violation, and not exceeding fifty ($50.00) dollars
for each additional day that any such violation shall continue, as may be
prescribed by ordinance of the town council, and shall also be liable in an
action on the case for all damages caused to the town or to any person by any
such violation.



(P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1.)



Sec. 18.  Plats of common sewers to be filed with town clerk as public
records.



   Whenever a common sewer is constructed under the provisions of this
chapter [this article], the town council shall cause a plat of the layout of
the same and of the estates abutting upon the same to be filed in the office
of the town clerk, which said plats are hereby declared to be public records
for determination of the description of the estates assessed for such
construction of such sewers.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1.)



Sec. 19.  Acceptance by town of federal and state funds.



   The town council of the said Town of Middletown is hereby authorized,
empowered and directed to accept and use in connection with the construction
of the sewerage works and sewers authorized by this chapter [this article]
any funds from the United States of America or from this state or aid in any
form under any and all acts and joint resolutions of congress and any and all
laws of this state already enacted or which may be enacted and upon such
terms and conditions as may be required by the proper federal or state
authorities.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1.)



Sec. 20.  Severability clause.



   If any part, clause, division or section of this chapter [this article]
shall be declared unconstitutional the validity of its remaining provisions
shall not be affected thereby.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1.)



Sec. 21.  Article not to affect any other power of town.



   This chapter [this article] shall not affect any other power which the
town may have under any other provisions of law to incur indebtedness. 
(P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1.)



Sec. 22.  Validation of prior actions taken and bonds and notes previously
issued.



   Bonds and notes issued and all other action taken under this chapter
[this article] as in effect prior to its amendment inserting this section
shall be regarded as having been issued or taken as the case may be, under
this chapter [this article] as so amended, and rules, orders and ordinances
adopted under this chapter [this article] prior to such amendment shall
continue in effect to the extent that they are not inconsistent with such
amendment.  The annual charges provided for in this chapter [this article]
prior to such amendment for the fiscal year in which such amendment takes
effect shall remain in effect.  General funds of the town may be used to
meet any deficiency in the receipts from such annual charges as compared with
the amount required for the purposes thereof, pending the receipt of the
charges for the next succeeding year. The general funds shall be replenished
without interest from the charges for the next succeeding year on or before
the close of such next succeeding year.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1.)



   Editor's note.  P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 1, which inserted the section
here codified, was approved May 23, 1958.



Sec. 23.  Referendum.



   The question of the approval of this act [this article] shall be
submitted to the electors of the Town of Middletown qualified to vote upon a
proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money at an annual or a
special financial town meeting the warning for which in the case of a special
financial town meeting shall contain notice of the proposal to accept this
act.  The question to be voted upon shall be submitted in substantially the
following form:  "Shall an act, passed at the January 1958 session of the
general assembly, bearing the title stated below, be approved? The title of
this act is:  `An act in amendment of chapter 1103 of the public laws, 1941,
entitled "An act to create a sewer commission for the Town of Middletown, and
to authorize said town to construct and maintain a sewer system," as
amended.'" (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 2.)



   Editors note.  Chapter 138, P.L. 1958, was ratified by the voters of
Middletown at a special financial meeting held November 24, 1958.



Sec. 24.  Effective date.



   This section and section 2 of this act [section 23 of this article]
shall take effect upon the passage of this act; and the remainder of this act
by a majority of those voting on the question at the financial town meeting
prescribed by section 2 hereof.  (P.L. 1958, ch. 138, § 3.)



Article VIII.  Public Laws 1979, Chapter 335, Taxation.



Sec. 1.  Property exempt.



   [In accordance with] Rhode Island Public Law, Chapter 335, 1979, the
following property shall be exempt from taxation:  the household furniture
and family stores of a housekeeper in the whole, including clothing, bedding
and other white goods, books and all other such tangible personal property
items which are common to the normal household not exceeding twenty thousand
dollars.  (12-17-79, § 1.)



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS




CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Town seal



   10.14   Probate court seal



   10.15   Seal keeper



   10.16   Ordinances repealed



   10.17   Ordinances unaffected



   10.18   Effective date of ordinances



   10.19   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.20   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.21   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of
Middletown shall be designated as the Middletown Town Code and may be so
cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This  municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



   COUNCIL.  The town council of the Town of Middletown, Rhode Island.



   COUNTY.  Newport County, Rhode Island.



   JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers



   KEEPER and PROPRIETOR. Includes persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a
servant, agent or employee.



   LAND, REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of corporeal nature.



   OR, AND.  "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the
sense requires it.



   OWNER.  As applied to any property includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of a part of such property.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively. 
R.I. Gen. Laws.



   PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   R.I. GEN. LAWS.  The 1956 General Laws of Rhode Island as amended
through the most recent session of the Rhode Island General Assembly.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   SIDEWALK.  That part of the street exclusively reserved for
pedestrians and constructed for such purpose.



   STATE.  The state of Rhode Island.



   STREET.  Includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the town and shall mean and include the entire width thereof between
the abutting property lines.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related
by the subject matter of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to a building or land, includes any
person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a
part of such building or land, either alone or with others.



   TIME.  Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.



   TOWN, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY.  The Town of Middletown,
Rhode Island.



   WRITTEN.  Includes any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.



(73 Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded. 



(73 Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.13  TOWN SEAL



   The following shall be the device of the seal of the town: Around the
margin of the same, there shall be a circle, the upper half containing the
words:  "The Town of Middletown, R.I."; in the lower half thereof shall be
the words "Incorporated 1743"; within which circle shall be a device
representing a windmill.



(73 Code, § 1-8)  (Ord. passed 1-21-81)



§ 10.14  PROBATE COURT SEAL.



   The following shall be the device of the seal of the probate court: 
Around the margin of the same, there shall be a circle, the upper half
containing the words "Court of Probate"; in the lower half thereof shall be
the words "Middletown, R.I."; and within the circle shall be a device
representing a lamb.



(73 Code, § 1-9)  (Ord. passed 1-21-81)



§ 10.15  SEAL KEEPER



   The town clerk shall be keeper of the town seal and clerk of probate
shall be keeper of the seal of such court.



(73 Code, § 1-10)  (Ord. passed 1-21-81)



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature  pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.18  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication shall
take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.19  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.20  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section.  In addition to
such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance,
a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.21  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific passage date
of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances, if
any, are listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord.
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord.
passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. 



Example:  (R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-2-10)  (Ord. passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-85)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory
reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.



Example:



   § 50.02  DEPOSITING WASTES IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.



      No person shall throw or pour, or in any way place, deposit, or
cause to be placed, any filth, offal, brine, dirty water, dirt, rubbish or
other offense substance of any description in any public place.



   ('73 Code, § 10-2) (Ord. passed 1-15-17)



   Penalty, see § 10.99



   Statutory references:



      Deposit of debris on Middletown Beaches



        prohibited, see R.I. Gen. Laws § 11-44-19



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1981 and subsequently amended, the 1981
code section number shall be indicated in the history by "('81 Code, § ___)."



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment up to 30
days, and/or restitution in cases involving property damage or personal
injury up to $2,500 and/or community service to the town up to ten days. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.



(R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-6-2)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   TOWN COUNCIL





         31.   OFFICERS





         32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS





         33.   FINANCE





         33A.   PURCHASING





         34.   TAXES





         35.   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS





         36.   FEE SCHEDULE





         37.   CIVIL SERVICE





         38.   MUNICIPAL COURT





         38A.   JUVENILE HEARING BOARD





         39.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM




CHAPTER 30:  TOWN COUNCIL



Section



   30.01   Procedure for adopting ordinances and resolutions



   30.02   Emergency ordinances



   30.03   Elections required for enabling legislation



   30.04   Elections required to transfer interest in Second Beach



   30.05   Town Council compensation



Cross-reference:



   For charter provisions on the Town Council, see the Charter, Division
1, § 201 et seq.



   For rules of the Town Council, see Title XVII: Town Policies, Policy 19
Rules of the Council



§ 30.01  PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTING ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.



   Every ordinance and resolution shall be introduced only in written or
printed form. No ordinance or resolution shall be so amended in its passage
as to change its original purpose. Any ordinance adopting a budget or making
appropriations shall be confined to the subject of the budget or
appropriation. No ordinance shall be acted upon until it has been read on two
separate days, nor until at least 48 hours shall have elapsed between two
readings, except in the case of an emergency ordinance as hereinafter
provided. The second reading of each ordinance shall be in full unless a copy
thereof shall have been furnished each member of the Council prior to such
reading. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be "Be it Ordained by
the Town of Middletown."



('73 Code, § 2-4)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



Statutory reference:



   Town ordinances, see R.I. Gen. Laws. § 45-6-1 et seq.



§ 30.02  EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.



   An emergency ordinance to provide for the immediate preservation of
public peace, property, health  or  safety  in which the emergency claimed
is set forth and defined in a preamble thereto, may be passed without a
second reading by an affirmative vote of at least five members of the Council.



('73 Code, § 2-5)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 30.03  ELECTIONS REQUIRED FOR ENABLING LEGISLATION.



   Any enabling or authorizing legislation enacted by the General Assembly
specifically affecting the town shall not become operative until and unless
it is approved by the electors.  Such legislation shall be submitted to the
electors for their approval or rejection not less than 30 days nor more than
one year from the date the Council takes its final vote thereon.  The
Council may, and if no regular election is to be held within such period
shall, provide for a special election.



(Ord. passed 11-16-04)



§ 30.04  ELECTIONS REQUIRED TO TRANSFER INTEREST IN SECOND BEACH.



   (A)   Purpose. In recognition of the unique value of Sachuest Beach,
also known as Second Beach, to the residents of the Middletown, this section
is intended to preserve and protect the beach and its immediate surrounding
area from inappropriate development, in order that future generations may
continue to use the beach for recreational activities, including sunbathing,
swimming, kiteboarding, sailboarding, windsurfing, and boating.



   (B)   Town responsibilities. To further the purpose of this section,
the town, acting through appropriate departments as directed by the
Administrator, shall maintain the beach, including its lifeguard structures,
buildings, walkways, and parking areas, in good condition at all times, with
adequate security and protection during the off-season for beach use.



   (C)   Voter approval.  Any resolution, agreement, or other action
by the Council that has the effect of transferring any interest in the real
property known as Sachuest Beach or Second Beach, or in any part of such
property, from the town to any other person, organization, or entity, shall
not become operative until and unless it is approved by the electors;
provided that this restriction shall not apply to any lease or contract of
limited duration entered into by the town to facilitate management of the
beach, including concessions providing amenities for beach patrons.



   (D)   Any resolution, agreement, or other action taken by the
Council under division (C) above shall be submitted to the electors for their
approval or rejection not less than 30 days nor more than one year from the
date the Council takes its final vote thereon. The Council may, and if no
regular election is to be held within such period, shall provide for a
special election.



   (E)   For purposes of division (C) above, the term "interest in the
real property" shall be interpreted in the broadest manner consistent with
the use of such term in real estate law.



(Ord. 09-06, passed 4-20-09)



§ 30.05  TOWN COUNCIL COMPENSATION.



   Town Council members shall be paid an annual stipend of $2,500.  The
Council President shall be paid an annual stipend of $4,000.  Stipend shall
be paid on a fiscal year basis and will be issued as a normal payroll check.



(Ord. passed 11-2-98; Am. Ord. 09-06, passed 4-20-09)



CHAPTER 31:  OFFICERS



Section



   31.01   Authority of subordinates, acting town officers



   31.02   Town Clerk



Statutory reference:



   For list of required officers, see R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-4-1



Cross-reference:



   Interfering with or impersonating town officers prohibited, see §
130.36, § 130.37



§ 31.01  AUTHORITY OF SUBORDINATES, ACTING TOWN OFFICERS.



   (A)   Authority vested in and duties imposed upon town officers by
state law, the Charter, this Code or other ordinances and resolutions of the
Council may, when they so authorize, be exercised or performed by their
deputies, assistants and other subordinates, to the extent not prohibited by
state law, the Charter, this Code or other ordinance or resolution of the
Council.



   (B)   When any officer or employee is absent or disabled, or when
any office or position in the town government is vacant, the person
designated by competent authority to act in the place of such absent or
disabled officer or employee or to hold temporarily the vacant office or
position shall have the powers and perform the duties of such absent or
disabled officer or employee or appertaining to such vacant office or
position.



('73 Code, § 2-1)



§ 31.02  TOWN CLERK.



   In addition to the duties prescribed by the laws of the state and by
the Charter, this Code and other ordinances of the town, the Town Clerk shall
record all votes, orders, resolutions, ordinances, rules and regulations made
and passed by the Council; provided, that it shall not be necessary to record
this Code, but publication thereof in book form shall be sufficient for all
purposes. He shall furnish the finance director with a certified copy of all
votes of the Council requiring the expenditure of money as soon as
practicable after such votes have been passed. He shall file weekly with the
Tax Assessor notice of transfers or conveyances of real estate made upon the
books of record in the office of the Town Clerk.



('73 Code, § 2-2) 



Statutory reference:



   Town Clerk as Clerk of Council, see R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-5-5



   Town Clerk generally, see § 54-7-1 et seq.



Cross reference:



   Charter provision on Town Clerk



CHAPTER 32:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Board of Assessment Review



   32.01   Members serve without compensation



   32.02   Meetings



   32.03   Officers



   32.04   Filing of appeals



   32.05   Time for filing appeals



   32.06   Data to be provided with application for appeal



   32.07   Forms



Conservation Commission



   32.15   Creation, members



   32.16   Compensation, terms, vacancies



   32.17   Officers



   32.18   Powers and duties generally



   32.19   Rules, records



   32.20   Assistance form other departments



   32.21   Consultation with other departments, compliance with master
plan



   32.22   Gifts to commission



   32.23   Public meetings; right to be heard



   32.24   Public records, annual reports



Fire Department



   32.35   Rules and regulations



Planning Department



   32.44   Town Planner



   32.45   Creation; members



   32.46   Board organization, rules



   32.47   Studies and plans, generally



   32.48   Recommendations to the Council



   32.49   Comprehensive plan



   32.50   Duties as to capital improvement budget and program



   32.51   Cooperation with other agencies, officials



   32.52   Annual reports



   32.53   Agreements, expenditures



   32.54   Authority of Planning Board



   32.55   Board to submit rules and regulations to Council



   32.56   General authority of Zoning Board of Review



   32.57   Appellate powers of Board of Review



   32.58   Appeal procedure



Police Department



   32.65   Rules and regulations



Publics Works Department



   32.75   Responsibilities in addition to charter requirements



School Committee



   32.85   School Committee compensation



BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW



§ 32.01  MEMBERS SERVE WITHOUT COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Board of Assessment Review for the town shall serve
in such capacity without any form of compensation.



('73 Code, § 2-29) (Ord. passed 9-21-70)



Cross-reference:



   Charter provisions, see §§ 704, 1001 of Division 1 of the Charter



§ 32.02  MEETINGS.



   The Board shall meet with such frequency as is necessary to promptly
and efficiently settle all appeals presented to the board.



('73 Code, § 2-30) (Ord. passed 9-21-70)



§ 32.03  OFFICERS.



   The members of the Board shall elect a chairman and a secretary who
shall serve for a term of one year. Each such term shall commence on
September 1 of each year.



('73 Code, § 2-31) (Ord. passed 9-21-70)



§ 32.04  FILING OF APPEALS.



   Applications for appeals shall be in writing and filed with the Tax
Assessor for review and transmission to the secretary of the Board.



('73 Code, § 2-32) (Ord. passed 9-21-70)



§ 32.05  TIME FOR FILING APPEALS.



   The Board shall receive and consider appeals from property owners
regarding the amounts of assessments as determined by the Tax Assessor;
provided, that such appeals are properly filed with it within ninety days of
the last date appointed for payment without penalty of such tax, or the first
installment thereof, if such tax be paid in installments.



('73 Code, § 2-33)  (Ord. passed 9-21-70)



§ 32.06  DATA TO BE PROVIDED WITH APPLICATION FOR APPEAL.



   Every applicant filing an appeal shall state the reason for the appeal.
If appertaining to real estate, a description of the property, with
information as to the street number, if any, and also the assessor's plat and
lot number. If appertaining to tangible personal property, the description
and location thereof. The filing must be in writing notarized and properly
signed by the applicant (if an individual) or by a corporate officer (if the
applicant be a corporation).



('73 Code, § 2-34) (Ord. passed 9-21-70)



§ 32.07  FORMS.



   Forms for filing appeals with the Board will be available in the Tax
Assessor's office.



('73 Code, § 2-35) (Ord. passed 9-21-70)



CONSERVATION COMMISSION



§ 32.15  CREATION, MEMBERS.



   There is hereby created a Conservation Commission  of the town
consisting of seven members, all of whom shall be qualified electors of the
town and one of whom shall be a member of the planning board of the town.
These seven persons shall be appointed by the Council in accordance with the
provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 45-35-1 et seq.



('73 Code, § 2-36) (Ord. passed 8-1-66; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-83)



§ 32.16  COMPENSATION, TERMS, VACANCIES.



   The persons appointed to the Conservation Commission shall serve
without compensation and shall be appointed for a term of three years.
Vacancies caused by resignation, death or for any other reason, shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term of office. Members shall hold
office until their successors have been duly appointed.



('73 Code, § 2-37) (Ord. passed 8-1-66; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-83)



§ 32.17  OFFICERS.



   (A)   The Conservation Commission shall elect its chairman from its
members and his term of office shall be for one year and he may be eligible
for reelection thereafter. The Commission may, at its discretion, likewise
elect a vice chairman. The Commission shall also elect a secretary in the
same manner as the chairman.



   (B)   The chairman of the Commission shall preside over all meetings
and, in his absence, the vice chairman, if such office exists. In the event
that the Commission fails to elect a vice chairman, the members of the
Commission shall appoint a temporary chairman to conduct any meeting in the
absence of the chairman.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep minutes of all
Commission meetings, record all its transactions and authenticate same. All
such records shall be kept by the secretary as the Commission's permanent
records, which shall be available to the general public for inspection at all
times after the authentication thereof.



('73 Code, § 2-38) (Ord. passed 8-1-66; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-83)



§ 32.18  POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.



   (A)   The Conservation Commission shall have such powers and duties
as are prescribed in R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-35-1 et seq. and shall have as its
objectives: to promote and develop the natural resources; to protect the
watershed resources; and to preserve natural aesthetic areas within the
town. 



   (B)   Such Commission shall conduct researches into its local land
areas and shall seek to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies
organized for similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and
distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which units judgment it
deems necessary for its work, subject to the availability of funds for such
purposes. It shall make and keep an index of all open spaces within the town
publicly or privately owned including open marshlands, swamps and other
wetlands, for the purpose of obtaining information on the proper use of such
areas. It may recommend to the Council a program for the better promotion,
development, utilization, or preservation of open areas, streams, shores,
wooded areas, roadsides, swamps, marshlands, and natural aesthetic areas.



   (C)   The Commission shall have power, subject to the approval of
the Council, to appoint clerks and other employees it from time to time
require.



('73 Code, § 2-39) (Ord. passed 8-1-66; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-83)



§ 32.19  RULES, RECORDS.



   The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business
and shall keep permanent and accurate records of all its resolutions,
transactions, findings, determinations and recommendations.



('73 Code, § 2-43) (Ord. passed 8-1-66; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-83)



§ 32.20  ASSISTANCE FORM OTHER DEPARTMENTS.



   The Commission, in carrying out its program, may call on other
departments, boards or agencies of the town for such information, assistance
or advice as may conveniently be rendered by the departments, boards or
agencies, and may advertise, prepare, print or distribute maps, charts, plans
and pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its work within
the limit of any funds that may be provided for such work.



('73 Code, § 2-40)  (Ord. passed 8-1-66; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-83)



§ 32.21  CONSULTATION WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS, COMPLIANCE WITH MASTER PLAN.



   The Commission, prior to making any findings, shall consult with any
other department, board or agency of the town that may be in any way directly
or indirectly affected thereby, and shall be entitled to receive from any
other department, board or agency information concerning any plans, projects
or contemplated work that will affect the program or objectives of the
Commission. Any action relating to land use or other physical aspects of the
town shall be in general conformance with any master plan that may have been
adopted by the Council.



('73 Code, § 2-41) (Ord. passed 8-1-66; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-83)



§ 32.22  GIFTS TO COMMISSION.



   The Commission may receive gifts of funds, lands, buildings or other
properties in the name of the town, subject to the approval of the Council,
and may thereafter manage the same in accordance with the objectives set
forth in this division, and the purposes set forth in title 45, chapter 35 of
the General Laws of Rhode Island, 1956. This authority shall not be construed
or exercised to deny to the people free access to such lands, or to any other
land held by or for the town for recreational purposes.



('73 Code, § 2-42) (Ord. passed 8-1-66; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-83)



§ 32.23  PUBLIC MEETINGS; RIGHT TO BE HEARD.



   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, and any
person or his duly constituted representative shall be entitled to appear and
be heard on any matter before the Commission before it reaches final decision
on such matter.



('73 Code, § 2-44) (Ord. passed 8-1-66; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-83)



§ 32.24  PUBLIC RECORDS, ANNUAL REPORTS.



   All records of the Commission shall become public records. The
Commission shall file an annual report on or before the last day of March of
each year.



('73 Code, § 2-45) (Ord. passed 8-1-66; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-83)



FIRE DEPARTMENT.



§ 32.35  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Fire Chief shall make rules and regulations, not inconsistent with
state law, the Charter, this Code or other ordinance, concerning the conduct
of all officers and subordinate members of the Fire Department, and the
government of the Department generally. Such rules and regulations, when
approved by the town administrator and by ordinance or resolution of the
Council and a copy thereof has been placed on file in the office of the Fire
Chief for the inspection of all members of the Fire Department, shall be
binding upon all members of the Fire Department, and it shall be unlawful for
any member of the Fire Department to violate or fail to comply with any such
rule or regulation as approved by the town administrator and the Council.



('73 Code, § 9-14)



Cross-reference:



   For Charter provisions, see § 702 of Divisions 1 of the Charter



   For fire protection, see Chapter 91



PLANNING DEPARTMENT



§ 32.44 TOWN PLANNER.



   There may be a Town Planner appointed by the Town Administrator who
shall be responsible for the efficient operation of all Town planning
activities, including but not limited to, compliance with all planning
related statutes of the state and ordinances of the town. The Town Planner
shall also serve as staff to the Planning Board, process decisions and
recommendations of the Board and be responsible for any other matters
assigned by the Town Administrator or the Town Council.



§ 32.45  CREATION; MEMBERS.



   In accordance with the provisions of section 1008 of the Charter, there
is established a Planning Board for the town consisting of seven members who
are qualified electors of the town. Members shall be appointed by the Council
for terms of three years (except that initial appointments under this
division shall provide that two members shall serve for one-year terms and
two other members for two-year terms). Any vacancy on the Board shall be
filled by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. All members
shall serve until their respective successors shall have been appointed.



('73 Code, § 2-46)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



Statutory reference:



   State law generally on Planning Board, see R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-22-1 et
seq.



Cross-reference:



   For Charter provisions, see § 1008 of Division 1 of the Charter



§ 32.46  BOARD ORGANIZATION, RULES.



   The Board shall organize annually by electing a chairman, a vice
chairman and secretary. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation
but shall be compensated for their necessary and actual traveling expenses in
the performance of their official duties, to be paid out of any funds
appropriated for the use of the Board. Regular meetings of the board shall be
held monthly on such days as the Board may determine, and special meetings
shall be held at the call of the chairman or on the written request of three
members. The Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and
shall keep permanent and complete records of its proceedings, meetings,
hearings and recommendations. Four members of the board shall constitute a
quorum at any regular or special meeting and no action shall be taken unless
by the concurring vote of a majority of the members present and voting.



('73 Code, § 2-47)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.47  STUDIES AND PLANS, GENERALLY.



   The Board shall, when requested by the Council, make studies and, when
necessary, prepare plans of the resources and needs of the town, with
reference to its physical growth and development as affecting the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the people and the economy and
efficiency of communal life. Such studies and plans may include among other
things the following: Land use; zoning; transportation facilities; public
utilities; public facilities including schools, parks, beaches and other
public areas and structures; blighted areas including plans for the
redevelopment, rehabilitation and prevention of slum districts; air and water
pollution; natural resources; protection from disaster; and economic and
sociological characteristics of the town.



('73 Code, § 2-48)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.48  RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE COUNCIL.



   The Board shall submit a recommendation to the Council on all proposed
ordinances and resolutions which concern the existing and proposed location
and arrangement of the uses of land, or such other matters within the scope
of section 248 that may be referred to it. Nothing in this section, however,
shall be construed to restrict or prevent the Council from acting on any
ordinance or resolution contrary to or in the absence of a recommendation of
the Board.



('73 Code, § 2-54) (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.49  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   The Board shall prepare and adopt a comprehensive plan for the
development and improvement of the town. Such plan shall show among other
things the existing and proposed location and arrangement of the uses of land
in the town; zoning districts; highways and appurtenant structures;
transportation and utility routes, facilities, and structures; public
schools; parks and recreation areas; and public buildings and facilities. The
board shall not adopt, modify or amend such comprehensive plan until after a
public hearing of which it shall give notice specifying the time and place of
such hearing by publication of such notice in a newspaper of general
circulation within the town at least once a week for three successive weeks
prior to the date of such hearing, at which hearing opportunity shall be
given all persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed
comprehensive plan, or of such modification or amendment.



('73 Code, § 2-49)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.50  DUTIES AS TO CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT BUDGET AND PROGRAM.



   When requested by the Town Administrator, the Board shall collaborate
with the Town Administrator in the annual preparation and recommendation to
the Council of a capital improvement budget for the following year and a
comprehensive future capital improvement program.



('73 Code, § 2-50)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.51  COOPERATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES, OFFICIALS.



   The Board may call upon other departments, boards or committees of the
town and agencies of the state and federal governments for assistance in the
performance of its designated functions and shall cooperate with such other
departments and with state and federal agencies on community, regional and
state planning and development. All town officials and boards shall upon
request furnish the Planning Board such available information as it may
require for its work.



('73 Code, § 2.51)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.52  ANNUAL REPORTS.



   The Board shall report annually to the Council, summarizing the work of
the preceding year and recommending plans of future development. All plans
and reports of the board shall be first submitted to the Council, and
thereafter, subject to approval by the Council, the Board may publish and
distribute copies of plans and reports to promote public interest in and
understanding of the work of the board.



('73 Code, § 2-52)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.53  AGREEMENTS, EXPENDITURES.



   The Board, subject to approval by the Council, may appoint such
assistants and employees as it may deem necessary and may also employ
consultants or enter into agreements with state, federal or regional
agencies; and the Board may incur any expense necessary therefor, but it
shall not for any purpose contract for or incur any expense larger than the
amount appropriated or available therefor.



('73 Code, § 2-53)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.54  AUTHORITY OF PLANNING BOARD.



   For the purpose of promoting the general health, safety and general
welfare, by governing and restricting the plotting and subdivision of land in
the town, the Planning Board is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt
rules and regulations governing and restricting the plotting or other
subdivision of land within the town, and from time to time modify and amend
such rules and regulations as it may adopt; and is further authorized and
empowered to control the subdivision of land within the town, pursuant to
such rules and regulations and subject to and in accordance with the
provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws Title 45, Chapter 23.



('73 Code, § 22-1) (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.55  BOARD TO SUBMIT RULES AND REGULATIONS TO COUNCIL.



   The Planning Board shall submit the rules and regulations, and
amendments or modifications thereof that it proposes to adopt, to the Council
for its consideration and approval and for any recommendation it may desire
to make with respect thereto.



('73 Code, § 22-1)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.56  GENERAL AUTHORITY OF ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW.



   The Zoning Board of Review, hereinafter referred to as the Board of
Review, shall constitute and act as the Board of Review prescribed by R.I.
Gen. Laws § 45-23-14 and shall have all the power and authority and be
subject to all duties provided for such Board of Review by R.I. Gen. Laws
Title 45, Chapter 23.



('73 Code, § 22-2)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.57  APPELLATE POWERS OF BOARD OF REVIEW.



   The Board of Review may, in appropriate cases and subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards, make special exceptions to the rules
and regulations of the Planning Board in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of such rules and regulations, or where such exception is reasonably
necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public; and shall have the
following powers:



   (A)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Planning
Board in the enforcement of this chapter or of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.



   (B)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the
rules and regulations upon which such Board is authorized to pass under this
chapter.



   (C)   To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance in
the application of the terms of the rules and regulations as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of such rules and regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the rules and regulations
shall be observed and substantial justice done.



('73 Code, § 22-3)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



§ 32.58  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   An appeal to the Board of Review may be taken by any person
whose plat has been rejected by the Planning Board.  The appellant shall
file with the secretary of the Board of Review a statement of his appeal, a
copy of his plat and copy of the list of the abutting owners furnished
therewith and of the grounds of disapproval of the Planning Board, together
with the names and addresses of any other persons who appeared before the
Planning Board in opposition to his application for approval of his plat. 
Such appeal shall be filed with the secretary of the Board of Review within
ten days after the final action of the Planning Board on such application.



   (B)   The Board of Review shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to
the parties in interest including the applicant, abutting owners and any
other persons who entered appearances before the Planning Board, and shall
decide the appeal within a reasonable time.  Upon the hearing, any party in
interest may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.



('73 Code, § 22-4)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69)



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.65  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of Police shall make rules and regulations, not inconsistent
with state law, the Charter, this Code or other ordinance, concerning the
conduct of all officers and subordinate members of the Police Department and
the government of the Department generally.  Such rules and regulations,
when approved by the Town Administrator and by ordinance or resolution of the
Council and a copy thereof has been placed on file in the office of the Chief
of Police for the inspection of all members of the Police Department, and it
shall be unlawful for any member of the Police Department to violate or fail
to comply with any such rule or regulation as approved by the Town
Administrator and the Council.



('73 Code, § 19-1)



Cross-reference:



   For Charter provisions, see § 701 of Division 1 of the Charter



PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT



§ 32.75  RESPONSIBILITIES IN ADDITION TO CHARTER REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to the responsibilities of the Department of Public Works
as defined in Section 703 or the Charter, that Department shall be
responsible for the maintenance and repair of causeways, bridges, storm water
drains and the sewerage works of the town, and such other responsibilities as
may from time to time be specified by resolution of the Council.



('73 Code, § 2.3)



Cross-reference



   For Charter provisions, see § 703 of Division 1 of the Charter



SCHOOL COMMITTEE



§ 32.85  SCHOOL COMMITTEE COMPENSATION.



   School Committee members shall be paid an annual stipend of $1,200. 
The School Committee Chairperson shall be paid an annual stipend of $1,400. 
The stipend shall be paid on a fiscal  year basis and will be issued as a
normal payroll check.



(Ord. passed 10-16-2006)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCE



Section



   33.01   Finance Director



   33.02   Duties of Finance Director



   33.03   Deputy Finance Director



   33.04   Weekly deposits required of town personnel



   33.05   Deposit by Second and Third Beach operations



   33.06   Cash records subject to examination



   33.07   Accounting by Director and Tax Assessor



   33.08   Bids for contracts



   33.09   Requisitions



   33.10   Transfer of appropriations between departments



   33.11   Transfer of appropriations within department



   33.12   Personnel administration functions of department



   33.13   Department responsibility for certain sewer system functions



   33.14   Burial funds



   33.15   Special grants and gifts



   33.16   School Department funds



   33.17   Investment of town funds



   33.18   Fund balance policy



   33.19   Revenue and expenditures



§ 33.01  FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   The Finance Director shall be in charge of the office of director and,
pursuant to section R.I. Gen. Laws § 44-7-6, as amended, the Finance
Director, in his capacity as town Treasurer, shall perform all duties and
exercise all the powers which by law are imposed and confirmed upon
collectors of taxes.



('73 Code, § 2-12)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.02  DUTIES OF FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The office of the Finance Director shall be charged with the
duty of making all purchases for the town, except the school department and
all departments or agencies thereof; the issuance of specifications and
drafting all proposals for bids; it shall be charged with the duty to see
that there is complete compliance with the provisions of all contracts
entered into by the town; to provide for the inspection, and to see that all
materials, supplies and equipment purchased by the town are in accord with
the specifications prescribed.



   (B)   The Finance Director shall maintain records of bonds and
notes, the retirement thereof and interest due thereunder, and report to and
advise the Town Administrator as to all matters pertaining thereto.



('73 Code, § 2-13)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.03  DEPUTY FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   The Deputy Finance Director, as prescribed by section 706 of the
Charter, shall be charged with the duty of making all payments and
disbursements on behalf of the town and all departments and agencies
thereof.  The Deputy Director is empowered to exercise the powers and
perform the duties of the office of Finance Director in case of the absence
or disability of the Finance Director.



('73 Code, § 2-14)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.04  WEEKLY DEPOSITS REQUIRED OF TOWN PERSONNEL.



   Except as provided in section § 33.05, every officer, official or
employee of the town who, in the discharge of his duties, receives any money
for issuing permits, licenses, copies or records or receives money in
connection with the duties of his official position, shall deposit all such
receipts in the office of the Finance Director on the last business day of
each week and the Finance Director shall give proper receipts therefor.



('73 Code, § 2-15)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.05  DEPOSIT BY SECOND AND THIRD BEACH OPERATIONS.



   Cash receipts received from the Second and Third Beach operations shall
be deposited directly into the bank by the Department of Parks and
Recreation. The accounting of parking ticket sales and cash deposits will be
as prescribed by the Finance Director.



('73 Code, § 2-16)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.06  CASH RECORDS SUBJECT TO EXAMINATION.



   All cash in the possession of any official or employee of the town
received by him in connection with his official position, and all vouchers,
stubs, cash books or other records, or books evidencing the receipt of such
cash, shall be subject to complete examination at any or all times by the
properly authorized representatives of the town.



('73 Code, § 2-17)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.07  ACCOUNTING BY DIRECTOR AND TAX ASSESSOR.



   The Finance Director shall, under the direction of the Town
Administrator, keep an accurate account of all his receipts and payments and
shall monthly submit to the Council a statement of the condition of the
treasury, the amount paid out for the several departments and the balance on
hand of the several appropriations; further in conjunction with the
aforesaid, the Tax Assessor shall submit a profit and loss statement with
relation to current assessments, both real and personal.



('73 Code, § 2-18)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.08  BIDS FOR CONTRACTS.



   (A)   All contracts for more than $3,000, except for the engagement
of engineering, architectural, legal, accounting, auditing, insurance,
planning and similar professional activities, shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder meeting specifications after proper notice as prescribed
by the Director of Finance.



   (B)   The council shall have the power to reject all bids and
advertise for new bids. Alterations in any contract may be made when
authorized by the Town Council.



   (C)   In the event of an emergency, as declared by the Town
Administrator, in which it is necessary to contract for goods, materials or
services necessary to insure the immediate preservation of public peace,
property, health or safety, the Town Administrator shall have the power to
suspend public notice, to solicit bids and to award a contract to the lowest
responsible bidder meeting specifications. The Town Administrator shall
notify the Council as soon as practicable, in writing, of any action taken
pursuant to this section.



('73 Code, § 2-19)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70; Am. Ord. passed 4-7-75; Am. Ord.
passed 5-20-91)



§ 33.09  REQUISITIONS.



   All purchases made and contacts executed on behalf of the town shall be
pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or
agency whose appropriation will be charged.



('73 Code, § 2-20)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.10  TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS BETWEEN DEPARTMENTS.



   The Council, by vote of five members and upon the recommendation of the
Town Administrator, may transfer any unencumbered appropriation, balance or
portion thereof from any office, department or agency to another.



('73 Code, § 2-21)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.11  TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS WITHIN DEPARTMENT.



   The Department of Finance, upon the request by the head of any
department or agency and with the approval of the Town Administrator, shall
have authority to transfer any unencumbered balance or portion hereof between
appropriation items within the same department in an amount not to exceed two
hundred fifty dollars.



('73 Code, § 2-22)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.12  PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION FUNCTIONS OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Department of Finance shall be responsible for the following
functions:



   (A)   Payrolls. Supervise, coordinate and prepare the payroll for
all town departments except the School Department.  Prepare checks for each
employee showing all deductions made, and deliver checks to department heads
biweekly. Maintain pay data cards for each employee and other records to
insure that the payroll accounts are balanced.  Verify biweekly, the School
Department pay checks, with the School Department Finance Director, and
countersign with the check writer each check from that payroll.



   (B)   Pension plan. Maintain records on each employee who has joined
the town pension plan. Act as the focal point for information and service to
the department heads and employees on questions pertaining to the pension
plan. Prepare necessary reports and monthly payments of employee
contributions to the insurance company concerned.



   (C)   Blue Cross plan.  Maintain records and reports on the Blue
Cross plan. Prepare monthly reports and payments for all employees covered by
this plan. Provide individual services and information to employees and
department heads as requested.



   (D)   Payments to welfare recipients.  Make payments to welfare
recipients as directed by the town director of public welfare. Submit
requests for reimbursements of town funds so used, monthly, to the state
government.



   (E)   FICA and withholding for taxes.  Prepare and submit for the
town the quarterly FICA and WHT reports to the state and federal governments.
Annually prepare and distribute W-2 statements to each town employee and the
federal government.



('73 Code, § 2-23)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.13  DEPARTMENT RESPONSIBILITY FOR CERTAIN SEWER SYSTEM FUNCTIONS.



   The Department of Finance shall be responsible for the following
functions in relation to the operation of the town sewer system:



   (A)   Property owner data cards.  Maintain data cards on each
property owner whose property is abutting the town sewer system. Record
property ownership transfer as received from the Tax Assessor.



   (B)   Maintenance assessment rolls; maintenance charges.  Prepare
annually the sewer maintenance assessment rolls on all property owners
abutting the sewer system.  Develop sewer maintenance charges based on the
sewer maintenance budget, for approval by the Council.



   (C)   Construction assessment rolls and charges.  Prepare sewer
construction assessment rolls, as required, as the town sewer system is
expanded. Recommend to the Council the construction assessment charge based
on the project costs and the limits prescribed in Public Laws 1958, chapter
138, amended.



   (D)   Notices; collection of charges. Prepare and send necessary
notices of sewer construction and maintenance assessment to all property
owners concerned. Collect all charges on prescribed due dates.



('73 Code, § 2-24)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.14  BURIAL FUNDS.



   The Council is hereby designated trustee, pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws §
45-5-11, as amended, for all funds received by the town for burial purposes.
The Finance Director is hereby designated the agent of the Council to manage
these funds by maintaining records on each trust received, invest these funds
within the limit of the above cited statute, and disburse the proceeds of
such investment for the perpetual care of burial lots in the town cemetery.



('73 Code, § 2-25)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.15  SPECIAL GRANTS AND GIFTS.



   The Council is hereby designated trustee for all special grants or
gifts received from individuals or estates for special purposes such as
scholarship funds and donations for the support of the poor. The Department
of Finance shall receive these funds, invest them in sound securities and
disburse the proceeds in accordance with the grantee's request.



('73 Code, § 2-26)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.16  SCHOOL DEPARTMENT FUNDS.



   (A)   In accordance with section 812, article VIII of the Charter,
the School Committee is responsible for the expenditure of all funds made
available for the operation and maintenance of the Middletown school system.



   (B)   The Department of Finance shall maintain minimum necessary
financial records on all receipts and expenditures to assure that funds for
the school department are not obligated beyond the total budgetary amount
voted by the Council.



   (C)   The School Department, in accordance with section 814, article
VIII of the Charter, shall perform all detailed administration and control
over receipts and expenditures. Periodic financial reports as required by the
Finance Director to support his records shall be made by the school
department.



('73 Code, § 2-27)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.17  INVESTMENT OF TOWN FUNDS.



   The Finance Director is empowered to develop and implement an
investment program for idle funds not immediately needed for the maintenance
and operation of the town services and facilities.  Investments may be in
certificates of high grade commercial paper, or saving deposits with banks
which are members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or in
obligations issued or guaranteed by the United States government or by any
agency or instrumentality thereof, or as may be provided in any other
applicable laws of the State of Rhode Island.



('73 Code, § 2-28)  (Ord. passed 8-3-70)



§ 33.18  FUND BALANCE POLICY.



   (A)   The unrestricted non-committed General Fund balance will be
maintained at a level sufficient to provide for the required resources to:



      (1)   Plan for contingencies, and



      (2)   Maintain good standing with rating agencies, and



      (3)   Avoid interest expense for operating budget needs and
capital projects, and



      (4)   Provide for investment income, and



      (5)   Ensure short-term cash availability when anticipated
revenue is unavailable.



   (B)   (Reserved).



   (C)   The town will maintain a minimum unrestricted non-committed
General Fund balance of 8% of the current period’s budgeted expenditures.
The unrestricted non-committed General Fund balance does not include the non-
spendable, restricted or committed fund balance that is either inherently
non-spendable, has externally enforceable limitations on use, or has
limitations imposed by the Town Council.



   (D)   To avoid a balance in excess of the level deemed sufficient
for prudent fiscal management, the town will maintain a maximum unrestricted
non-committed General Fund balance of 16% of the current period’s budgeted
expenditures. Excess surpluses will be available for appropriation by the
Town Council in a subsequent fiscal year to fund capital, operating, or debt
service expenditures as determined by the Town Council during the budget for
that subsequent fiscal year.



   (E)   An unrestricted non-committed General Fund balance in excess
of the minimum recommended level may be utilized for the purposes listed
below.



      (1)   Meeting future capital needs, or



      (2)   Offsetting difficult economic times, or



      (3)   Stabilizing fluctuations in cash flow requirements, or



      (4)   Provisions for emergency situations.



   (F)   If the unrestricted non-committed General Fund balance falls
outside of the above parameters, budgeted revenues will be either greater or
less than budgeted expenditures in subsequent years to bring the unrestricted
non-committed General Fund balance into compliance with this policy.



(Ord. passed 4-18-05; Am. Ord. 2011-13, passed 12-19-11)



§ 33.19  REVENUE AND EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   Revenues.



      (1)   Diversification and stabilization.  The town will
maintain a diversified and stable revenue system as a protection from
short-run fluctuations.  The town will strive to diversify the revenue base,
reducing its dependency on property taxes and intergovernmental transfers. 
To encourage diversity within the local economy, the town will support
policies that promote tourism, agriculture,  commercial and industrial
employment.



         (a)   One-time revenues.  The use of one-time revenues
shall be limited to the purpose for which they are intended, or for a capital
expenditure, and not to subsidize costs such as recurring personnel,
operation, and maintenance.



         (b)   New revenues.  For any proposed additional
revenue source, the Town Council will consider the following criteria:



            1.   Community acceptability;



            2.   Competitiveness.  The revenue or tax burden
of the town relative to neighboring communities;



            3.   Diversity. The balance of revenue sources
that can withstand changes in the business cycle;



            4.   Efficiency.  The cost of administering a tax
or fee should bear a reasonable relation to revenues collected, and any new
tax or fee should have minimal effect on private economic decisions; and



            5.   Fairness.  The distribution of the town's
revenue burden shall be as progressive as possible measured by ability to
pay, the benefits received, or the community's definition of the resident's
fair share of the revenue burden.



      (2)   Forecasting.  Town revenues shall be forecast
conservatively, using an objective and analytical approach.  Where
practical, historical tending and econometric forecasting shall be used to
maintain consistency and enhance reliability.  Budget estimates shall be
compared to actual results on a periodic basis to determine the validity of
assumptions made during the formulation of estimated revenues.



      (3)   User fees.  User fees will be developed and continually
reviewed to ensure they recover the cost of services that are not universal
to all taxpayers.  In Proprietary Funds, user fees will provide full
coverage of direct and indirect costs including depreciation.  In the Park
and Recreation Fund, user fees will be maintained at a level to cover
operating costs exclusive of facility costs.



   (B)   Expenditures.



      (1)   Maintenance of capital assets.  Within the resources
available each year, the town shall maintain capital assets and
infrastructure at a sufficient level to protect the town's investment, to
minimize future replacement and maintenance costs, and to continue service
levels.



      (2)   Full funding of pension and other post-retirement
systems.  The annual budget will provide for the full funding of the
employee retirement systems as recommended by the town's actuary.



      (3)   Program review/privatization.  It is the town's intent
to control personnel costs as a proportion of the total budget, to more
productively and creatively use available resources, and to avoid duplication
of effort and resources.  The town will encourage delivery of services by
other public and private organizations whenever and wherever greater
efficiency and effectiveness can be expected.  The town will develop and
internally use technology and productivity advancements that will help reduce
or avoid increasing personnel costs.



(Ord. passed 5-7-07)



CHAPTER 33A:  PURCHASING



Section



General Provisions



   33A.001   Purpose



   33A.002   Application



   33A.003   Definitions



   33A.004   Public access to procurement information



Office of the Purchasing Agent



   33A.020   Establishment



   33A.021   Authority and duties



   33A.022   Delegations to other Town Officials



Source Selection and Contract Formation



   33A.030   Competitive sealed bidding



   33A.031   Competitive sealed proposals



   33A.032   Contracting for designated professional services



   33A.033   Small purchases



   33A.034   Sole source procurement



   33A.035   Emergency procurements



   33A.036   Cancellation of invitation for bids or requests for
proposals



   33A.037   Responsibility of bidders and offerors



   33A.038   Cost or pricing data



   33A.039   Cost or pricing analysis



   33A.040   Bid and performance bonds on supply or service contracts



   33A.041   Types of contracts



   33A.042   Contract clauses and their administration



   33A.043   Contract administration



   33A.044   Cost reimbursement provisions



   33A.045   Approval of accounting system



   33A.046   Right to inspect plant



   33A.047   Right to audit records



   33A.048   Reporting of anti-competitive practices



   33A.049   Town procurement records



Specifications



   33A.060   Maximum practical competition



   33A.061   Qualified products list



   33A.062   Brand name or equal specification



   33A.063   Brand name specification



Procurement of Construction, Architect-Engineer and Land Surveying Services



   33A.080   Responsibility for selection of methods of construction
contracting management



   33A.081   Bid security



   33A.082   Contract performance and payment bonds



   33A.083   Copies of bond forms



   33A.084   Fiscal responsibility



   33A.085   Public announcement and selection process



Debarment or Suspension



   33A.100   Authority to debar or suspend



   33A.101   Decision to debar or suspend



   33A.102   Notice of decision



   33A.103   Finality of decision



Cost Principles



   [Reserved]



Supply Management



   33A.130   Disposal of surplus or obsolete property



Appeals and Remedies



   33A.140   Bid protests



   33A.141   Contract claims



   33A.142   Access to administrative forums



   33A.143   Access to town courts



   33A.144   Access to state courts



   33A.145   Authority of the purchasing agent to settle bid protests
and contract claims



   33A.146   Remedies for solicitations or awards in violation of law



Cooperative Purchasing



   33A.160   Master price agreements



   33A.161   Joint purchasing



Assistance to Small and Disadvantaged Businesses



   [Reserved]



Ethics in Public Contracting



   33A.200   Criminal penalties



   33A.201   Employee conflict of interest



   33A.202   Gratuities and kickbacks



   33A.203   Prohibition against contingent fees



   33A.204   Contemporaneous employment prohibited



   33A.205   Waivers



   33A.206   Use of confidential information



   33A.207   Sanctions



   33A.208   Recovery of value transferred or received in breach of
ethical standards



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33A.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and equitable
treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by the town, to
maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide
safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.002  APPLICATION.



   This chapter applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies,
services, and construction, entered into by the town after the effective date
of this chapter, unless the parties agree to its application to contracts
entered into prior to the effective date. It shall apply to every expenditure
of public funds by a public agency for public purchasing irrespective of the
source of the funds. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal
assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in
accordance with any mandatory applicable federal law and regulations. Nothing
in this chapter shall prevent any public agency from complying with the terms
and conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest that is otherwise consistent
with law.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ARCHITECT-ENGINEER AND LAND SURVEYING SERVICES. Those professional
services within the scope of the practice of architecture, professional
engineering, or land surveying, as defined by the laws of the State of Rhode
Island.



   BLIND TRUST. An independently managed trust in which the
employee-beneficiary has no management rights and in which the
employee-beneficiary is not given notice of alterations in, or other
dispositions of, the property subject to the trust.



   BRAND NAME OR EQUAL SPECIFICATION. A specification limited to one or
more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the
standard of quality, performance, and other salient characteristics needed to
meet town requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent
products.



   BRAND NAME SPECIFICATION. A specification limited to one or more items
by manufacturer's names or catalogues numbers.



   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole
proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private
legal entity.



   CHANGE ORDER. A written order signed and issued by the purchasing
agent, directing the contractor to make changes, which the "Changes" clause
of the contract authorizes the purchasing agent to order without the consent
of the contractor.



   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Any information which is available to an
employee only because of the employee's status as a town employee and is not
a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request.



   CONSTRUCTION. The process of building, altering, repairing, improving,
or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements
of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine
operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing structures,
buildings, or real property.



   CONTRACT. All types of town agreements, regardless of what they may be
called, for the procurement of supplies, services, or construction.



   CONTRACT MODIFICATION (BILATERAL CHANGE). Any written alteration in
specifications, delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance,
price, quantity, or other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual
action of the parties to the contract.



   CONTRACTOR. Any person having a contract with the town or a using
agency thereof.



   COST ANALYSIS. The evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving
at costs actually incurred or estimated of costs to be incurred, prices to be
paid, and costs to be reimbursed.



   COST DATA. Factual information concerning the cost of labor, material,
overhead, and other cost elements, which are expected to be incurred, or
which have been actually incurred by the contractor in performing the
contract.



   COST-REIMBURSEMENT CONTRACT. A contract under which a contractor is
reimbursed for costs which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the
contract terms and the provisions of this chapter, and a fee or profit, if
any.



   DIRECT OR INDIRECT PARTICIPATION. Involvement through decision,
approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase
request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement
standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other
advisory capacity.



   DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS. A small business, which is owned or controlled
by a majority of persons, not limited to members of a minority group, who
have been deprived of the opportunity to develop and maintain a competitive
position in the economy because of social disadvantages.



   EMPLOYEE. An individual drawing a salary or wages from the town,
whether elected or not; any noncompensated individual performing personal
services for the town or any department, agency, commission, council, board,
or any other entity established by the executive or legislative branch of the
town; and any noncompensated individual serving as an elected official of the
town.



   FINANCIAL INTEREST.



      (1)   Ownership of any interest or involvement in any
relationship for which, or as a result of which, a person within the past
year has received, or is presently or in the future entitled to receive,
anything of value; any ownership of any property or business; or



      (2)   Holding a position in a business such as officer,
director, trustee, partner, employee, or the like, or holding any position of
management.



   GRATUITY. A payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money,
service, or anything of more than nominal value as defined by the Rhode
Island Ethics Commission, present or promised, unless consideration of
subsequently equal or greater value is received.



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. A spouse, children, parents, brothers, and sisters.



   INVITATION FOR BIDS. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids.



   PERSON. Any business, individual, union, committee, club, other
organization, or group of individuals.



   PRICE ANALYSIS. The evaluation of price data, without analysis of the
separate cost components and profit as in cost analysis, which may assist in
arriving at prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed.



   PRICING DATA. Factual information concerning prices for items
substantially similar to those being procured. Prices in this definition
refer to offered or proposed selling prices, historical selling prices and
current selling prices. The definition refers to data relevant to both prime
and subcontract prices.



   PROCUREMENT. The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise
acquiring of any supplies, services, or construction. It also includes all
functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service or
construction, including description of requirements, selection, and
solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, in all phases of
contract administration.



   PUBLIC AGENCY. A public entity subject to or created by the town.



   QUALIFIED PRODUCTS LIST. An approved list of supplies, services, or
construction items described by model or catalogue numbers, which, prior to
competitive solicitation, the town has determined will meet the applicable
specification requirements.



   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. All documents, whether attached or incorporated
by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals.



   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR OFFEROR. A person who has the capability in all
respects to perform fully the contract requirements, and the tenacity,
perseverance, experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities,
equipment, and credit which will assure good faith performance.



   RESPONSIVE BIDDER. A person who has submitted a bid, which conforms in
all material respects to the requirements, set forth in the invitation for
bids.



   SERVICES. The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are
merely incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include
employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.



   SMALL BUSINESS. A United States business which is independently owned
and which is not dominant in its field of operation or an affiliate or
subsidiary of a business dominant in its field of operation.



   SPECIFICATION. Any description of the physical or functional
characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item.
It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or
preparing a supply, service, or construction item for delivery.



   SUPPLIES. All property, including but not limited to equipment,
materials, printing, insurance, and leases of real property, excluding land
or a permanent interest in land.



   USING AGENCY. Any department, commission, board, or public agency
requiring supplies, services, or construction procured pursuant to this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.004  PUBLIC ACCESS TO PROCUREMENT INFORMATION.



   Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent provided
in R. I. Gen. Law, Title 38, Public Records, and shall be available to the
public as provided in such statute.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



OFFICE OF THE PURCHASING AGENT



§ 33A.020  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Finance Director shall be the town's principal public purchasing
official.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.021  AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Principal public purchasing official. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the purchasing agent shall serve as the principal public
purchasing official for the town and shall be responsible for the procurement
of supplies, services, and construction in accordance with this chapter, as
well as the management and disposal of supplies.



   (B)   Duties. In accordance with this chapter, and subject to the
supervision of the Town Administrator, the purchasing agent shall:



      (1)   Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies,
services, and construction needed by the town;



      (2)   Exercise direct supervision over the town's central
stores and general supervision over all other inventories of supplies
belonging to the town; and



      (3)   Sell, trade, or otherwise dispose of surplus supplies
belonging to the town; and



      (4)   Establish and maintain programs for specifications
development, contract administration and inspection and acceptance, in
cooperation with the public agencies using the supplies, services, and
construction.



   (C)   Operational procedures. Consistent with this chapter, and with
the approval of the Town Administrator and the Town Council, the purchasing
agent may adopt operational procedures relating to the execution of its
duties.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.022  DELEGATIONS TO OTHER TOWN OFFICIALS.



   With the approval of the Town Council and the Town Administrator, the
purchasing agent may delegate authority to purchase certain supplies,
services, or construction items to other town officials, if such delegation
is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 33A.021 (Authority and Duties),
procurement authority with respect to certain supplies, services, or
construction may be delegated to other town officials by the Town
Administrator, when such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective
procurement of these supplies, services, or construction.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT FORMATION



§ 33A.030  COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING.



   (A)   Conditions for use. All contracts of the town shall be awarded
by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in § 33A.031
(Competitive Sealed Proposals), § 33A.032 (Contracting for Designated
Professional Services), § 33A.033 (Small Purchases), § 33A.034 (Sole Source
Procurement), § 33A.035 (Emergency Procurements), and § 33A.085 (Public
Announcement and Selection Process) of this chapter.



   (B)   Invitation for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued
and shall include specifications, and all contractual terms and conditions
applicable to the procurement.



   (C)   Public notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation for
bids shall be given a reasonable time, not less than seven calendar days
prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. Such notice may
include publication in a newspaper of general circulation a reasonable time
prior to bid opening. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time
of the bid opening.



   (D)   Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of
one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for
bids. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as the
purchasing agent deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder
shall be recorded; the record and each bid shall be open to public inspection
in accordance with § 33A.004 (Public Access to Procurement Information).



   (E)   Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be
unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as
authorized in the chapter. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements
set forth in the invitation to bids, which may include criteria to determine
acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery,
and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the
bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively
measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle
costs. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be
used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that are not set forth in the
invitation for bids.



   (F)   Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards.
Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid
opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes,
may be modified or withdrawn by written or telegraphic notice received in the
office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for bid
opening. After bid opening, correction bids shall be permitted only to the
extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a
mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and
the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices
or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the town or fair
competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder
alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if:



      (1)   The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid
document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or



      (2)   The bidder submits evidence, which clearly and
convincingly demonstrated that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit
the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based
on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the
purchasing agent.



   (G)   Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable
promptness by appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible bidder
whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for
bids. In the event the low responsive and responsible bid for a construction
project exceeds available funds as certified by the Finance Director, and
such bid does not exceed such funds by more than 5%, the purchasing agent is
authorized, when time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of
work or a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the
low responsive bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of
available funds. Any such negotiated adjustment shall be based only upon
eliminating independent deductive items specified in the invitation for bids.



   (H)   Multi-step sealed bidding. When it is considered impractical
to prepare initially a purchase description to support an award based on
price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of
unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those
bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically acceptable under
the criteria set forth in the first solicitation.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.031  COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS.



   (A)   Conditions for use. When the purchasing agent determines in
writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable
or not advantageous to the town, a contract may be entered into by use of the
competitive sealed proposals method.



   (B)   Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a
request for proposals.



   (C)   Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for
proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in § 33A.030(C)
(Competitive Sealed Bidding, Public Notice); provided, the minimum time shall
be seven calendar days.



   (D)   Receipt of proposals. No proposals shall be handled so as to
permit disclosure of the identity of any offer or the contents of any
proposal to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. A register
of proposals shall be prepared containing the name of each offeror, the
number of modifications received, if any, and a description sufficient to
identify the item offered. The register of proposals shall be open for public
inspection only after contract award.



   (E)   Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the
relative importance of price and other evaluation factors.



   (F)   Discussion with responsible offerors and revisions to
proposals. As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be
conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be
reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of
clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the
solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal
treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of
proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to
award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting
discussions, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing
offerors or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing
offerors.



   (G)   Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offer whose
proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the town,
taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the
request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the
evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is
made.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.032  CONTRACTING FOR DESIGNATED PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.



   (A)   Authority. For the purpose of procuring the services of
accountants, clergy, physicians, engineers, architects, lawyers, or dentists
as defined by the laws of the State of Rhode Island, any using agency
requiring such services may procure them on its own behalf, in accordance
with the selection procedures specified in this section. A using agency
procuring such services shall consult with the purchasing agent. No contract
for the services of legal counsel may be awarded without the approval of the
Town Council.



   (B)   Selection procedure.



      (1)   Conditions for use. Except as provided under § 33A.034
(Sole Source Procurement) or § 33A.035 (Emergency Procurements), the
professional services designated in division (A) of this section shall be
procured in accordance with this division.



      (2)   Statement of qualifications. Persons engaged in
providing the designated types of professional services may submit statements
of qualifications and expressions of interest in providing such professional
services. A using agency using such professional services may specify a
uniform format for statements of qualifications. Persons may amend these
statements at any time by filing a new statement.



      (3)   Public announcement and form of request for proposals.
Adequate notice of the need for such services shall be given by the using
agency requiring the services required, list the types of information and
date required of each offeror, and state the relative importance of
particular qualifications.



      (4)   Discussions. The head of a using agency procuring the
required professional services or a designee of such officer may conduct
discussions with any offeror who has submitted a proposal to determine such
offeror's qualifications for further consideration. Discussions shall not
disclose any information derived from proposals submitted by other offerors.



      (5)   Award. Award shall be made to the offeror determined in
writing by the head of the using agency procuring the required professional
services or a designee of such officer to be best qualified based on the
evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals, and negotiation of
compensation determined to be fair and reasonable. If compensation cannot be
agreed upon with the best qualified offeror, then negotiations will be
formally terminated with the selected offeror. If proposals were submitted by
one or more other offerors determined to be qualified, negotiations may be
conducted with such other offeror or offerors, in the order if their
respective qualification ranking, and the contract may be awarded to the
offeror then ranked best qualified if the amount of compensation is
determined to be fair and reasonable.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.033  SMALL PURCHASES.



   (A)   General. Any contract not exceeding an aggregate amount of
$10,000 for construction and $5,000 for all other purchases may be made in
accordance with the small purchase procedures authorized in this section.
These amounts shall be increased or decreased annually hereafter at the same
rate as the Boston Regional Consumer Price Index. Contract requirements shall
not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this
section.



   (B)   Small purchases equal to or over $3,000. Insofar as it is
practical for small purchases in excess of $3,000, no less than three
businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. Award shall be made to
the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the
businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation,
shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.



   (C)   Small purchases under $3,000. The purchasing agent shall adopt
operational procedures for making small purchases of $3,000 or less. Such
operational procedures shall provide for obtaining adequate and reasonable
competition for the supply, service, or construction being purchased.
Further, such operational procedures shall require the preparation and
maintenance of written records adequate to document the competition obtained,
properly account for the funds expended, and facilitate an audit of the small
purchase made.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.034  SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT.



   A contract may be awarded without competition when the purchasing agent
determines in writing after conducting a good faith review of available
sources, that there is only one source for the required supply, service, or
construction item. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained
as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, the amount and type
of each contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under each contract, and
the identification number of each contract file.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.035  EMERGENCY PROCUREMENTS.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the Town
Administrator may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of
supplies, services, or construction items when there exists a threat to
public health, welfare, or safety; provided that such emergency procurements
shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the
circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for
the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract
file. As soon as practicable, a record of each emergency procurement shall be
made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the
contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under the contract, and the
identification number of the contract file. Furthermore, the Town
Administrator shall notify the Town Council as soon as practicable in
writing, of any action taken pursuant to this section.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.036  CANCELLATION OF INVITATION FOR BIDS OR REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS.



   An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation
may be cancelled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or
in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause
and in the best interests of the town. The reasons therefor shall be made
part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the town shall state
that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be
rejected in whole or in part for good cause when in the best interests of the
town. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The
notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation
and, where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete
on any resolicitation or any future procurement of similar items. Reasons for
rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.037  RESPONSIBILITY OF BIDDERS AND OFFERORS.



   (A)   Determination of nonresponsibility. If a bidder or offeror who
otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found nonresponsible, the
purchasing agent shall prepare a written determination of nonresponsibility,
setting forth the basis of the finding. The unreasonable failure of a bidder
or offeror to supply promptly information in connection with an inquiry with
respect to responsibility may be grounds for a determination of
nonresponsibility with respect to such bidder or offeror. A copy of the
determination shall be sent promptly to the nonresponsible bidder or offeror.
The final determination shall be made part of the contract file and be made a
public record.



   (B)   Right of nondisclosure. Information furnished by a bidder or
offeror pursuant to this section shall not be disclosed by the town outside
of the office of the purchasing agent, or using agency, without prior written
consent by the bidder or offeror.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.038  COST OR PRICING DATA.



   (A)   Required submissions relating to the award of contracts. A
prospective contractor shall submit cost or pricing data when the contract is
expected to exceed $100,000 and is to be awarded by competitive sealed
proposal (§ 33A.031, Competitive Sealed Proposals), or by sole source
procurement authority (§ 33A.034, Sole Source Procurement).



   (B)   Exceptions. The submission of cost or pricing data relating to
the award of a contract is not required when:



      (1)   The contract price is based on adequate price
competition;



      (2)   The contract price is based on established catalogue
prices or market prices;



      (3)   The contract price is set by law or regulation; or



      (4)   It is determined in writing by the purchasing agent that
the requirements of § 33A.038(A) (Cost or Pricing Data; Required Submissions
Relating to the Award of Contracts) may be waived, and the determination
states the reasons for such waiver.



   (C)   Required submissions relating to change orders or contract
modifications. A contractor shall submit cost or pricing data prior to the
pricing of any change order or contract modification, including adjustments
to contracts awarded by competitive sealed bidding, whether or not cost or
pricing data was required in connection with the initial pricing of the
contract, when the change or modification involves aggregate increase or
aggregate decreases in costs plus applicable profits that are expected to
exceed $100,000.



   (D)   Certification required. A contractor, actual or prospective,
required to submit cost or pricing data in accordance with this section,
shall certify that, to the best of its knowledge and belief, the cost or
pricing data submitted was accurate, complete, and current as of a mutually
specified date prior to the award of the contract or the pricing of the
change order or contract modification.



   (E)   Price adjustment provision required. Any contract award,
change order, or contract modification under which the submission and
certification of cost or pricing data are required shall contain a provision
stating that the price to the town, including profit or fee, shall be
adjusted to exclude any significant sums by which the town finds that such
price was increased because the contractor-furnished cost or pricing data was
inaccurate, incomplete, or not current as of the date agreed upon between the
town and the contractor.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.039  COST OR PRICING ANALYSIS.



   A cost analysis or a price analysis, as appropriate, shall be conducted
prior to award of the contract other than one awarded under § 33A.030
(Competitive Sealed Bidding). A written record of such cost analysis or price
analysis shall be made a part of the contract file.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.040  BID AND PERFORMANCE BONDS ON SUPPLY OR SERVICE CONTRACTS.



   Bid and performance bonds or other security may be requested for supply
contracts or service contracts as the purchasing agent or head of a using
agency deems advisable to protect the Town of Middletown's interests. Any
such bonding requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation. Bid or
performance bonds shall not be used as a substitute for a determination of a
bidder or offeror's responsibility.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.041  TYPES OF CONTRACTS.



   (A)   General authority. Subject to the limitations of this section,
any type of contract which is appropriate to the procurement and which will
promote the best interests of the town may be used, provided that the use of
a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract is prohibited. A cost reimbursement
contract may be used only when a determination is made in writing that such
contract is likely to be less costly to the town than any other type or that
it is impracticable to obtain the supply, service, or construction item
required except under such a contract.



   (B)   Multi-term contracts.



      (1)   Specified period. Unless otherwise provided by law, a
contract for supplies or services may be entered into for any period of time
deemed to be in the best interests of the town, provided the term of the
contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the
solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time
of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal
periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds
thereof.



      (2)   Determination prior to use. Prior to the utilization of
a multi-term contract, it shall be determined in writing:



         (a)   That estimated requirements cover the period of
the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing; and



         (b)   That such a contract will serve the best interests
of the town by encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting
economies in town procurement.



      (3)   Cancellation due to unavailability of funds in
succeeding fiscal periods. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made
available to support continuation of performance in subsequent fiscal period,
the contract shall be cancelled and the contractor shall be reimbursed for
the reasonable value of any non-recurring costs incurred but not amortized in
the price of the supplies or services delivered under the contract. The cost
of cancellation may be paid from any appropriations available for such
purposes.



   (C)   Multiple source contracting.



      (1)   General. A multiple source award is an award of an
indefinite quantity contract for one or more similar supplies or services to
more than one bidder or offeror. The obligation to order the town's actual
requirements is limited by the provision of Uniform Commercial Code Section
2-306(1).



      (2)   Limitations on use. A multiple source award may be made
when award to two or more bidders or offerors for similar products is
necessary for adequate delivery, service, or product compatibility. Any
multiple source award shall be made in accordance with the provisions of §
33A.030 (Competitive Sealed Bidding), § 33A.031 (Competitive Sealed
Proposals), § 33A.033 (Small Purchases), and § 33A.035 (Emergency
Procurements), as applicable. Multiple source awards shall not be made when a
single award will meet the town's needs without sacrifice of economy of
service. Awards shall not be made for the purpose of dividing the business,
making available product or supplier selection to allow for user preference
unrelated to utility or economy, or avoiding the resolution of tie bids. Any
such awards shall be limited to the least number of suppliers necessary to
meet the valid requirements.



      (3)   Contract and solicitation provisions. All eligible users
of the contract shall be named in the solicitation, and it shall be mandatory
that the requirements of such users that can be met under the contract be
obtained in accordance with the contract, provided that:



         (a)   The town shall reserve the right to take bids
separately if a particular quantity requirement arises which exceeds its
normal requirement or an amount specified in the contract; and



         (b)   The town shall reserve the right to take bids
separately if the purchasing agent approves a finding that the supply or
service available under the contract will not meet a nonrecurring special
need of the town.



      (4)   Intent to use. If a multiple source award is anticipated
prior to issuing a solicitation, the town shall reserve the right to make
such an award and the criteria for award shall be stated in the solicitation.



      (5)   Determination required. The purchasing agent shall make
a written determination setting forth the reasons for a multiple source
award, which shall be made a part of the procurement file.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.042  CONTRACT CLAUSES AND THEIR ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Contract clauses. All town contracts for supplies, services,
and construction shall include provisions necessary to define the
responsibilities and rights of the parties to the contract. The purchasing
agent, after consultation with the Town Solicitor, may issue clauses
appropriate for supply, service, or construction contracts, addressing among
others the following subjects:



      (1)   The unilateral right of the town to order in writing
changes in the work within the scope of the contract;



      (2)   The unilateral right of the town to order in writing
temporary stopping of the work or delaying performance that does not alter
the scope of the contract;



      (3)   Variations occurring between estimated quantities of
work in contract and actual quantities;



      (4)   Defective pricing;



      (5)   Liquidated damages;



      (6)   Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance;



      (7)   Termination of the contract for default;



      (8)   Termination of the contract in whole or in part for the
convenience of the town;



      (9)   Suspension of work on a construction project ordered by
the town;



      (10)   Site conditions differing from those indicated in the
contract, or ordinarily encountered, except that a differing site conditions
clause need not be included in a contract:



         (a)   When the contract is negotiated;



         (b)   When the contractor provides the site or design; or



         (c)   When the parties have otherwise agreed with
respect to the risk of differing site conditions.



   (B)   Price adjustments.



      (1)   Adjustments in price resulting from the use of contract
clauses required by division (A) of this section shall be computed in one or
more of the following ways:



         (a)   By agreement on a fixed price adjustment before
commencement of the pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as
practicable;



         (b)   By unit prices specified in the contract or
subsequently agreed upon;



         (c)   By the costs attributable to the events or
situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as
specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;



         (d)   In such other manner as the contracting parties
may mutually agree; or



         (e)   In the absence of agreement by the parties, by a
unilateral determination by the town of the costs attributable to the events
or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee as computed
by the town, as accounted for in accordance with industry specific cost
principals and subject to the provisions of §§ 33A.140et seq. (Appeals and
Remedies).



      (2)   A contractor shall be required to submit cost or pricing
data if any adjustment in contract price is subject to the provisions of §
33A.038 (Cost or Pricing Data).



   (C)   Standard clauses and their modification. The purchasing agent,
after consultation with the Town Solicitor, may establish standard contract
clauses for use in town contracts. If the purchasing agent establishes any
standard clauses addressing the subjects set forth in division (A) of this
section, such clauses may be varied provided that any variations are
supported by a written determination that states the circumstances justifying
such variations, and provided that notice of any such material variation be
stated in the invitation for bids or request for proposals.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.043  CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION.



   A contract administration system designed to insure that a contractor
is performing in accordance with the solicitation under which the contract
was awarded, and the terms and conditions of the contract, shall be
maintained.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.044  COST REIMBURSEMENT PROVISIONS.



   [Reserved.]



§ 33A.045  APPROVAL OF ACCOUNTING SYSTEM.



   Except with respect to firm fixed-price contracts, no contract type
shall be used unless it has been determined in writing by the purchasing
agent that:



   (A)   The proposed contractor's accounting system will permit timely
development of all necessary cost data in the form required by the specific
contract type contemplated; and



   (B)   The proposed contractor's accounting system is adequate to
allocate costs in accordance with generally accepted cost accounting
principles.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.046  RIGHT TO INSPECT PLANT.



   The town may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant, place
of business, or worksite of a contractor or subcontractor at any time, which
is pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by
the town.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.047  RIGHT TO AUDIT RECORDS.



   (A)   Audit of cost or pricing data. The town may, at reasonable
times and places, audit the books and records of any contractor who has
submitted cost or pricing data pursuant to § 33A.038 (Cost or Pricing Data)
to the extent that such books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent
to such cost or pricing data. Any person who receives a contract, change
order, or contract modification for which cost or pricing data is required,
shall maintain such books, documents, papers, and records that are pertinent
to such cost or pricing data for three years from the date of final payment
under the contract.



   (B)   Contract audit. The town shall be entitled to audit the books
and records of a contractor or a subcontractor at any time under any
negotiated contract or subcontract other than a firm fixed-price contract to
the extent that such books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to
the performance of such contract or subcontract. The contractor shall
maintain such books and records for a period of three years from the date of
final payment under the prime contract and by the subcontractor for a period
of three years from the date of final payment under the subcontract.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.048  REPORTING OF ANTI-COMPETITIVE PRACTICES.



   When for any reason collusion or other anti-competitive practices are
suspected among any bidders or offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall
be transmitted to the State Attorney General.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.049  TOWN PROCUREMENT RECORDS.



   (A)   Contract file. The purchasing agent shall maintain all
determinations and other written records pertaining to the solicitation,
award, or performance of a contract for the town in a contract file.



   (B)   Retention of procurement records. All procurement records
shall be retained and disposed of by the town in accordance with records
retention guidelines and schedules approved by the state.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



SPECIFICATIONS



§ 33A.060  MAXIMUM PRACTICAL COMPETITION.



   All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy
for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the town's
needs, and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy enunciated in this
section applies to all specifications including, but not limited to, those
prepared for the town by architects, engineers, designers, and draftsmen.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.061  QUALIFIED PRODUCTS LIST.



   [Reserved.]



§ 33A.062  BRAND NAME OR EQUAL SPECIFICATION.



   (A)   Use. Brand name or equal specification may be used when the
purchasing agent determines in writing that:



      (1)   No other design or performance specification or
qualified products list is available;



      (2)   Time does not permit the preparation of another form or
purchase description, not including a brand name specification;



      (3)   the nature of the product or the nature of the Town's
requirements makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for
the procurement; or



      (4)   Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the
town's best interest.



   (B)   Designation of several brand names. Brand name or equal
specifications shall seek to designate three, or as many different brands as
are practicable, as "or equal" references and shall further state that
substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for
award.



   (C)   Required characteristics. Unless the purchasing agent
determines in writing that the essential characteristics of the brand names
included in the specifications are commonly known in the industry or trade,
brand name or equal specifications shall include a description of the
particular design, functional, or preference characteristics which are
required.



   (D)   Nonrestrictive use of brand name or specifications. Where a
brand name or equal specification is used in a solicitation, it shall contain
explanatory language that the use of a brand name is for the purpose of
describing the standard of quality, performance, and characteristics desired
and is not intended to limit or restrict competition.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.063  BRAND NAME SPECIFICATION.



   (A)   Use. Since use of a brand name specification is restrictive of
product competition, it may be used only when the purchasing agent makes a
written determination that only the identified brand name item or items will
satisfy the town's needs.



   (B)   Competition. The purchasing agent shall seek to identify
sources from which the designated brand name item or items can be obtained
and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price
competition is practicable. If only one source can supply the requirement,
the procurement shall be made under § 33A.034 (Sole Source Procurement).



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



PROCUREMENT OF CONSTRUCTION, ARCHITECT-ENGINEER AND LAND SURVEYING SERVICES



§ 33A.080  RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTION OF METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION
CONTRACTING MANAGEMENT.



   The purchasing agent shall have discretion to select the appropriate
method of construction contracting management for a particular project. In
determining which method to use, the purchasing agent shall consider the
town's requirements, its resources, and the potential contractor's
capabilities. The purchasing agent shall execute, and include in the contract
file, a written statement setting forth the facts which led to the selection
of a particular method of construction contracting management for each
project.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.081  BID SECURITY.



   (A)   Requirement for bid security. Bid security shall be required
for all competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts when the price
is estimated by the purchasing agent to exceed $100,000. Bid security shall
be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the State
of Rhode Island, or the equivalent in cash, or otherwise supplied in a form
satisfactory to the town. Nothing herein shall prevent the requirement of
such bonds in construction contracts under $100,000, when the circumstances
warrant.



   (B)   Amount of bid security. Bid security shall be in an amount
equal to at least 10% of the amount of the bid.



   (C)   Rejection of bids for noncompliance with bid security
requirements. When the invitation for bids requires security, noncompliance
requires that the bid be rejected unless it is determined that the bid fails
to comply in a nonsubstantial manner with the security requirements.



   (D)   Withdrawal of bids. If a bidder is permitted to withdraw its
bid before award as provided in § 33A.030(F) (Competitive Sealed Bidding;
Correction or Withdrawal of Bids; Cancellation of Awards), no action shall be
had against the bidder or the bid security.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.082  CONTRACT PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS.



   (A)   When required; amounts. When a construction contract is
awarded in excess of $25,000, the following bonds or security shall be
delivered to the town and shall become binding on the parties upon the
execution of the contract:



      (1)   A performance bond satisfactory to the town, executed by
a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Rhode Island or
otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the town, in an amount equal to
100% of the price specified in the contract; and



      (2)   A payment bond satisfactory to the town, executed by a
surety company authorized to do business in the state or otherwise secured in
a manner satisfactory to the town, for the protection of all persons
supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the
performance of the work provided for in the contract.



   (B)   Reduction of bond amounts. After notice to the Town Council,
the purchasing agent is authorized to reduce the amount of performance and
payment bonds to 50% of the contract price for each bond when a written
determination is made that is in the best interests of the town to do so.



   (C)   Authority to require additional bonds. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to limit the authority of the town to require a
performance bond or other security in addition to those bonds, or in
circumstances other than specified in division (A) of this section.



   (D)   Suits on payment bonds; right to institute. Unless otherwise
authorized by law, any person who has furnished labor or material to the
contractor or subcontractors for the work provided in the contract, for which
a payment bond is furnished under this section, and who has not been paid in
full within 90 days from the date on which that person performed the last of
the labor or supplied the material, shall have the right to sue on the
payment bond for any amount unpaid at the time the suit is instituted and to
prosecute the action for the amount due that person. However, any person
having a contract with a subcontractor of the contractor, but no express or
implied contract with the contractor furnishing the payment bond, shall have
a right of action upon the payment bond upon giving written notice to the
contractor within 90 days from the date on which that person performed the
last of the labor or supplied the material. That person shall state in the
notice the amount claimed and the name of the party to whom the material was
supplied or for whom the labor was performed. The notice shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an
envelope addressed to the contractor at any place the contractor maintains an
office or conducts business.



   (E)   Suits on payment bonds; where and when brought. Unless
otherwise authorized by law, every suit instituted upon a payment bond shall
be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction for the county or district in
which the construction contract was to be performed.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.083  COPIES OF BOND FORMS.



   Any person may request and obtain from the town a certified copy of a
bond upon payment of the cost of reproduction of the bond and postage, if
any. A certified copy of a bond shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, execution, and delivery of the original.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.084  FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   Every contract modification, change order, or contract price adjustment
in excess of $25,000 under a construction contract with the town shall be
subject to prior approval by the Town Council after receiving a report from
the Town Administrator as to the effect of the contract modification, change
order, or contract price adjustment on the total project budget or the total
contract budget.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.085  PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENT AND SELECTION PROCESS.



   (A)   Public announcement. It is the policy of the town to announce
publicly all requirements for architect-engineer and land surveying services
and to negotiate such contracts on the basis of demonstrated competence and
qualifications at fair and reasonable prices. In the procurement of
architect-engineer and land surveying services, the purchasing agent shall
request firms to submit a statement of qualifications and performance data.



   (B)   Selection process. A selection committee of three members,
including the purchasing agent, the Town Engineer, and the head of a using
agency in need of the architect-engineer or land surveying services shall
conduct discussions with no less than three firms regarding the proposed
contract and the relative utility of alternative methods of approach for
furnishing the required services and shall select from among them no less
than three of the firms deemed most qualified to provide the required
services. The selection shall be made in order of preference, based on
criteria established and published by the selection committee.



   (C)   Negotiation. The purchasing agent shall negotiate a contract
with the firm considered to be the most qualified for architect-engineer or
land surveying services at compensation, which the purchasing agent
determines in writing to be fair and reasonable to the town. In making this
decision, the purchasing agent shall take into account the estimated value,
the scope, the complexity, and the professional nature of the services to be
rendered. Should the purchasing agent be unable to negotiate a satisfactory
contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified at a price the
purchasing agent determines to be fair and reasonable to the town,
negotiations with that form shall be formally terminated. The purchasing
agent shall then undertake negotiations with the second most qualified firm.
Failing accord with the second most qualified firm, the purchasing agent
shall formally terminate negotiations. The purchasing shall then undertake
negotiations with the third most qualified firm. Should the purchasing agent
be unable to negotiate a contract at a fair and reasonable price with any of
the selected firms, the selection committee shall select additional firms in
order of their competence and qualification, and the purchasing agent shall
continue negotiations in accordance with this section until an agreement is
reached.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION



§ 33A.100  AUTHORITY TO DEBAR OR SUSPEND.



   After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable
opportunity for that person to be heard, the purchasing agent, after
consulting with the Town Solicitor, is authorized to debar a person for cause
from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall be for a
period of not more than three years. After consultation with the Town
Solicitor, the purchasing agent is authorized to suspend a person from
consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause to believe
that the person has engaged in any activity which might lead to debarment.
The suspension shall be for a period not to exceed three months. The causes
for debarment include:



   (A)   Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident
to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or
subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract;



   (B)   Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement,
theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving
stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity
or business honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects
responsibility as a town contractor;



   (C)   Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising
out of the submission of bids or proposals;



   (D)   Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a
character which is regarded by the purchasing agent to be so serious as to
justify debarment action:



      (1)   Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in
accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the
contract; or



      (2)   A recent record of failure to perform or of
unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more
contracts; provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance
caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered
to be a basis for debarment;



   (E)   Any other cause the purchasing agent determines to be so
serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a town contractor,
including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause listed in
this chapter; and



   (F)   For violation of the ethical standards set forth in §§
33A.200et seq. (Ethics in Public Contracting).



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.101  DECISION TO DEBAR OR SUSPEND.



   The purchasing agent shall issue a written decision to debar or
suspend. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform
the debarred or suspended person involved of its rights concerning judicial
or administrative review.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.102  NOTICE OF DECISION.



   A copy of the decision required by § 33A.101 (Decision to Debar or
Suspend) shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred
or suspended person.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.103  FINALITY OF DECISION.



   A decision under § 33A.101 (Decision to Debar or Suspend) shall be
final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or the debarred or suspended person
within ten calendar days after receipt of the decision takes an appeal to the
Town Council or commences a timely action in court in accordance with
applicable law.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



COST PRINCIPLES



   [Reserved]



SUPPLY MANAGEMENT



§ 33A.130  DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS OR OBSOLETE PROPERTY.



   (A)   The head of any using agency may declare supplies or equipment
held by such department surplus. Such declaration shall be in writing and the
written declaration shall be delivered to the purchasing officer who shall
maintain a written inventory for circulation to, and review by each using
agency. If any using agency has use of such property, the using agency may
request reassignment of such property from the purchasing agent. The
purchasing agent shall have the authority to assign the property to the using
agency best able to make use of such property. If no using agency makes a
request for use of such property after the inventory has been circulated
once, the property shall be deemed surplus.



   (B)   The purchasing officer shall have the authority to exchange
for or trade in on new supplies or equipment all supplies or equipment which
have been deemed surplus.



   (C)   The purchasing officer shall have the authority to dispose of
surplus property or equipment by auction or sale or otherwise after receiving
bids or proposals which, in his judgement, provide the best return to the
city.



      (1)   Sale on the open market. The purchasing officer shall
cause to be published at least seven calendar days before the sale, in a
locally adjudicated newspaper, a notice of sale setting forth a general
description of the property to be sold, the day, time and location of the
sale. The terms of all such sales shall be cash in the amount of the full
purchase price.



      (2)   Sale by sealed bid or auction. As an alternative to the
sale on the open market, the purchasing officer may, when in his judgement it
is in the best interest of the town, sell surplus property by means of sealed
bid or public auction. In the case of sale by sealed bid or public auction,
the purchasing officer shall cause to be published at least seven calendar
days before the sale, in a locally adjudicated newspaper, a notice setting
forth a general description of the property to be sold, the day, time and
location of the sale. The terms of all such sales shall be cash in the amount
of the full purchase price. In conducting an auction, the purchasing officer
may contract with a professional auctioneer and allow a flat fee, hourly fee
or percentage of the amount of the sale to be paid based upon that which is
common and customary method and rate for such auctioneering services.



      (3)   The purchasing officer may, when in his or her judgement
sale or auction of surplus property is infeasible or will result in minimal
return to the town, recommend to the Town Council that such surplus property
be donated to any non-profit corporation or school located within or serving
the town, any other Rhode Island communities, or sold to town employees at
fair market value. Such surplus property shall only be donated or sold upon
approval of the Town Council.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



APPEALS AND REMEDIES



§ 33A.140  BID PROTESTS.



   (A)   Right to protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror,
or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award
of a contract may protest to the Town Council. Protestors are urged to seek
resolution of their complaints initially with the purchasing agent. A protest
with respect to an invitation for bids or request for proposals shall be
submitted in writing prior to the opening of the bids or the closing date of
proposals, unless the aggrieved person did not know and should not have known
if the facts giving rise to such protest prior to bid opening or the closing
date for proposals. The protest shall be submitted within three calendar days
after such aggrieved person knows or should have known of the facts giving
rise thereto.



   (B)   Stay of procurements during protests. In the event of a timely
protest under division (A) of this section, the purchasing agent shall not
proceed further with the solicitation or award of the contract until all
administrative and judicial remedies have been exhausted or until the Town
Council makes a determination on the record that the award of a contract
without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the town. The
stay of procurement shall not exceed 45 calendar days from the date on which
the purchasing agent recognizes the protest.



   (C)   Entitlement to costs. In addition to any other relief, when a
protest is sustained and the protesting bidder or offeror should have been
awarded the contract under the solicitation but is not, then the protesting
bidder or offeror shall be entitled to the reasonable costs incurred in
connection with the solicitation, including bid preparation costs other than
attorney's fees.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.141  CONTRACT CLAIMS.



   (A)   Decision of the purchasing agent. All claims by a contractor
against the town relating to a contract, except bid protests, shall be
submitted in writing to the purchasing agent for a decision. The contractor
may request a conference with the purchasing agent on the claim. Claims
include, without limitation, disputes arising under a contract, and those
based upon breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation, or other cause for
contract modification or recision.



   (B)   Notice to the contractor of the purchasing agent's decision.
The decision of the purchasing agent shall be promptly issued in writing and
shall be immediately mailed or otherwise furnished to the contractor. The
decision shall state the reasons for the decision reached and shall inform
the contractor of its appeal rights under division (C) of this section.



   (C)   Finality of purchasing agent's decision; contractor's right to
appeal. The purchasing agent's decision shall be final and conclusive unless,
within five calendar days from the date of receipt of the decision, the
contractor mails or otherwise delivers a written appeal to the Town Council
or commences an action in a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   Failure to render timely decision. If the purchasing agent
does not issue a written decision regarding any contract controversy within
five calendar days after written request for a final decision, or within such
longer period as may be agreed upon between the parties, then the aggrieved
party may proceed as if an adverse decision had been received.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.142  ACCESS TO ADMINISTRATIVE FORUMS.



   [Reserved.]



§ 33A.143  ACCESS TO TOWN COURTS.



   [Reserved.]



§ 33A.144  ACCESS TO STATE COURTS.



   The law of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations shall
govern all contracts.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.145  AUTHORITY OF THE PURCHASING AGENT TO SETTLE BID PROTESTS AND
CONTRACT CLAIMS.



   The purchasing agent is authorized to settle any protest regarding the
solicitation or award of a town contract, or any claim arising out of the
performance of a town contract, prior to an appeal to the Town Council or the
commencement of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.146  REMEDIES FOR SOLICITATIONS OR AWARDS IN VIOLATION OF LAW.



   (A)   Prior to bid opening or closing date for receipt of proposals.
If prior to the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the
purchasing agent, after consultation with the Town Solicitor, determines that
a solicitation is in violation of federal, state, or municipal law, then the
solicitation shall be cancelled or revised to comply with applicable law.



   (B)   Prior to award. If after bid opening or the closing date for
receipt of proposals, the purchasing agent, after consultation with the Town
Solicitor, determines that a solicitation or a proposed award of a contract
is in violation of federal, state, or municipal law, then the solicitation or
proposed award shall be cancelled.



   (C)   After award. If, after an award, the purchasing agent, after
consultation with the Town Solicitor, determines that a solicitation or award
of a contract was in violation of applicable law, then:



      (1)   If the person awarded the contract has not acted
fraudulently or in bad faith:



         (a)   The contract may be ratified and affirmed,
provided it is determined that doing so is in the best interests of the town;
or



         (b)   The contract may be terminated and the person
awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual costs reasonably
incurred under the contract, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the
termination; or



      (2)   If the person awarded the contract has acted
fraudulently or in bad faith, the contract may be declared null and void or
voidable, if such action is in the best interests of the town.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



COOPERATIVE PURCHASING



§ 33A.160  MASTER PRICE AGREEMENTS.



   This chapter shall not preclude the town from participating in
purchasing opportunities afforded through master price agreements as allowed
under Rhode Island General Laws.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.161  JOINT PURCHASING.



   This chapter shall not preclude the town from participating in joint
purchasing opportunities, to include intermunicipal agreements for joint
purchasing, as allowed under Rhode Island General Laws.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



ASSISTANCE TO SMALL AND DISADVANTAGED BUSINESSES



   [Reserved]



ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING



§ 33A.200  CRIMINAL PENALTIES.



   To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set
forth in this subchapter constitute violations of the Rhode Island Ethics
Commission, they shall be punishable as provided therein. Such penalties
shall be in addition to the civil sanctions set forth in this subchapter.
Criminal, civil, and administrative sanctions against employees or
nonemployees, which are in existence on the effective date of this chapter,
shall not be impaired.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.201  EMPLOYEE CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   (A)   It shall be unethical for any town employee to participate
directly or indirectly in a procurement contract when the town employee knows
that:



      (1)   The town employee or any member of the town employee's
immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement
contract; or



      (2)   Any other person, business, or organization with whom
the town employee or any member of the town employee's immediate family is
negotiating or has an arrangement concerning prospective employment is
involved in the procurement contract.



   (B)   A town employee or any member of a town employee's family who
holds a financial interest in a disclosed blind trust shall not be deemed to
have a conflict of interest with regard to matters pertaining to that
financial interest.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.202  GRATUITIES AND KICKBACKS.



   (A)   Gratuities. It shall be unethical for any person to offer,
give, or agree to give any town employee or former town employee, or for any
town employee or former town employee to solicit, demand, accept, or agree to
accept from another person, a gratuity or an offer of employment in
connection with any decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, or
preparation of any part of a program requirement or a purchase request,
influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard,
rendering of advice, investigation, auditing or in any other advisory
capacity in any proceeding or application, request for ruling, determination,
claim or controversy, or other particular matter, pertaining to any program
requirement or a contract or subcontract, or to any solicitation or proposal
therefore.



   (B)   Kickbacks. It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity, or
offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a
contract to the prime contractor to the prime contractor or higher tier
subcontractor or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the
award of a subcontractor or order.



   (C)   Contract clause. The prohibition against gratuities and
kickbacks prescribed in this section shall be conspicuously set forth in
every contract and solicitation therefor.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.203  PROHIBITION AGAINST CONTINGENT FEES.



   It shall be unethical for a person to be retained, or to retain a
person, to solicit or secure a town contract upon an agreement or
understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee,
except for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide established
commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.204  CONTEMPORANEOUS EMPLOYMENT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unethical for any town employee who is participating
directly or indirectly in the procurement process to become or to be, while
such a town employee, the employee of any person contracting with the
governmental body by whom the employee is employed.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.205  WAIVERS.



   The Town Council may grant a waiver from the employee conflict of
interest provision (§ 33A.201, Employee Conflict of Interest) or the
contemporaneous employment provision (§ 33A.204, Contemporaneous Employment
Prohibited) upon making a written determination that:



   (A)   The contemporaneous employment or financial interest of the
town employee has been publicly disclosed;



   (B)   The town employee will be able to perform its procurement
functions without actual or apparent bias or favoritism; and



   (C)   The award will be in the best interests of the town.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.206  USE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   It shall be unethical for any employee or former employee knowingly to
use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for
the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.207  SANCTIONS.



   (A)   Employees. The Town Administrator may impose any one or more
of the following sanctions on a town employee for violations of the ethical
standards in this subchapter:



      (1)   Oral or written warnings or reprimands;



      (2)   Suspension with or without pay for specified periods of
time; or



      (3)   Termination of employment.



   (B)   Nonemployees. The Town Council may impose any one or more of
the following sanctions on a nonemployee for violations of the ethical
standards:



      (1)   Written warnings or reprimands;



      (2)   Termination of contracts; or



      (3)   Debarment or suspension as provided in § 33A.100
(Authority to Debar or Suspend).



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



§ 33A.208  RECOVERY OF VALUE TRANSFERRED OR RECEIVED IN BREACH OF ETHICAL
STANDARDS.



   (A)   General provisions. The value of anything transferred or
received in breach of the ethical standards of this chapter by a town
employee or a nonemployee may be recovered from both town employee and
nonemployee.



   (B)   Recovery of kickbacks by the town. Upon a showing that the
subcontractor made a kickback to a prime contractor or a higher tier
subcontractor in connection with the award of a subcontract or order
thereunder, it shall be conclusively presumed that the amount thereof was
included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the
town and will be recoverable hereunder from the recipient. In addition, that
amount may also be recovered from the subcontractor making such kickbacks.
Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other
offending parties.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



CHAPTER 34:  TAXES



Section



Tax Exemption at Age 65



   34.01   Definitions



   34.02   Exemption on residential property



   34.03   Income of married persons, cotenants



   34.04   Conditions of exemption



   34.05   Application, continuing eligibility



   34.06   Reestablishment of residency



   34.07   Termination of exemption



   34.08   Authority of assessor not abrogated



Tax Freeze at Age 65



   34.15   Definitions



   34.16   Freeze of tax rate and valuation



   34.17   Application required



   34.18   Termination of freeze



   34.19   Authority of assessor not abrogated



   34.20   Deferral of taxes



   34.21   Payment



   34.22   Title



   34.23   Transfer to widow/widower



   34.24   Other exemptions



   34.25   Regulations



Tax Exemptions for Veterans



   34.30   Real property exemptions



   34.31   Termination of exemption



Tax Exemptions for Blind Persons



   34.40   Property exemption defined



   34.41   Application required for exemption



   34.42   Revaluation adjustment



   34.43   Termination of exemption



Tax Exemption for Certain Non-Profit Organizations



   34.50   Exemption of certain non-profit organizations



Tax Exemption for Wholesalers' and Retailers' Inventories



   34.60   Exemption of wholesalers' and retailers' inventories



Tax Classification System



   34.70   Tax classification system



Real Estate Nonutilization Tax



   34.80   Establishment



   34.81   Definitions



   34.82   Imposition



   34.83   Exemptions



   34.84   Cessation of tax



   34.85   Appeals



Motor Vehicle Excise Tax



   34.86   Motor vehicle excise tax



Atlantic Beach Tax Increment Financing District



   34.90   Atlantic Beach TIF District and master plan



Statutory Reference:



   Authority of town to tax, see R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-2-1



Cross-reference:



   Board of Assessment Review, see § 32.01



   Charter Provisions, see §§ 704 and 1001 of Division 1 of the Charter



TAX EXEMPTION AT AGE 65



§ 34.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   INCOME. Total income from whatever source derived, including but not
limited to realized capital gains, pension, annuity, retirement and social
security benefits, received by all persons living in the dwelling, except a
live-in caretaker or care-giver who has another primary residence. Income
shall be determined on the basis of the calendar year ending with the date of
assessment for the tax year for which the exemption is claimed.



   RESIDENT. A person who:



      (1)   Is legally domiciled within the town for a continuous
period of at least five years ending with the date of assessment for the year
for which the exemption is claimed. Mere seasonal or temporary residence in
town, of whatever duration, shall not constitute domicile for the purposes of
this section. Absence from the town for 12 months shall be prima facie
evidence of termination or abandonment of domicile. The burden of
establishing domicile in the town shall be on the applicant;



      (2)   Is 65 years of age or older as of the assessment date
for the year for which the exemption is claimed;



      (3)   Is one of the lawful owners of the property for which
the exemption is claimed. The exemption applies to a life tenant who has the
obligation for payment of the taxes assessed on the property for which the
exemption is claimed; and



      (4)   Who occupies the property for which the exemption is
claimed as his or her principal residence.



(‘73 Code, § 24-1) (Ord. passed 12-7-70; Am. Ord. 2012-14, passed 9-17-12;
Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 7-18-16; Am. Ord. 2016-14, passed 9-19-16)



§ 34.02  EXEMPTION ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   The Town Council grants to every person who is a citizen and
resident of the town of the age of 65 or more years and residing in the town
in a dwelling house owned by him/her, which is a constituent part of his/her
real property, on proper claim being made therefor, a tax exemption on the
following basis:



      (1)   An amount not to exceed $33,949 of the assessed
valuation of such real property for any such person, regardless of the amount
of such person's income;



      (2)   An amount not to exceed $100,239 of the assessed
valuation of such real property for any such person having an annua! income
of less than $21,384;



      (3)   An amount not to exceed $78,141 of the assessed
valuation of such real property for any such person having an annual income
of $21,385 or more but less than $24,948;



      (4)   An amount not to exceed $56,045 of the assessed
valuation of such real property for any such person having an annual income
of $24,949 or more but less than $35,640; and



      (5)   Income levels shall increase yearly based upon the
Consumer Price Index, which shall be calculated utilizing the average of:
U.S. city average; Northeast Region; and Boston-Brockton-Nashua, MA-NH-ME-CT
figures for September of each calendar year.



   (B)   The Town Council grants to every person who is a citizen and
resident of the town of the age of 75 or more years and residing in the town
in a dwelling house owned by him/her, which is a constituent part of his/her
real property, on proper claim being made therefor, a tax exemption on the
following basis:



      (1)   An amount not to exceed $37,344 of the assessed
valuation of such real property for any such person, regardless of the amount
of such person's income;



      (2)   An amount not to exceed $110,263 of the assessed
valuation of such real property for any such person having an annual income
of less than $21,384;



      (3)   An amount not to exceed $85,955 of the assessed
valuation of such real property for any such person having an annual income
of $21,385 or more but less than $24,948;



      (4)   An amount not to exceed $61,650 of the assessed
valuation of such real property for any such person having an annual income
of $24,949 or more but less than $35,640; and



      (5)   Income levels shall increase yearly based upon the
Consumer Price Index, which shall be calculated utilizing the average of:
U.S. city average; Northeast Region; and Boston-Brockton-Nashua, MA-NH-ME-CT
figures of September of each calendar year



   (C)   Hold harmless provision. In the year of implementation of any
amendment restructuring the number of income tiers set forth in § 34.02
hereof, the tax assessor shall identify all eligible taxpayers that currently
receive an exemption under this chapter and who are negatively impacted by
such re-structuring. In the event of a decrease in the amount of the
exemption which such taxpayer would otherwise have received but for said
restructuring, the tax assessor shall place the taxpayer into the closest
income tier that does not result in a loss in the amount of the exemption.
Provided that they remain eligible for an exemption under the terms of this
chapter and barring any increase in income, such taxpayer(s) shall be
entitled to remain in said tier.



(‘73 Code, § 24-2) (Ord. passed 7-7-82; Am. Ord. passed 10-15-90; Am. Ord.
passed 8-25-94; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-98; Am. Ord passed 1-19-99; Am. Ord.
passed 7-3-03; Am. Ord. 2012-8, passed 8-6-12; Am. Ord. 2015-7, passed
9-8-15; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 7-18-16; Am. Ord. 2016-14, passed 9-19-16)



§ 34.03  INCOME OF MARRIED PERSON, COTENANT.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the income of a married person shall
be deemed to include the total income of his or her spouse, and only one such
exemption shall be allowed in favor of a married couple.  Likewise, the
income of one cotenant, joint tenant, or tenant in common shall be deemed to
include the total income of all other cotenants, joint tenants, or tenants in
common and only one such exemption shall be granted to cotenants, joint
tenants, or tenants in common, even though all of said cotenants, joint
tenants, or tenants in common are 65 years of age or over or all occupy said
property.



('73 Code, § 24-2) (Ord. passed 7-7-82; Am. Ord. passed 10-15-90; Am. Ord.
passed 8-25-94)



§ 34.04  CONDITIONS OF EXEMPTIONS.



   In addition to the requirement of domicile within the town at the time
of making application, the applicant must have been a resident of said town
for a period of five years ending with the date of assessment for the year
for which exemption is claimed, provided, however, that such exemption shall
not be allowed in favor of any person unless he or she shall have presented
to the assessor a statement, under oath, of income derived from all sources
for the calendar year ending with the date of assessment for the year for
which exemption is claimed, together with due evidence that he or she is so
entitled to such exemption.  The proposed exemptions shall be extended to
include senior citizens who own and reside in income-producing property.



('73 Code, § 24-2)  (Ord. passed 7-7-82; Am. Ord. passed 10-15-90; Am. Ord.
passed 8-25-94)



§ 34.05  APPLICATION, CONTINUING ELIGIBILITY.



   No exemption from taxation on the valuation of real property, as in
this article provided, shall be allowed except upon written application
therefor, which application shall be on a form prescribed by the Tax
Assessor. All applications must be filed with the Tax Assessor’s Office
between January 1 and March 15 following the date of assessment for the year
for which the exemption is claimed. The Tax Assessor may at any time inquire
into the right of a claimant to the continuance of an exemption hereunder,
and for such purpose he may  require the  filing of a new  application 
or  the submission of such proof as he shall deem necessary to determine the
right of the claimant to the continuance of such exemption.



(‘73 Code, § 24-3) (Ord. passed 7-7-82; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 8-20-18)



§ 34.06  REESTABLISHMENT OF RESIDENCY.



   A person who qualifies for and receives an exemption under this
subchapter, and who subsequently moves their legal domicile outside of the
town but continues to maintain ownership of a residential dwelling unit
within the town, shall be entitled to reapply and qualify for an exemption
hereunder without waiting an additional five year period, provided they
reestablish their legal domicile within the town and otherwise meet all other
requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2018-14, passed 8-20-18)



§ 34.07  TERMINATION OF EXEMPTION.



   All exemptions granted pursuant to this subchapter shall terminate upon:



   (A)   The conveyance of the subject property; provided, however,
that the person exempted shall be entitled to transfer a prorated portion of
the exemption to another residence they own within the town, or which they
acquire during the same tax year, provided they establish such residence as
their legal domicile;



   (B)   The death of the person exempted; provided, however, that if
the person exempted holds an ownership interest in the subject property as of
the date of assessment for the year for which the exemption is claimed and
subsequently deceases, the exemption shall continue through the end of said
tax year, unless the subject property is sold; or



   (C)   The moving of such person from the town.



(‘73 Code, § 24-5) (Ord. passed 12-7-70; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 8-20-18)



§ 34.08  AUTHORITY OF ASSESSOR NOT ABROGATED.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall abrogate or affect the
authority conferred upon the Tax Assessor by the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws
§ 44-3-3, subparagraph 16.



('73 Code, § 24-6) (Ord. passed 12-7-70)



TAX FREEZE AT AGE 65



§ 34.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASE YEAR.  The year before the year for which the application for
deferral of taxes is first claimed.



   HOUSEHOLD INCOME.  Total income from whatever source derived,
including but not limited to realized capital gains, pension, annuity,
retirement and social security benefits received by all persons living in the
dwelling except the live-in caretaker or care-giver, who has another primary
residence. HOUSEHOLD INCOME shall be determined on the basis of the calendar
year ending with the date of assessment for the tax year for which the
deferral is claimed.



   INCOME.  All funds received by a person from whatever source derived,
including, but not limited to, realized capital gains, and, in their
entirety, pension, annuity, retirement and social security benefits.  Income
shall be determined on the basis of the calendar year ending with date of
assessment for the year for which freeze is claimed.



   QUALIFIED PROPERTY.  An owner occupied, single family residence, with
no accessory family dwelling unit or commercial component or use.



   QUALIFIED RESIDENT.  A resident of the town who:



      (1)   Is 65 years of age or older as of the assessment date
for the year for which the deferral is claimed;



      (2)   Is one of the lawful owners of the property for which
the deferral is claimed and has continuously been a lawful owner of that
property for a period not less than 20 years ending on the date of assessment
for the year for which the deferral is claimed;



      (3)   Occupies the subject property as his or her principal
residence;



      (4)   Who has a household income of not more than $50,000.



   RESIDENT.  A person legally domiciled within the town for a period of
at least 20 years ending with the date of assessment for the year for which
the deferral is claimed and who continues to be legally domiciled in the town
during the period for which the deferral is claimed. Residency must be for at
least nine  months per annum. Mere seasonal or temporary residence in town,
of whatever duration, shall not constitute domicile for the purposes of this
section. Absence from the town for 12 months shall be prima facie evidence of
termination or abandonment of domicile. The burden of establishing domicile
in the town shall be on the applicant.



('73 Code, § 24A-6) (Ord. passed 9-15-82; Am. Ord. passed 7-3-03)



§ 34.16  FREEZE OF TAX RATE AND VALUATION.



   (A)   Every person a citizen and resident of the town 65 years of
age or older who does not have income from all sources in excess of $11,880
per year shall be granted a freeze of the tax rate and valuation on real
property which is a constituent part of a single-family dwelling which such
person owns and in which such person resides, on proper application being
made therefor.



   (B)   In the event two or more persons reside in said dwelling, said
freeze shall be granted if the total income of said persons does not exceed
$16,020.



   (C)   These income levels shall be adjusted annually in accordance
with the updated US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Poverty
Guidelines.



(‘73 Code, § 24A-2) (Ord. passed 9-15-82; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 7-18-16;
Am. Ord. 2016-14, passed 9-19-16)



§ 34.17  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   An application for tax deferral shall be presented to the Tax Assessor
on or before the last day upon which sworn accounts of their ratable estate
are required to filed pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws, Title 44, Ch. 5 for each
year for which such deferral is claimed, provided however that in the initial
year of this program a timely application may be filed by July 31, 2003. Such
application shall be on a form provided by the Tax Assessor and shall be
accompanied by such other forms of evidence as the Tax Assessor may
reasonably require to establish eligibility for the deferral program. All
applications must be signed by all persons or entities having a present legal
or equitable ownership interest in the property.



('73 Code, § 24A-3) (Ord. passed 9-15-82; Am. Ord. passed 7-3-03)



§ 34.18  TERMINATION OF FREEZE.



   The freeze granted pursuant to this subchapter shall terminate upon
either the conveyance of said real property, or when such person no longer
resides at said real property, and, thereupon, the tax rate and valuation of
said real property shall be adjusted by the Tax Assessor effective
immediately, or upon the death of the person to whom such freeze is granted,
in which case the tax rate and valuation of said real property shall be
adjusted by the Tax Assessor effective at the beginning of the next tax year,
subject to the provisions of § 34.23.



(‘73 Code, § 24A-4) (Ord. passed 9-15-82; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 8-20-18)



§ 34.19  AUTHORITY OF ASSESSOR NOT ABROGATED.



   Nothing contained herein shall abrogate or affect the statutory
authority of the Tax Assessor.



('73 Code, § 24A-5) (Ord. passed 9-15-82)



§ 34.20  DEFERRAL OF TAXES.



   Upon proper application therefor and subject to conditions hereinafter
set forth, payment of a portion of the taxes on a qualified property as
defined herein, owned and occupied by a qualified resident of the town age 65
or older, is deferred until the property is disposed of by reason of death of
the qualified owner-occupant or by reason of transfer or conveyance as
hereinafter set forth. The portion of taxes deferred under this section is
the amount of any taxes due in the year for which the deferral is claimed
which exceeds the taxes due and payable in the base year, provided however
that for applications filed in 2003 and 2004 for persons otherwise qualified
in 2003, the base year shall be the year based upon the assessment of
December 31, 2001.



(Ord. passed 7-3-03)



§ 34.21  PAYMENT.



   The amount of any taxes deferred pursuant hereto shall be a lien on the
property from the date of assessment and shall be payable upon the occurrence
of any one of the following:



   (A)   Within six months of the death of the qualified resident,
(subject to exception set forth in  § 34.23);



   (B)   Transfer or conveyance of the property to anyone other than a
person who was a qualified resident and joint applicant at the time the
deferral was first claimed;



   (C)   Written request of the applicant to be removed from the
program.



(Ord. passed 7-3-03)



§ 34.22  TITLE.



   If title to the property is held by two or more persons, the terms
QUALIFIED RESIDENT, OWNER-OCCUPANT, and APPLICANT shall refer to all such
persons. Each such person must meet the eligibility requirements provided in
this section, except in the following cases:



   (A)   In the case of property held jointly by husband and wife, the
property, if otherwise eligible for deferral shall not be disallowed upon the
grounds that one spouse is not 65 years or older or has not resided in the
town for the required 20 years.



   (B)   A deferral under this section shall not be disallowed if the
owner-occupant has only a life estate in the property or if the property is
in the name of a parent or one or more children or a living trust for the
benefit of the otherwise qualified resident and the owners submit an
affidavit that the qualified resident is principal owner or present
beneficiary and title is held in that manner for estate planning purposes
only.



(Ord. passed 7-3-03)



§ 34.23  TRANSFER TO WIDOW/WIDOWER.



   (A)   In the event that the death of a qualified resident results in
title being vested in a surviving widow or widower and at the time of said
death the widow or widower is a qualified resident, said death shall result
in only the following portion of the deferred taxes becoming due and payable:



      (1)   Those taxes which would otherwise have been due and
payable in the years prior to the lawful marriage of the qualified resident
and the surviving widow/widower.



   (B)   The remainder of the deferred taxes become due and payable:



      (1)   Within six months of the death of the widow/widower;



      (2)   Transfer or conveyance of the property to anyone other
than a person who was a qualified resident and joint applicant at the time
the deferral was first claimed;



      (3)   Written request of the applicant to be removed from the
program.



(Ord. passed 7-3-03)



§ 34.24  OTHER EXEMPTIONS.



   Any applicant qualifying for tax deferral pursuant to this section
shall remain eligible for any and all tax exemptions allowed by the town for
which they are eligible and have qualified at the time of enrollment in the
tax deferment program established hereby. Provided however that such
exemptions shall not be increased by any automatic annual increase set forth
in any local laws or ordinances during the period in which taxes are deferred.



(Ord. passed 7-3-03)



§ 34.25  REGULATIONS.



   Subject to the approval of the Town Administrator and the Town Council
the Tax Assessor shall formulate and adopt regulations for the administration
of this program which shall not be inconsistent with the provisions hereof
and which may govern requirements of the program including, but not limited
to: form and recordation of lien, manner of establishment of title, form of
application and requisite supporting documents.



(Ord. passed 7-3-03)



TAX EXEMPTIONS FOR VETERANS



§ 34.30  REAL PROPERTY EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Real property owned by any veteran or by the unmarried widow
of any veteran shall be exempt from taxation to the amount of $25,777 of
valuation.



   (B)   Real property owned by any totally disabled veteran shall be
exempt from taxation to the additional amount $51,555 of valuation.



   (C)   Real property of those disabled veterans, in “specially
adopted housing,” and their unmarried widows, who qualify pursuant to R.I.
Gen. Laws § 44-3-4 shall be exempt to the amount of $106,083 of valuation.



   (D)   Real property of every person whose son or daughter was a
veteran who lost his or her life as a casualty of any such wars, shall be
exempted form taxation to the amount of $38,676.



   (E)   Real property owned by any veteran of military or naval
service of the U.S.A. who has been or who shall be classified as, or
determined to be a prisoner-of-war by the Veteran’s Administration of the
United States, shall be exempted from taxation to the amount of $31,293.



   (F)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, the term
“veteran” as used in this section shall mean and include all those
persons entitled to veterans’ exemptions pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws §§
44-3-4 and 44-3-4.2.



(‘73 Code, § 24B-1) (Ord. passed 6-26-80; Am. Ord. passed 10-15-90; Am.
Ord. passed 4-17-06; Am. Ord. 2012-9, passed 8-6-12; Am. Ord. 2015-8, passed
9-8-15)



§ 34.31  TERMINATION OF EXEMPTION.



   All exemptions granted pursuant to this subchapter shall terminate upon:



   (A)   The conveyance of the subject property; provided, however,
that the person exempted shall be entitled to transfer a prorated portion of
the exemption to another residence they own within the town, or which they
acquire during the same tax year, provided they establish such residence as
their legal domicile;



   (B)   The death of the person exempted; provided, however, that if
the person exempted holds an ownership interest in the subject property as of
the date of assessment for the year for which the exemption is claimed and
subsequently deceases, the exemption shall continue through the end of said
tax year, unless the subject property is sold; or



   (C)   The moving of such person from the town.



(Ord. 2018-14, passed 8-20-18)



TAX EXEMPTIONS FOR BLIND PERSONS



§ 34.40  PROPERTY EXEMPTION DEFINED.



   The property of each person who has permanent impairment of both eyes
of the following status:  Central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the
better eye, with corrective glasses, or central visual acuity of more than
20/200 if there is a field defect in which the peripheral field has
contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field
subtends an angular distance no greater than 20° in the better eye, shall be
exempted from taxation to the amount of $38,866.



(Ord. passed 6-18-90; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 8-6-12; Am. Ord. 2015-9,
passed 9-8-15)



§ 34.41  APPLICATION REQUIRED FOR EXEMPTION.



   Legal residents of the state who have presented to the Tax Assessor's
office, on or before the last day on which sworn statements may be filed for
the year for which exemption is claimed, due evidence that he or she is so
entitled, on forms provided by the Tax Assessor's office, containing
affirmation by persons licensed by the state to make such affirmation of the
conditions enumerated in this subchapter, shall be exempted  from 
taxation  under  this  subchapter; provided, however, that such exemption
shall first apply to such property in the municipality where such applicant
resides, and if there is not sufficient property to exhaust such exemption
such person may proclaim the balance in the town and further provided,
however, that in no case shall the sum total of all exemption due to
blindness exceed the maximum exemption due to blindness in the applicant's
legal residence.



(Ord. passed 6-18-90)



§ 34.42  REVALUATION ADJUSTMENT.



   In any year that the town has a real property revaluation, the Tax
Assessor is hereby authorized to adjust any tax exemption for all persons
entitled to such exemption pursuant to this chapter, to the extent permitted
by law.  The adjustment shall be made to reflect the same monetary savings
that appeared on the property tax bill that existed for the year prior to the
revaluation of the real property.



(Ord. passed 7-14-03)



§ 34.43  TERMINATION OF EXEMPTION.



   All exemptions granted pursuant to this subchapter shall terminate upon:



   (A)   The conveyance of the subject property; provided, however,
that the person exempted shall be entitled to transfer a prorated portion of
the exemption to another residence they own within the town, or which they
acquire during the same tax year, provided they establish such residence as
their legal domicile;



   (B)   The death of the person exempted; provided, however, that if
the person exempted holds an ownership interest in the subject property as of
the date of assessment for the year for which the exemption is claimed and
subsequently deceases, the exemption shall continue through the end of said
tax year, unless the subject property is sold; or



   (C)   The moving of such person from the town.



(Ord. 2018-14, passed 8-20-18)



TAX EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS



§ 34.50  EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.



   (A)   Personal property and motor vehicles owned by and registered
to and exclusively used by the Rhode Island Arts Foundation at Newport, Inc.
d/b/a Newport Music Festival, Inc., located at 850 Aquidneck Avenue, shall be
exempt from taxation, provided said property is used for the purposes for
which said corporation was incorporated.



   (B)   Real property owned by the Rhode Island Society Sons of the
Revolution, located on Fort Hill Road (108SE/117) shall be exempt from
taxation, provided said property is used for the purposes for which said
corporation was incorporated.



   (C)   Real property owned by the Healing Co-op Inc. or leased by
said entity in accordance with R.I. Gen. Laws, § 44-4-6, located on
Mitchell’s Lane, Middletown, shall be exempt from taxation, provided said
property is used for the purposes for which said corporation was incorporated.



(Ord. 97-5, passed 8-12-97; Am. Ord. passed 9-02-03; Am. Ord. 2013-3, passed
3-4-13)



TAX EXEMPTION FOR WHOLESALERS' AND RETAILERS' INVENTORIES



§ 34.60  EXEMPTION OF WHOLESALERS' AND RETAILERS' INVENTORIES.



   The Town Council of the Town of Middletown hereby grants and
establishes a wholesale and retail inventory phase-out program, as mandated
by and in compliance with, R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 44-3-29.1 and 44-5-12(c).



(Ord. passed 12-19-94; Am. Ord. passed 4-19-99)



TAX CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM



§ 34.70  TAX CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM.



   (A)   The town does hereby adopt a system of classification of
taxable property in the town.  All ratable property in the town shall be
classified by the Tax Assessor as follows:



      (1)   Class One.  Residential real estate consisting of no
more than five dwelling units, land classified as open space and dwellings on
leased land including mobile homes.



      (2)   Class Two.  Commercial and industrial real estate,
residential properties containing partial commercial or business uses and
residential real estate of more than five dwelling units.



      (3)   Class Three.  All ratable tangible personal property.



      (4)   Class Four.  Motor vehicles and trailers subject to
excise tax created by R.I. Gen. Laws Title 44, Ch. 34.



   (B)   The Tax Assessor of the town, on or before June 15 each year
shall make a full and fair cash valuation of all the estate, real and
personal, including motor vehicles and trailers, subject to taxation and
determine the assessed valuation of all property within each class.



      (1)   The designated classes of property shall be limited to
the four classes as defined in division (A) above.



      (2)   The effective tax rate applicable to any class shall not
exceed by 50% the rate applicable to any other class.



      (3)   Any tax rate changes from one year to the next shall be
applied such that the same percentage rate change is applicable to all
classes, unless otherwise mandated by law.



      (4)   The tax rates applicable to wholesale and retail
inventory within Class Three are governed by R.I. Gen. Laws § 44-3-29.1.



      (5)   The tax rates applicable to motor vehicles within Class
Four as defined in division (A) above are governed by R.I. Gen, Laws §
44-34.1-1.



   (C)   The provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws Title 44, Ch. 35 relating to
property tax and fiscal disclosure applies to the reporting of and compliance
with these classification restrictions.



   (D)   The Assessor has the authority to apply different rates of
taxation against Class One, Class Two, Class Three and Class Four property to
determine the tax due and payable on the property provided the rate of
taxation is uniform within each class.



   (E)   The Assessor shall provide to the Finance Director a list
containing the full and fair cash valuation of each property class and, with
the approval of the Town Council, annually determine the percentages of the
tax levy to be apportioned each class or property and shall annually
establish tax rates sufficient to produce the proportion of the total tax
levy.



(Ord. passed 7-3-03)



REAL ESTATE NONUTILIZATION TAX



§ 34.80  ESTABLISHMENT.



   In accordance with R.I. Gen Laws Title 44, Ch. 5.1 and to further the
goals and policies set forth therein, there is hereby established in the town
a real estate nonutilization tax.



(Ord. passed 9-2-03)



§ 34.81  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTIVELY MARKETED.  A good faith effort by the owner of the property
to obtain one or more occupants of the property. These good faith efforts may
include, without limitation, one or more of the following:



      (1)   Making substantial financial expenditures in comparison
with the value of the property, or



      (2)   Listing the property for sale or lease, or both, with
one or more real estate brokers, for a price and on terms or for a rental
that is realistic considering the fair market or fair market rental value of
the property; or



      (3)   Advertising, using one or more signs in the property and
at least one other medium, theavailability of the property for sale or rental
for a price and on terms or at a rental that is realistic considering the
fair market or fair market rental value of the property. Sporadic attempts to
sell or lease the property during the privilege year may be viewed as not
constituting a good faith marketing effort.



   CONTINUOUSLY UNOCCUPIED. Any property which is listed during the entire
privilege year as vacant in the records of the town's Department of Minimum
Housing.



   NONPROFIT HOUSING ORGANIZATION.  Any organization exempt from taxation
pursuant to Section 501C(3) of the Internal Revenue Code [26 USC sec. 501
C(3)] whose exempt purposes include the provision of affordable housing to
low and moderate income households.



   PRIVILEGE YEAR.  The twelve-month period corresponding to the calendar
year.



   REVIEWING ENTITY.  The reviewing entity designated by the town
pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 44-5.1-3 shall be the Planning Board.



   VACANT AND ABANDONED PROPERTY.  Any property which is:



      (1)   A building which has remained continuously unoccupied
during the privilege year or a lot, with no existing structure that is
littered with trash and obviously abandoned.



      (2)   (a)   In the case of property containing one or more
buildings used in whole or in part for one or more dwelling units immediately
prior to the time the property became vacant, been under continuous
designation as vacant by the town Department of Minimum Housing during the
privilege year; or



         (b)   In the case of property containing one or more
buildings none of which were used in whole or in part for one or more
dwelling units immediately prior to the time the property became vacant, been
under continuous citation by the town for violation of minimum housing code
provisions relating to health of safety of citizens during the privilege year.



(Ord. passed 9-2-03)



§ 34.82  IMPOSITION.



   (A)   The town may annually impose upon any property which is vacant
and abandoned, as determined by the Building Official, a nonutilization tax
measured to the assessed value of the real estate at $10 for each $100 of
assessed value of the real estate as most recently assessed by the Tax
Assessor.



   (B)   The tax imposed by this section shall be due and payable in
the same manner as other municipal taxes are due in the town.



(Ord. passed 9-2-03)



§ 34.83  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The nonutilization tax shall not be imposed on property owned
by an abutter or nonprofit housing organization if:



      (1)   The abutter or nonprofit housing organization submits a
proposed development plan which has been approved the Rhode Island Housing
Resources Commission or the Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance
Corporation to the reviewing entity.



      (2)   The proposed development contains a reasonable time
frame for the development or reuse of the property; and



   (3)   The reviewing entity determines that the proposed development
plan is in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the town and approves it.



   (B)   The reviewing entity shall deliver a copy of the approved
development plan to the Tax Assessor who shall certify the property as exempt
from the nonutilization tax.



   (C)   Failure of the nonprofit housing organization or abutter
without good cause, to carry out the development or reuse of the property in
accordance with the time table set forth in the approved development plan
shall result in the property being subject to the nonutilization tax as of
the first date of assessment following the expiration of the timetable in the
approved development plan.



   (D)   The decision of the reviewing entity denying any approval of a
development plan may be appealed to the Board of Assessment Review.



(Ord. passed 9-2-03)



§ 34.84  CESSATION OF TAX.



   (A)   Upon a finding by the Building Official that the property is
no longer vacant or abandoned said property will cease to be subject to the
nonutilization tax until such time as it again is determined to be vacant or
abandoned. This section shall not result in the modification, nullification
or recission of taxes already assessed.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any property that is vacant and
abandoned and which is sold shall not be subject to this nonutilization tax
for the first 90 days subsequent to transfer of ownership. Failure by the new
owner to have the property removed from its vacant and abandoned status
within that 90-day period will again subject that property to this tax.



   (C)   The Tax Assessor is empowered to abate the tax if it is
imposed in error or if a nonprofit housing organization or an abutter
acquires the property for rehabilitation and submits a development plan which
complies with the provisions of § 34.83.



(Ord. passed 9-2-03)



§ 34.85  APPEALS.



   (A)   In any appeal from the imposition of the tax set forth in this
chapter the Board of Review shall find in favor of the appellant who
established that the property:



      (1)   Was actively marketed during the privilege year,



      (2)   Was occupied for a substantial portion of the privilege
year notwithstanding its designation by the minimum housing official;



      (3)   Was exempt from imposition of the tax pursuant to §
34.83.



   (B)   Nothing herein shall be deemed to enlarge or diminish any
other right of appeal that a property owner may possess pursuant to general
or public laws or local ordinances.



(Ord. passed 9-2-03)



MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX



§ 34.86  MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX.



   (A)   Consistent with R.I. Gen. Laws  §§ 44-34-1 et seq., the
town shall assess and levy on every vehicle and trailer registered under R.I.
Gen. Laws  §§ 31-3-1 et seq. for the privilege of the registration, an
excise tax measured by its value as further set forth in R.I. Gen. Laws.



   (B)   For the fiscal year 2011 and thereafter, the town through its
Tax Assessor shall exempt from taxation the first $3,000 of assessed value on
any vehicle or trailer, reduced by the amount of any exemption provided by
the State of Rhode Island, on a pro-rated basis as provided in R.I. Gen. Laws
§§ 44-34.1 et seq.  It being the intent hereof that the  total exemption
provided from the state to the town, or a combination thereof, not exceed
$3,000.



(Ord. 2101-27, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 34.90  ATLANTIC BEACH TIF DISTRICT AND MASTER PLAN.



   (A)   In accordance with the Act, the Council hereby authorizes the
creation of the district, the boundaries of which are included in the TIF
District Plan.



   (B)   The Council has considered whether the establishment of the
district and the TIF District Plan will contribute to the economic growth and
well being of the town and will be to the betterment of the health, welfare,
and safety of the inhabitants of the town.



   (C)   The Council has received a written advisory opinion from the
Town Planning Board, which opinion includes a determination that the TIF
District Plan is consistent with the town’s Comprehensive Community Plan,
adopted by the Town Council on March 2, 2015, and amended on November 16,
2015.



   (D)   The Council has considered all evidence presented to it, if
any, with regard to any adverse economic effect on the town, and determines
that such adverse economic effect, if any, is outweighed by the contribution
expected to be made through the designation of the district and adoption of
the TIF District Plan.



   (E)   The town hereby finds and determines, in accordance with the
Act, that:



      (1)   All or a portion of the district is in need of economic
development and infrastructure improvements, is suitable for industrial,
commercial, residential, mixed- use or retail uses, downtown development, or
transit oriented development; and



      (2)   The original assessed value of the taxable property
within the district does not exceed 25% of the total value of taxable
property within the town.



   (F)   In accordance with the Act, the Council hereby adopts the TIF
District Plan attached to Ordinance 2018-19 as Exhibit A and incorporated
herein by reference as if laid out here in full.



   (G)   The Council hereby authorizes that 100% of the future
increased assessed property values within the district shall be retained as
captured assessed value in accordance with the TIF District Plan, and up to
100% of the real property tax revenues generated from such captured assessed
value may be used to fund the various costs and improvements set forth in the
TIF District Plan.



(Ord. 2018-19, passed 11-5-2018)



CHAPTER 35:  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS



Section



   35.01   What constitutes a capital improvements project



   35.02   Agencies and officials to submit requests



   35.03   Forms for request, review



   35.04   Priority of projects



   35.05   Effect of projects on city finances



   35.06   Six-year program



   35.07   Capital improvement program budget



   35.08   Restriction on use of funds



   35.09   Qualified projects



   35.10   Annual appropriation



   35.11   Effective term of funding



§ 35.01  WHAT CONSTITUTES A CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROJECT.



   For the purposes of this chapter, a capital improvements project shall
be defined as the type of project or acquisition that fits within one or more
of the following categories:



   (A)   Acquisition or interest in land.



   (B)   The lease of buildings.



   (C)   The acquisition or construction of land, buildings or other
structures, including preconstruction planning, survey, engineering and
architectural costs.



   (D)   The improvement, expansion or reconstruction of existing
building, facilities, or land, not including normal maintenance and repair
work.



   (E)   Construction or reconstruction of highways, sidewalks and
utility lines, including preconstruction planning, survey and engineering
costs.



   (F)   The purchase of items of equipment of nonrecurring nature
which have a cost in excess of $25,000 and a useful life in excess of five
years.



('73 Code, § 2-6) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. 10-20-03)



§ 35.02 AGENCIES AND OFFICIALS TO SUBMIT REQUESTS.



   Not later than November first of each year, the following town agencies
and officials shall submit requests for capital improvements projects to the
Town Administrator:



      Town Council.



      Town Clerk.



      Police Department.



      Fire Department.



      Department of Public Works/Sewer and Sanitation.



      Finance Director.



      Building Inspector.



      Conservation Commission.



      School Committee.



      Tax Assessor.



      Director of Information Technology.



      Canvassing Authority.



      Zoning Board of Review.



      Civil Defense Department.



      Director of Emergency Management.



      Senior Center Board of Directors.



      Town Engineer.



      Town Planner.



      Planning Board.



      Library Board of Directors.



   Any other town agency, official or department having need for capital
acquisitions as defined by  § 35.01.



('73 Code, § 2-7) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03) 



§ 35.03  FORMS FOR REQUEST, REVIEW.



   (A)   Requests for capital improvements projects shall be submitted
on forms supplied by the Town Administrator in accordance with instructions
contained in the "Capital Improvements Manual" to be supplied to each
participating agency, department and official by the Town Administrator.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the requests for capital improvements the Town
Administrator shall refer the list to the Planning Board.  The Planning
Board shall review the list and notify the Town Administrator in writing of
any project listed thereon which is in conflict with the town Comprehensive
Community Plan.



   (C)   Each request shall be reviewed by the Town Administrator in
the light of Planning Board response, current development plans and programs
of the town.



('73 Code, § 2-8) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03)



§ 35.04  PRIORITY OF PROJECTS.



   In evaluating requests and recommending a  capital improvements
program, the Town Administrator shall base his/her  recommendations on the
following major criteria and others that may be considered essential to the
general welfare of the community:



   Protection of life, maintenance of public health and protection of
property.



   External requirements mandated by law.



   Provisions for public education.



   Protection of capital facilities and equipment.



   Conservation of resources.



   Provision of necessary public services.



   Replacement or improvement of obsolete  facilities.



   Reduction of operating costs.



   Public support, comfort and convenience.



   Improvement of environmental quality.



   Life expectancy of project.



   Risk of not implementing project.



   Conformity and compatibility with town's Comprehensive Plan.



   Availability of financing.



   Benefit to cost ratio.



   Economic benefit to community.



   Timeliness of project in relation to external factors.



   Whether project is a prerequisite to another project.



   Percent of population served.



   Project meets a community obligation to serve a special segment of the
population.



('73 Code, § 2-9) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03)



§ 35.05  EFFECT OF PROJECTS ON CITY FINANCES.



   The Town Administrator, in consultation with the Finance Director,
shall review the requests with respect to the financial resources of the town
and shall prepare a schedule showing the effect of requested projects upon
the current annual budget and the future debt and debt service charges for
the town.



('73 Code, § 2-10) (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03)



§ 35.06  SIX-YEAR PROGRAM.



   Not later than February first of each year, the Town Administrator
shall forward to the Council and make public a recommended capital budget and
capital improvements program for the following six-year period. The first
year of this six-year program shall be designated as the capital budget. The
Council shall consider this recommended program as a guide in preparing its
annual budget and shall designate those projects to be authorized for funding
during the next fiscal year.



('73 Code, § 2-11)  (Ord. passed 7-3-67; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03)



§ 35.07  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM BUDGET.



   There shall be a Capital Improvement Program (CIP) account which shall
be a part of the annual budget and which shall be funded by a Town Council
appropriation on an annual basis.



(Ord. passed 10-20-03)



§ 35.08  RESTRICTION ON USE OF FUNDS.



   Funds appropriated to the CIP account may be utilized for the following
purposes only, and for no others:



   (A)   To pay the costs and expenses of any qualified capital
improvement project, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Costs and expenses of negotiations, evaluation, studies,
appraisals, etc., associated with the acquisition of property.



      (2)   Costs and expenses associated with studies, analysis,
evaluations and reports concerning the need or feasibility of any particular
capital improvement projects, including costs associated with identifying or
securing other funding sources.



      (3)   Pre-acquisition or pre-construction engineering, legal,
environmental, planning, architectural, surveying, accounting, regulatory and
permitting costs.



   (B)   To provide short term financing of projects for which funding
is ultimately derived from other sources provided said projects otherwise
qualify as capital improvement projects, and to pay debt service relating to
same.



   (C)   Upon resolution of the Town Council to perform any emergency
repair, replacement or reconstruction of any building, structure, facility or
improvement when the life and safety of the general public is in danger, or
it is otherwise necessary to insure the immediate preservation of public
peace, property, health or safety.



(Ord. passed 10-20-03)



§ 35.09  QUALIFIED PROJECTS.



   Subject to the exception set forth in § 35.08(C), a qualified capital
improvement project is one included in the annual recommended budget
submitted by the Town Administrator and designated for funding by the Town
Council and included in the capital budget.



(Ord. passed 10-20-03)



§ 35.10  ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS.



   The CIP shall be funded by the Town Council by an annual
appropriation.  The appropriation for any year may not be less than the
appropriation for the preceding year, first increased by the percentage
increase in the budgeted property tax revenues.



(Ord. passed 10-20-03)



§ 35.11  EFFECTIVE TERM OF FUNDING.



   Any funds so appropriated shall be expended within two years of
appropriation unless otherwise resolved by the Town Council.  All funds not
expended within two years after appropriation shall be returned to the CIP
fund balance for redesignation by the Town Council in accordance with the
provisions hereof.



(Ord. passed 10-20-03)



CHAPTER 36:  FEE SCHEDULE



   The following fees will be charged for permits, licenses and other
services provided by the town.



   (A)   Clerk’s Department.



      (1)   Alcoholic Beverage.



         (a)   Class A:  $1,000 per year.



         (b)   Class BT: $2,000 per year.



         (c)   Class BL:  $1,500 per year.



         (d)   Class BV:  $2,000 per year.



         (e)   Class BM: $2,000 per year.



         (f)   Class C:  $800 per year.



         (g)   Class D Full:  $800 per year.



         (h)   Class D Limited:  $400 per year.



         (i)   Class J :  $2,000 per year.



         (j)   Class F:  $15 per day.



         (k)   Class F-1:  $35 per day.



      (2)   Alcoholic Beverage License Application Fees.



         (a)   Renewals: $25 plus advertising.



         (b)   New, Transfers, Expansions:  $100 plus
advertising.



      (3)   Amusement Devices and Juke Boxes: $75 per machine, $50
per application.



      (4)   Amusement License - Dance Hall/Live Entertainment: $200
per year.



      (5)   Bingo: $5 per year.



      (6)   Body Works Establishment: $250 per year.



      (7)   Body Works Personnel: $75 per year.



      (8)   Bowling Alleys, billiards, and pool tables: 



         (a)   $20 each alley or pool table per year;



         (b)   $20 Sunday operations, per year.



      (9)   Carnival and Circus: $50 per day.



      (10)   Cemetery Lots- License of Burial.



         (a)   Middletown Resident: $700 per lot.



         (b)   Non-Resident: $1,000 per lot.



         (c)   Perpetual Care: 20% of cost of lot.



      (11)   Dog License/Registration: $10 per year.



      (12)   Firearms Dealers: $5 per year.



      (13)   Fortune Tellers:



         (a)   $10 per application.



         (b)   $10 per day.



         (c)   $30 per week.



         (d)   $50 per month.



         (e)   $200 per year.



      (14)   Holiday Sales (Retail Sales Licenses):  $100 per year.



      (15)   Itinerant Vendors: $350.



      (16)   Junk Dealer (Auto Wrecking Yard):  $100 per year.



      (17)   Kennel License: $25 per year.



      (18)   Mobile Food Service: $100 per year for each vehicle,
plus $25 Application fee.



      (19)   Motion Picture: $200 per year.



      (20)   Peddler: $50 per year for each vehicle.



      (21)   Private Detective:  $150 per year, plus $10
Application fee.



      (22)   Short Term Rentals: $10 per bedroom, per year.



      (23)   Special Event Permit.



         (a)   In a commercial zone that is likely to attract
more than 250 persons or 50 motor vehicles: $250 per event.



         (b)   All other events: $100 per event.



      (24)   Sunday Selling (Class A Liquor Licensees): $100 per
year.



      (25)   Tobacco License Fee: $100 per year.



      (26)   Town Code of Laws with Supplements: $200 each.



      (27)   Town Maps: 



         (a)   $5 each for small.



         (b)   $10 each for large.



      (28)   (a)   Victualling House License, Capacity 40 or
less: $110 per year.



         (b)    Victualling House License, 24 Hours, Capacity 40
or less: $165 plus advertising.



      (29)   (a)   Victualling House License, Capacity over 40:
$220 per year.



         (b)    Victualling House License, 24 Hours, Capacity
over 40: $275 plus advertising.



   (B)   Building/Zoning.



      (1)   Filing with Zoning Board of Review, petition for special
use permit, variance or extensions.



         (a)   Residential: $150 plus the cost of advertising and
abutter notification.



         (b)   Commercial:  $225 plus the cost of advertising
and abutter notification.



         (c)   An additional fee of $200 per hearing date shall
be assessed when any petition filed with the Zoning Board of Review and any
appeal filed with the Zoning Board of Review acting as an Appeals Board is
determined, for whatever reason, by the Chairman of the Zoning Board to
require a special meeting devoted primarily to said petition and/or appeal.
Said fee shall be assessed also if the special meeting is convened and
petitioner fails to appear and/or proceed. Said fee shall be paid no later
than 48 hours prior to special meeting.



      (2)   Filing an appeal with Zoning Board of Review acting as
Appeals Board.



         (a)   Residential: $150 plus the cost of advertising and
abutter notification.



         (b)   Commercial: $225 plus the cost of advertising and
abutter notification.



         (c)   An additional fee of $200 per hearing date shall
be assessed when any petition filed with the Zoning Board of Review and any
appeal filed with the Zoning Board of Review acting as an Appeals Board is
determined, for whatever reason, by the Chairman of the Zoning Board to
require a special meeting devoted primarily to said petition and/or appeal.
Said fee shall be assessed also if the special meeting is convened and
petitioner fails to appear and/or proceed. Said fee shall be paid no later
than 48 hours prior to special meeting.



         (d)   Zoning Certificate: $50.



      (3)   Construction Permit Fees. All Building,
Demolition/Moving, Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical and Sign Permits.



         (a)   Fee: $25 plus $30 for first $1,000 of the
estimated cost of the project plus $15 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof.



         (b)   Late Filing Fee: an additional fee of 50% of the
permit fee or $500, whichever amount is greater. (Applies to all types of
permits/working without a permit.)



         (c)   Certificate of Occupancy: $50.



         (d)   Fences and Walls: $50.



         (e)   Tent License: $30.



         (f)   Temporary Sign: $25.



         (g)   Seasonal Sign: $50.



      (4)   Petition for Change of Zoning (Council):  $35 plus
advertising.



      (5)   Zoning Board Site Plan Review:  $5 per 1,000 sq. ft. of
land within site plan property limits or $200, whichever is greater.



      (6)   Re-Inspection Fee. 



         (a)   The Building Inspection Department is authorized
to assess a $50 building, mechanical, electrical or plumbing re-inspection
fee whenever the Building Inspector is caused to make an additional visit to
a property for inspection purposes because:



            1.   Work for which an inspection is requested is
not complete when the inspector arrives.



            2.    Corrections previously called for are not
complete when the inspector arrives for a requested re-inspection.



            3.   Approved plans or the field permit card are
not readily available to the inspector.



            4.   Failure to provide access to a project on the
date the inspection is requested.



            5.   Approved plans have been substantially
changed without prior review and approval.



         (b)   When a re- inspection fee has been assessed, no
additional inspections will be performed at that job site until it has been
paid.



      (7)   Collection Box Fee: Application fee $100, Permit fee
$100 per year.



   (C)   Fire Department.



      (1)   Ambulance Billing Rates. The Finance Director, upon
notice to the Town Council, will set ambulance billing rates annually.



      (2)   Fire Plan Review.



         (a)   Cost of construction is $500 or less, then the
required fee is $25.



         (b)   Cost of construction is over $500 but not over
$1,000, then the required fee is $35.



         (c)   Cost of construction is over $1,000 but not over
$2,000, then the required fee is $45.



         (d)   Cost of construction is over $2,000 but not over
$500,000, then the required fee is $45+ (plus $6 per $1,000 or fraction
thereof over $2,000).



         (e)   Cost of construction is over $500,000, then the
required fee is $3,033+ (plus $4 per $1,000 or fraction thereof over
$500,000).



         (f)   Cost of plan review and inspection for the
installation of smoke detector and/or carbon monoxide detection (includes
smoke detector and carbon monoxide detector plan review, together with any
subsequent detection inspections) in any new and existing private dwelling:



            1.   One- family unit: $75.



            2.   Two- family unit: $125.



            3.   Three- family unit: $175.



      (3)   Burning Permit Fee(s):



         (a)   $10 seven-day permit.



         (b)   $40 six-month permit.



      (4)   Hazardous Materials Response Fee. The Fire Chief is
authorized to assess fees whenever the Fire Department is caused to respond
to any location to mitigate the effects of a hazardous material spill,
release, or other incidents that involve hazardous conditions. Said fee to be
assessed as follows:



         (a)   Haz-Mat Team Response: $750.



         (b)   Other Personnel: Contract hourly rate, plus 70%.



         (c)   Other personnel related expenses: cost of any
medical evaluation and/or treatment of personnel necessitated by exposure to
hazardous material.



      (5)   Equipment:



         (a)   Aerial device: $250 per hour.



         (b)   Ambulance: $250 per hour.



         (c)   Brush truck: $250 per hour.



         (d)   Command vehicle: $150 per hour.



         (e)   Engine company: $250 per hour.



         (f)   Tanker: $250 per hour.



      (6)   Public Safety Private Detail Billing Rates: Fire
Department.



         (a)   The regular hourly rate for a firefighter will be
paid at the rate of one and one-half times the Shift Captain’s pay rate,
rounded up to the next dollar, per hour with a minimum of four hours for such
duty. All details performed on a holiday such as New Year’s Day, Martin
Luther King Day, Lincoln’s Birthday, Washington’s Birthday, Victory Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Armistice Day,
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day are to  be paid and billed out at two times
the Shift Captain’s pay rate rounded up to the nearest dollar, per hour
with a minimum of four hours for such duty.



         (b)   Vehicles and apparatus:



            1.   Pumper: $50/hour, four hour minimum.



            2.   Rescue Wagon: $50/hour, four hour minimum.



            3.   Brush Truck: $50/hour, four hour minimum.



            4.   Rescue Boat: $50/hour, four hour minimum.



         (c)    Administrative Fee: 10% of total amount billed.



      (7)   Records: cost of copying and/or inspecting.



         (a)   Charges for inspecting and/or copying public
records:



            1.   Fifteen cents per page for any document
reproducible on common business or legal size paper.



            2.   Fifteen dollars per hour for each search and
retrieval, with the first hour free.



            3.    Reasonable actual cost for providing
electronic records or retrieving records from storage where the public body
is assessed a retrieval fee.



         (b)   Charge for copies of rescue patient care reports:
$5.



      (8)   Smoke and carbon monoxide detector inspections: $30,
re-inspection $60 per inspection.



   (D)   Parks and Recreation.



      (1)   Beach Parking Fees.



         (a)   A Middletown Parking pass for Residents only,
authorizing free parking at Third Beach, Dunlap Wheeler Park and Middletown
Town Beach.



         (b)   Season Parking Pass: Sachuest Beach and Third
Beach and Middletown Town Beach.



            1.    Resident: $70.



            2.   Resident Senior: $65.



         (c)   Season Parking Pass: Sachuest Beach, Third Beach
(Boat Ramp Lot only).



            1.   Non- Resident: $140.



            2.   Non- Resident Senior: $130.



         (d)   Week Days: $15.



         (e)   Saturday, Sunday, and Holidays: $25.



         (f)   Motorcycles:



            1.   Daily, including weekends and holiday: $10.



            2.   Season Pass: Resident: $30.



            3.   Season Pass: Non-Resident: $60.



         (g)   Small craft storage rack rental: Third Beach.



            1.   Season pass for resident: $50.



            2.   Season pass for non-resident: $100.



         (h)   Small craft seizure fee: $150.



      (2)   Campground Fees.



 



 
2018
 
2019
 
2020
 
2021*




(a)    Seasonal
 
$5,800
 
$6,800
 
$7,800
 
$8,800


(b)    Monthly, non-peak: daily rate
 
$50
 
$55
 
$65
 
$70


(c)    Monthly, peak: daily rate
 
$60
 
$70
 
$80
 
$90


(d)   Weekly, non-peak
 
$470
 
$550
 
$630
 
$710


(e)   Weekly, peak
 
$555
 
$650
 
$745
 
$840


(f)   Daily, non-peak
 
$70
 
$85
 
$95
 
$110


(g)   Daily, peak
 
$85
 
$100
 
$115
 
$130




 



   *   Every year after 2021, the sitting Town Council will make an
annual review and by a majority vote, may make annual fee adjustments if they
deem necessary.



         (h)   May, June and September are considered non-peak
time.



         (i)   July and August are considered peak time.



         (j)   Monthly rate applies to a minimum of four weeks.



      (3)   Outdoor Public Places Approved Reservation. Second
Beach, Third Beach, Middletown Town Beach, Paradise Park, Dunlap-Wheeler
Park, War Memorial Field (Berkeley-Peckham) and Wyatt Road Complex: Parking
permits are required for Second Beach, Third Beach, Middletown Town Beach and
Dunlap-Wheeler Park:



         (a)   Middletown Resident/non-profit:



            1.   Peak season: June 1 - September 30: $100 per
day.



            2.   Non-peak season: October 1 - May 31: $50 per
day.



         (b)   Middletown Non-Resident/Commercial:



            1.   Peak season: June 1 - September 30: $200 per
day.



            2.   Non-peak season: October 1 - May 31: $100 per
day.



         (c)    Wellness/recreation camps: $10 per day.



   (E)   Planning Department.



      (1)   Planning Board Fees:



         (a)    Administrative Subdivisions: Application filing
fee $100.



         (b)   Minor Subdivisions/Land Development Project.



            1.    Preliminary Plan Review: Application filing
fee $200 plus $40 per lot.



            2.   Final Plan Review: Filing fee $100 plus $30
per lot.



         (c)   Major Subdivisions/Land Development Project.



            1.   Master Plan: Filing fee $200 plus $40 per lot
proposed.



            2.    Preliminary Plan: Filing fee $300 plus $40
per lot or dwelling unit, whichever is greater.



            3.   Final Plan Review: Filing fee of $200 plus
$30 per lot or dwelling unit, whichever is greater.



   (F)   Police Department.



      (1)   Concealed Carry Permit: $40.



      (2)   Dog Board at Pound: $1.50 per day.



      (3)   Dog Pick-up: $10 each time.



      (4)   Public Safety Private Detail Billing Rates: Police
Department.



         (a)   The regular hourly rate for Police Officer,
Community Service Officer (CSO) or Non-Permanent Officer (NPO) will be the
Top Step Patrol Rate x one and one-half per hour rounded to the nearest
dollar, four hour minimum; officers working for more than eight consecutive
hours at a private detail shall be paid at a rate of one and one-half times
the regular hourly rate; officers working private details on Thanksgiving
Day, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year’s Eve and New Year’s Day
shall be compensated at double the regular hourly rate. Details for
Middletown School Department functions shall be discounted $5 per hour.



         (b)   Police Cruiser: $25 per hour, four hour minimum
except for RIDOT details which will be $20 per hour, four hour minimum.



         (c)    Administrative Fee: 10% of total amount billed.



      (5)   Security Fingerprinting:



         (a)   $10 per person, no background check, per card. (No
charge for children).



         (b)   $40 per person, with background check.



   (G)   Public Works Department.



      (1)   Drain Layer’s Permits: $50 per connection.



      (2)   Public Works Hourly Billing Rates:



         (a)   Town Engineer: Hourly rate.



         (b)   Director of Public Works: Hourly rate.



         (c)    Administrative fee: 10% of total amount billed.



      (3)   Public Works Private Detail Billing Rates:



         (a)   The regular hourly rate for a public works detail
for set up or take down of a public event will be paid at a rate of one and
one-half times the Labor Equipment Operation III D rate, rounded up to the
nearest dollar per hour with a minimum of two hours, for such duty. All
details performed on Sundays and holidays such as New Year’s Day, Martin
Luther King Day, Washington’s Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Victory Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day, and
Christmas Day are to be paid and billed out at two times the Labor Equipment
Operator III D rate, rounded up to the nearest dollar, per hour with a
minimum of two hours for such duty.



         (b)   Public Works Vehicles: $25 per hour, two hour
minimum.



         (c)    Administrative Fee: 10% of total amount billed.



      (4)   Sidewalk Obstruction Permits: $50 per day.



      (5)   Street Opening Permits: $50.



   (H)   Refuse and Recycling Department.



      (1)   Annual User Fee and Bulky Waste Pickup: Annual Stickers.
Must be a Middletown taxpayer as defined in § 50.21.



      (2)   User Fee: $141.



         (a)   Thirty-three gallon bag rate: $2 per bag.



         (b)   Fifteen gallon bag rate: $1.75 per bag.



         (c)   Eight gallon bag rate: $1 per bag.



         (d)   Bulky Waste Pickup. The town vendor provides bulky
waste pickup by scheduled appointment. The fee is determined by material
being picked up.



   (I)   Municipal Permit Administrative Fee. Five percent of the
underlying fee for any permit issued by town departments, except where the
application thereof would increase total permit costs in excess of any
maximum prescribed by state law.



   (J)   Late Fee(s).



      (1)   Late fee accrues on any unpaid balances following the
due date at the rate of 18% per annum.



      (2)   In special cases, the Finance Director may reduce the
amount of the accrued late fee.



(‘73 Code, § 3-22)  (Ord. passed 4-16-79; Am. Ord. passed 3-6-95; Am.
Ord. passed 5-20-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-18-95; Am. Ord. passed 3-4-96; Am.
Ord. passed 3-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 1-20-98; Am. Ord. 01-05, passed 1-2-01;
Am. Ord. 01-06, passed 1-2-01; Am. Ord. passed 5-7-01; Am. Ord. passed
8-20-01; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-03; Am. Ord. passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord. passed
2-2-04; Am. Ord. passed 3-1-04; Am. Ord. passed 5-24-04; Am. Ord. passed
6-21-04; Am. Ord. passed 8-16-04; Am. Ord. passed 9-7-04; Am. Ord. passed
1-3-05; Am. Ord. passed 1-3-05; Am. Ord. passed 1-3-05; Am. Ord. passed
8-15-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. passed 1-3-06; Am. Ord. passed
7-17-06; Am. Ord. passed 3-5-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed
3-3-08; Am. Ord. passed 12-15-08; Am. Ord. passed 12-15-08; Am. Ord. passed
12-15-08; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed
6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed
6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed
6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed
6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed
6-21-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10; Am. Ord. 2010-24, passed 7-19-10; Am. Ord.
2010-26, passed 10-4-10; Am. Ord. 2010-30, passed 12-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-5,
passed 6-20-11; Am. Ord. 2011-9, passed 9-6-11; Am. Ord. 2012-3, passed
5-7-12; Am. Ord. 2012-13, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 2013-4, passed 5-20-13; Am.
Ord. 2013-7, passed 6-17-13; Am. Ord. 2014-1, passed 3-3-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1,
passed 1-20-15; Am. Ord. 2015-6, passed 8-17-15; Am. Ord. 2016-4, passed
6-20-16; Am. Ord. 2016-10, passed 9-6-16; Am. Ord. 2017-2, passed 1-17-17;
Am. Ord. 2017-16, passed 11-20-17; Am. Ord. 2018-9, passed 4-2-18)



CHAPTER 37:  CIVIL SERVICE



Section



Personnel Board, Classified System



   37.001   Administration by Personnel Board



   37.002   Classified service established



   37.003   Composition of unclassified service



   37.004   Composition of classified service



   37.005   Provisions governing persons in the classified service



   37.006   Filling vacancies in classified service; probationary period



   37.007   Classified service positions grouped into classes



   37.008   Personnel plans, policies subject to change



Policies



   37.015   Town personnel policy



   37.016   Discrimination prohibited



   37.017   Negotiation of terms authorized



   37.018   Benefits to police and firefighters under state law allowed



   37.019   Performance reviews for unclassified employees



Process of Hiring, Reappointment



   37.025   Citizenship and residency required



   37.026   Physical and psychological examinations



   37.027   Placement on eligible lists



   37.028   Certification of those highest on lists



   37.029   Employment applications



   37.030   References



   37.031   Competitive exams; subject matter and notice



   37.032   Exam results



   37.033   Eligible lists from exams; correction and destruction of
exams



   37.034   Veterans' preference in exams



   37.035   Notice of rejection; destruction of applications



   37.036   Disqualification of applicants



   37.037   Lateral recruitment, appointment of police and fire



Comprehensive Pay Plan



   37.045   Factors governing plan, rates



   37.046   Pay as full compensation; fringe benefits; less than
full-time work



   37.047   Overtime compensation



   37.048   Starting rate of pay



   37.049   Pay increases



   37.050   Exceptional service increase



Grievance Procedure



   37.060   Grievance policy



   37.061   Processing of grievance to department or division head



   37.062   Appeal to Town Administrator and Review Board



Leave and Holidays



   37.070   Leave defined



   37.071   How and by whom granted



   37.072   Types of leave



   37.073   Leave records



   37.074   Leave policy



   37.075   Annual leave accrual



   37.076   Annual leave approval; separation



   37.077   When sick leave authorized



   37.078   Accrual of sick leave



   37.079   Provisions governing grant of sick leave



   37.080   Advance sick leave



   37.081   Separation from service and sick leave



   37.082   Reporting and investigating sickness



   37.083   Military duty defined



   37.084   Military leave without loss of pay



   37.085   Military leave with, without pay



   37.086   Restoration upon termination of leave without pay



   37.087   Other leave without pay



   37.088   Bereavement pay



   37.089   Designated holidays



   37.090   Procedure when holiday falls on non-work day



Separation and Retirement



   37.100   Separation from classified service



   37.101   Pension plan adopted



   37.102   Persons eligible for coverage



   37.103   Contributions to costs of plan



   37.104   Normal retirement age



   37.105   Pension benefits



PERSONNEL BOARD, CLASSIFIED SYSTEM



§ 37.001  ADMINISTRATION BY PERSONNEL BOARD.



   (A)   The personnel program established by this chapter shall be
administered by the Personnel Board or its designee. The Personnel Board
shall:



      (1)   Develop, maintain and apply procedures for the
recruitment. compensation, promotion training disciplinary and related
aspects of personnel management: provided. that such procedures shall be
consistent with the Charter and this Code.



      (2)   Develop and maintain the position classification plan
for all town personnel in the classified service and recommend to the
Council, for adoption, such modifications thereof as the Board from time to
time may deem advisable.



      (3)   Develop and maintain the comprehensive pay plan for all
town personnel in the classified service and recommend to the Council, for
adoption, such modifications thereof as the Board from time to time may deem
advisable.



      (4)   Develop and issue such other supplemental personnel
rules as are necessary for the effective implementation of this chapter.



   (B)   The position classification plan and the comprehensive pay
plan for all personnel in the classified service of the town, as in effect
immediately prior to the effective date of this Code, are hereby continued in
full force and effect; and the procedures and supplemental personnel rules
established or adopted by the Personnel Board, as in effect immediately prior
to the effective date of this Code, are likewise continued in full force and
effect.



('73 Code, § 7-1) (Ord. passed 10-29-62; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.002  CLASSIFIED SERVICE ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established, pursuant to article IX of the town
Charter, a classified civil service system; and all offices and positions in
the town government are hereby divided into the classified and unclassified
service.



('73 Code, § 7-4)  (Ord. passed 10-29-62; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.003  COMPOSITION OF UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE.



   The unclassified service shall include the following:



   (A)   All elected officials and members of boards and commissions.



   (B)   Persons appointed to fill vacancies in elected office.



   (C)   Officers appointed by the Council.



   (D)   The Town Administrator and the following appointive
administrative heads of departments:



      Chief of Police, Fire Chief and the director of the several town
departments.



   (E)   Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without
pay.



   (F)   Seasonal employees.



('73 Code, § 7-5) (Ord. passed 10-29-62; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.004  COMPOSITION OF CLASSIFIED SERVICE.



   The classified service shall include all other positions in the town
service which are not specifically placed in the unclassified service by this
chapter.



('73 Code, § 7-6) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.005  PROVISIONS GOVERNING PERSONS IN THE CLASSIFIED SERVICE.



   All persons now or hereafter employed by the town in the classified
service shall be allocated to one of the classes established by the position
classification plan, and they shall be entitled to the compensation specified
for their respective positions in the comprehensive pay plan, and they shall
be entitled to the benefits and subject to the conditions provided in those
plans and elsewhere in this chapter.



('73 Code, § 7-7) (Ord. passed 10-29-62)



§ 37.006  FILLING VACANCIES IN CLASSIFIED SERVICE, PROBATIONARY PERIOD.



   (A)   All vacancies in the classified service shall be filled by
regular appointment, temporary appointment, promotion, transfer or demotion.



   (B)   Regular appointment indicates that the employee is to work for
the town on a continuing basis. Every regular employee shall serve a
probationary period of one year after original appointment. The probationary
period shall be regarded as an integral part of the evaluation process and
shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for obtaining
the most effective adjustment of a new employee to his position, and for
separating any new employee whose performance does not meet the required
standards. Quarterly evaluations will be made by each supervisor to
accomplish a fair and objective evaluation during the probationary period.



   (C)   The status of the appointment shall not be changed from
probational to regular until a certification is made by the department head
to the Personnel Board that the employee's services are satisfactory. An
employee will not acquire full status as a regular employee until approved by
the Personnel Board.



('73 Code, § 7-8) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.007  CLASSIFIED SERVICE POSITIONS GROUPED INTO CLASSES.



   All positions in the classified service shall be grouped into classes
and each class shall include those positions sufficiently similar as to
character, difficulty and responsibility that:



   (A)   The same descriptive title may be used to designate each
position in the class.



   (B)   The same level of education, experience, knowledge, ability
and other qualifications may be required of incumbents.



   (C)   Similar tests of fitness may be used to select incumbents.



   (D)   The same range of compensation will apply with equity under
substantially the same employment conditions.



('73 Code, § 7-16) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.008  PERSONNEL PLANS, POLICIES SUBJECT TO CHANGE.



   The position classification plan, the comprehensive pay plan and the
policies as to vacation, sick leave, overtime pay, discipline and related
subjects applicable to personnel in the classified service, and benefits
thereby provided, may be changed, and new positions may be authorized and
created, by the Council from time to time when recommended by the Personnel
Board. Whenever new positions are created, whenever the duties and
responsibilities of existing positions in the classified service change, or
whenever the position classification plan is amended, the Personnel Board
shall allocate or reallocate the affected positions and shall determine the
status of employees affected by such action in accordance with the personnel
rules.



('73 Code, § 7-15) (Ord. passed 10-29-62)



POLICIES



§ 37.015  TOWN PERSONNEL POLICY.



   The Council hereby declares the personnel policy of the town to be that:



   (A)   Employment in the town government shall be based on merit and
fitness free of personal and political considerations.



   (B)   Conditions of employment will encourage employees to initiate
and continue efficient and economical operation of municipal business.



   (C)   Positions with similar duties and responsibilities shall be
classified and compensated on an equitable and uniform basis, at the highest
level consistent with the economic capability of the community.



   (D)   All personnel actions shall be based on a comprehensive
evaluation of an individual's qualifications to perform duties and accept
responsibilities of the position and meet working standards for town
employees.



   (E)   The rights and interests of employees shall be respected,
consistent with the interests of the town and citizen public, through a fair
administration of the provisions of this chapter.



   (F)   A permanent career service for all persons covered by this
chapter shall be governed by consistent standards of professional conduct,
necessity for continuance of the position and sufficient funds.



   (G)   High morale shall be promoted by the fair administration of
the provisions of this chapter.



   (H)   Every employee has a moral obligation and is expected to
comply with the spirit and intent of this merit system.



('73 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. passed 10-29-62; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.016  DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.



   There shall be no discrimination against or in favor of a candidate for
employment or an employee because of race, color, sex, religion or national
origin, or because of physical handicap which will not interfere with the
adequate performance of duties. Standards with respect to educational
requirements shall be used only where essential to the performance of the
duties of the position. Standards establishing a maximum age limitation may
be adopted by resolution of Council upon the recommendation of the Personnel
Board. All candidates for a position shall be evaluated against the same
qualification requirements.



('73 Code, § 7-13) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.017  NEGOTIATION OF AUTHORIZED.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude any duly constituted
and recognized bargaining agent for employees in any department of town
government from bargaining for and negotiating employment contracts
containing terms and conditions of employment varying the specific pay and
tangible benefits of employment contained herein, and any such contract, to
the extent its provisions on pay and tangible benefits are inconsistent or at
variance with the provisions of this chapter, shall supersede this chapter
and shall be controlling.



(‘73 Code, § 7-14)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.018  BENEFITS TO POLICE AND FIREFIGHTERS UNDER STATE LAW ALLOWED.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to deny to any person
any right or benefit, or to limit any right or benefit, to which he or she
may be entitled under the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws Chapter 19, Title 45
relating to relief of injured and deceased firemen and policemen.



('73 Code, § 7-56)



§ 37.019  PERFORMANCE REVIEWS FOR UNCLASSIFIED EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The Town Administrator shall develop a system of annual review
and performance evaluation for employees who are not in the classified
service.



   (B)   The Administrator shall conduct annual reviews and performance
evaluations for employees who are in the classified and unclassified service.



   (C)   The Administrator shall recommend to the Town Council annually
rates of compensation for non- classified employees based on their
performance, market factors and the best interests of the town.



   (D)   Non-classified employees' compensation will be fixed annually
based upon their performance evaluations, market factors and the best
interests of the town.



(Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



PROCESS OF HIRING, REAPPOINTMENT



§ 37.025  CITIZENSHIP AND RESIDENCY REQUIRED.



   To be eligible for employment in any position with the town service,
each candidate must be a citizen of the United States.



('73 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.026  PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL EXAMINATIONS.



   (A)   Appointment and continued employment in the classified service
shall be contingent upon the candidate or incumbent satisfactorily passing a
physical examination to assure that physical standards prescribed for the
different classes of positions established by the Personnel Board are met.
All required examinations shall be paid for by the town and shall be given by
physicians designated by the town. The results of the examination will be
evaluated against the criteria of whether the person could perform the
particular required duties without hazard to himself or others, to the full
extent permitted by law.



   (B)   Employees may be required to pass a physical examination at
any time to ensure their continued fitness for duty, to the full extent
permitted by law.



   (C)   Pre-employment physical examinations and psychological
examinations shall be passed prior to selection for all positions in the Fire
Department and Police Department or any other position requiring a high
degree of physical fitness. Police psychological examinations shall be
administrated in accordance with R.I. Gen. Laws § 42-28.3-1. Fire Department
physical exams shall be administrated in accordance with National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) 1582 Standard on Comprehensive Occupational
Medical Program for Fire Department (most current edition).



   (D)   Pre-employment physical examination for other types of
positions should be passed prior to actual employment; however, these
examinations may be delayed until after the appointment; provided, that the
employment offer and appointment is made subject to satisfactorily passing
the prescribed physical examination.



(‘73 Code, §§ 7-11, 7-26) (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. passed 9-19-05;
Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.027  PLACEMENT ON ELIGIBLE LISTS.



   (A)   In order of priority, eligible lists shall be reemployment,
promotion and original appointment.



   (B)   Permanent employees with a satisfactory employment record who
have been separated from the service through no fault or action of their own
shall be placed on an appropriate reemployment list prior to any appointment
by examination.



   (C)   Employees who are still serving their probation and whose
service has been terminated for lack of work or funds may have their names
restored to the eligibility list on which they were first rated by the
Personnel Board.



   (D)   No name shall remain on an eligible list for a period
exceeding two years from the date on which it was originally established
thereon by the Personnel Board.



(‘73 Code, § 7-9) (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.028  CERTIFICATION OF THOSE HIGHEST ON LISTS.



   (A)   The Personnel Board shall certify to the department head names
of those persons standing highest on the eligibility list.



   (B)   After interview and investigation, the department head shall
make recommendations for appointments from among those certified, and shall
immediately notify the Personnel Board of the person or persons so
recommended.



   (C)   The department head shall file his reasons with the Personnel
Board should the highest ranking eligible fail to be appointed.



('73 Code, § 7-10) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.029  EMPLOYMENT APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for employment shall be accepted at any time. As a result
of a single application, a candidate shall be considered for all classes of
positions in which his principal qualifications might profitably be used.
Each candidate for town employment shall make application on the standard
form prescribed and provided by the Personnel Board. Such information may be
required as is deemed necessary in order to judge the applicant's fitness for
service in the town.



('73 Code, § 7-23)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.030  REFERENCES.



   As part of the pre-employment procedure, former supervisors, employers
(for a reasonable past period) and references provided by candidates on the
standard application form shall be checked as a precaution against obtaining
undesirable employees. Reference checks made by personal or telephone contact
shall be documented, and made part of the applicant's file. These reference
checks shall be completed prior to an offer of employment and the information
be made a part of the application file. All such information is to be handled
as privileged information.



('73 Code, § 7-23)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.031  COMPETITIVE EXAMS, SUBJECT MATTER AND NOTICE.



   (A)   All applicants for positions in the classified service shall
be subject to competitive examination. The examination shall pertain to those
matters which test fairly the capacity and fitness of the candidates to
discharge efficiently the duties of the class for which the examination is
held. Examination may be assembled or unassembled, and may include written,
oral, physical or performance tests, or any combination of these. They may
take into consideration such factors as education, experience, aptitude,
knowledge, character, physical fitness or other qualifications which enter
into the determination of the relative fitness of applicants. 



('73 Code, § 7-24) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



   (B)   The time and place at which each examination for positions in
the classified service is to be held shall be given timely publication in a
newspaper in general circulation in the Newport area.



('73 Code, § 7-23)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.032  EXAM RESULTS.



   (A)   All original entrance and promotional examinations shall be
conducted and graded under the direct and sole supervision of the Personnel
Board. The Board shall maintain an eligibility list of persons successfully
passing the original entrance and promotional examinations, arranged in order
of their final earned rating plus veterans' preference credit.



   (B)   All Middletown residents competing for entry level positions
in the town service shall be granted ten additional points by virtue of their
residency. The ten points are to be added at the end of the personnel board
interview process, prior to the final establishment of the eligibility list.
Proof of residency shall include the following: vehicle registration showing
Middletown address; a current tax bill showing Middletown residence; or any
other documentation demonstrating residency. In order to qualify for resident
status, proof of residency must demonstrate that the applicant has been
living in Middletown for a minimum of five years.



   (C)   In the case of ties in the final rating, names shall be placed
on the list in the order of ratings earned in the part of the examination
given the greatest weight. Any remaining ties shall be broken by arranging
names in the order in which the, applications were received, except that in
promotional lists seniority shall be used for this purpose.



('73 Code, § 7-25)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. passed 3-18-96; Am. Ord.
passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. passed 5-7-07)



§ 37.033  ELIGIBLE LISTS FROM EXAMS; CORRECTION AND DESTRUCTION OF EXAMS.



   (A)   As soon as practical following a competitive examination, not
to exceed 30 days, the Personnel Board  shall establish an eligible list.
Each competitor shall be notified by mail of his relative position on the
eligible list as the result of the examination, or of his failure to obtain a
place on such an employment list. Each person in an examination shall be
entitled to inspect his rating and examination papers, but examination papers
shall not be open to the general public. Such inspection shall be permitted
within 30 days after the eligible list has been established, but only during
regular business hours. An error in the marking of the examination that would
affect the final earned credit, if called to the attention of the Personnel
Board within 30 days after the posting of an employment list resulting from
such examination, shall be corrected by the Personnel Board.



   (B)   The  examination papers  and other work of applicants for
positions, including any correspondence in relation thereto, may be destroyed
upon the expiration of the eligible list or lists resulting from such
examination.



('73 Code, § 7-27)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.034  VETERANS' PREFERENCE IN EXAMS.



   Preference in entrance examinations shall be granted once to qualified
applicants who have served honorably as members of the United States armed
forces during any period of war, armed hostilities or national emergency
declared by the Congress or by the President. To the final earned ratings of
veterans in competitive examinations who receive at least the minimum
required score and at least the minimum required final rating, service
credits of five points will be added and ten points for those with a
disability rating.



('73 Code, § 7-28)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.035  NOTICE OF REJECTION; DESTRUCTION OF APPLICATIONS.



   Whenever the Personnel Board determines that an application shall be
rejected, the applicant shall be notified in writing of such rejection.
Applications, whether accepted or rejected, shall remain on file and shall
not be returned. Applications may be disposed of from time to time upon
determination that they are of no further value to the town, to the extent
permitted by state and federal law.



(‘73 Code, § 7-29)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.036  DISQUALIFICATION OF APPLICANTS.



   The Personnel Board may remove from further consideration at any time
the application of an applicant who:



   (A)   Does not possess the minimum qualifications required for any
acceptable position.



   (B)   Has established an unsatisfactory employment or personal
record as evidenced by reference checks of such a nature as to demonstrate
unsuitability for employment.



   (C)   Has made false statement of any material fact or practiced
deception in his application.



   (D)   Is afflicted with any mental or physical disqualifying disease
or defect that would prevent satisfactory performance of duties, with or
without a reasonable accommodation.



   (E)   Is believed to be addicted to the habitual excessive use of
drugs or intoxicants.



   (F)   Has been convicted of crime other than minor traffic
violations.



   (G)   Does not reply to a mail inquiry within 10 days or does not
return a telephone inquiry or electronic transmission within two days.



   (H)   Fails to accept appointment within two days or to report for
duty within a reasonable time prescribed in the offer.



   (I)   Fails to file by the announced closing date for receiving
applications unless prior to such date an extension has been publicly
announced.



(‘73 Code, § 7-30)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.037  LATERAL RECRUITMENT, APPOINTMENT OF POLICE AND FIRE.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude the practice of
lateral recruitment. Police and fire personnel not above the grade of patrol
officer or firefighter, who have had previous training and have exemplary
records in any state, federal, or municipal department, may be appointed on
the recommendation of the respective chiefs with the approval of the
Personnel Committee and Town Administrator, provided that lateral hires shall
not be permitted in the Police and Fire Departments if such prior service can
be credited or partially credited as service for purposes of pension or other
benefits, pursuant to the terms of any pension or benefits plan document or
any labor contract, except as otherwise required by law.



(‘73 Code, § 7-31)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. passed 2-5-90; Am.
Ord. passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



COMPREHENSIVE PAY PLAN



§ 37.045  FACTORS GOVERNING PLAN, RATES.



   In preparing and maintaining the comprehensive pay plan, consideration
shall be given to the duties and responsibilities of the various types of
positions, rates paid for comparable services in public and private
employment, experience in recruiting for such positions, and availability of
funds. It shall include a minimum rate, a maximum rate, and intermediate
rates as are deemed necessary for each class.



('73 Code, § 7-17)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.046  PAY AS FULL COMPENSATION; FRINGE BENEFITS; LESS THAN FULL-TIME
WORK.



   (A)   The compensation of officers and employees as fixed or
otherwise provided for by this chapter shall be in full payment for all
official services of such officers or employees, and shall be in lieu of any
and all fees, commissions, and other compensation which may be receivable by
such officers or employees in performance of the duties of their offices;
such fees, commissions and compensation shall belong to the town, be
collected and accounted for by such officers, and be paid over to the town.



   (B)   Division (A) shall not be construed to preclude the granting
of fringe benefits such as overtime pay, vacations, retirement, insurance,
etc.



   (C)   The rates of pay prescribed are for full-time employment.
Compensation for a work week of less than the full-time schedule shall be in
proportion to the time actually worked, except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter.



('73 Code, § 7-18)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.047  OVERTIME COMPENSATION.



   The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) (29 U.S.C. § 207) and the Code of
Federal Regulations,



Title 29, will be the controlling law with respect to determining minimum
overtime compensation for town employees.



(Ord. passed 5-21-86; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.048  STARTING RATE OF PAY.



   (A)   Minimum Step Rate. The minimum step rate of pay for a class
shall normally be offered for recruitment purposes and shall normally be paid
upon appointment to the class. In no event shall an employee be paid at a
rate less than the minimum nor more than the maximum for his class.



   (B)   Appointment Above Minimum Step Rate. Appointment above the
minimum step rate may be made when the Town Administrator determines that it
is necessary and in the best interests of the town. Approval will be based on
the following considerations:



      (1)   The qualifications of the applicant are outstanding in
relation to those of competing applicants, his qualifications are
substantially in excess of the requirements for the class, and he declines
consideration for employment at the minimum rate.



      (2)   There is a shortage of qualified applicants available at
the minimum of the range.



('73 Code, § 7-19)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.049  PAY INCREASES.



   Employee salary increases to the next higher salary step shall be made
automatically on the anniversary of the employee's entrance to his present
grade, as provided by the schedule of pay rates, provided that the employee's
service has been satisfactory. If such service has not been satisfactory, the
employee should be demoted or released, not simply maintained at his current
pay scale.



('73 Code, § 7-20)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.050  EXCEPTIONAL SERVICE INCREASE.



   Any employee who performs the duties and responsibilities of his
position in an outstanding manner and deserves recognition for unusual acts
of value to the town, beyond those regularly related to the employee's work,
may be considered for an increase for exceptional service in an amount of 5
percent of his base pay, and this increment may be authorized for periods of
three, six or nine months. This increase must be approved by the Council upon
the recommendation of the Town Administrator. The maximum period of
authorization is for nine months. The recommendation shall be detailed
showing precise justification and use of strict criteria.



('73 Code, § 7-21)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE



§ 37.060  GRIEVANCE POLICY.



   The most effective accomplishment of the work of the town requires
prompt consideration and equitable adjustment of employee grievances. It is
the desire of the town to adjust grievances informally, and both supervisors
and employees are expected to make every effort to resolve problems as they
arise. However, it is recognized that there will be occasional grievances
which will be resolved only after a formal appeal and review. Accordingly,
the following procedure is established to insure fair and impartial review.



('73 Code, § 7-32)



§ 37.061  PROCESSING OF GRIEVANCE TO DEPARTMENT OR DIVISION HEAD.



   (A)   Any employee in the classified service who feels aggrieved,
and his/her representative, if any, shall, within seven calendar days of the
act or omission grieved, take up his/her grievance with his/her immediate
supervisor who will take the necessary steps to adjust the complaint if it is
in his power to do so.



   (B)   If the immediate supervisor is unable or unwilling to adjust
the grievance, the grievance should be put into writing and sent to his/her
division or department head within five calendar days after discussing the
grievance with his/her supervisor. The department or division head will
discuss the grievance with the employee and his representative, if any, and
attempt to adjust the problem if it is within his/her power to do so. The
division or department head will reduce his/her findings in the case to
writing within two days and advise the employee.



(‘73 Code, § 7-33)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.062  APPEAL TO TOWN ADMINISTRATOR AND REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   If an employee still feels aggrieved, after a finding made by
his/her department or division head, he/she or his/her representative, if
any, may apply in writing to the Town Administrator, stating the reasons for
his/her grievance, including all pertinent facts of the case within seven
calendar days after receiving the department or division head's findings.
Within ten days after receiving the complaint, the Town Administrator shall
call a meeting which shall include the department head, the complainant and
representatives of his/her own choosing, and any other person involved in the
complaint. The Town Administrator shall preside at the meeting and hear the
entire case to obtain all the facts.



   (B)   The Town Administrator shall make a complete report of his
findings and render a decision to the employee and department head in
writing. Within ten days of notification of such action the employee may
appeal to the Personnel Review Board.  The action of the Personnel Review
Board shall be final and binding.



(‘73 Code, § 7-34)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



LEAVE AND HOLIDAYS



§ 37.070  LEAVE DEFINED.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the term LEAVE shall mean any
authorized absence during regularly scheduled work hours that is approved by
proper authority. Leave may be authorized with or without pay.  Absence
without leave is considered unauthorized absence.



('73 Code, § 7-35)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.071  HOW AND BY WHOM GRANTED.



   Leave shall be granted in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the work requirements of the departments and, whenever possible, the personal
wishes of the employees. The Town Administrator may delegate the authority to
approve leave to department heads, who shall not have the power of
redelegation.



('73 Code, § 7-36)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.072  TYPES OF LEAVE.



   The following types of leave, and no other, are officially established:



   Annual leave.



   Sick leave.



   Leave for injury in line of duty.



   Compensatory leave.



   Military leave.



   Leave without pay.



   Holiday leave.



   Other absences.



('73 Code, § 7-37)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.073  LEAVE RECORDS.



   The heads of departments shall be responsible for the maintenance of
accurate leave records.  Such records shall be kept on forms prescribed by
the Town Administrator, who may periodically inspect them to insure adherence
to the provisions of these rules.



('73 Code, § 7-38)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.074  LEAVE POLICY.



   (A)   It is the policy of the town to promote employees's
efficiency, health and morale through periodic interruption from their
duties. Leave should be scheduled with due consideration to the needs of the
activity, but supervisors should avoid conveying the impression that the
non-use of annual leave is in itself desirable or commendable.



   (B)   A liberal leave policy may be maintained in circumstances such
as, but not necessarily limited to, the following:



      (1)   Religious observances, in the case of which activities
can usually find means whereby the needs of the service and the sincere
religious scruples of employees can both be satisfied. Absence on Holy Days
should be charged to annual leave.



      (2)   Illness in the employee's immediate family where the
employee's care and attendance is required but where the illness is not of a
nature to permit the use of sick leave.



('73 Code, § 7-39) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.075  ANNUAL LEAVE ACCRUAL.



   Employees shall accrue and be credited with annual leave as follows
(unless set forth in collective bargaining agreements):



   (A)   Full-time employees.  An employee must have been employed for
a continuous period of 30 days, without a break in service of one or more
workdays, before he is entitled to use annual leave. Annual leave shall
accrue as follows:



      (1)   1 through 10 years of service - 112 working hours.



      (2)   After 10 years of service - 168 working hours.



      (3)   After 20 years of service - 224 working hours.



      (4)   Employees are entitled to accumulate annual leave until
it totals not to exceed 240 working hours.



   (B)   For the purpose of charging annual leave, all work-day shifts
shall be assumed to be an eight hour shift, except for employees assigned
regularly to longer shifts.



(‘73 Code, § 7-40)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.076  ANNUAL LEAVE APPROVAL; SEPARATION.



   (A)   Requests for annual leave shall normally be submitted in
advance of the proposed absence. Approvals shall be determined consistent
with the desires of the employee and the work requirements of the town;
provided, that annual leave granted shall not exceed the total amount
credited to an employee at the start of the leave period.



   (B)   Upon separation, an employee shall be paid for the unused
portion of his accrued annual leave.



('73 Code, § 7-41)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.077  WHEN SICK LEAVE AUTHORIZED.



   Sick leave shall be granted to employees:



   (A)   When they are incapacitated for the performance of their
duties by sickness, injury, or confinement, or for medical, dental, or
optical examination or treatment.



   (B)   When a member of the immediate family of the employee is
afflicted with a contagious disease requiring isolation, quarantine, or
restriction of movement for a particular period and requires the care and
attendance of the employee.



   (C)   When, through exposure to contagious disease, the presence of
the employee at his post of duty would jeopardize the health of others.



('73 Code, § 7-42) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.078  ACCRUAL OF SICK LEAVE.



   Employees shall accrue and be credited with sick leave as follows:



   (A)   Full-time employees.  An employee must have been employed for
a continuous period of 30 days, without a break in service of one or more
workdays, before he is entitled to use sick leave.



          (1)   Full-time employees accrue sick leave on the basis
of two hours for each weekly pay period. There is a limit of 100 days on the
accumulation of sick leave.



      (2)   For the purpose of charging sick leave, all work-day
shifts shall be assumed to be an eight hour shift, except for employees
assigned regularly to longer shifts.



   (B)   Part-time employees. Part-time employees who have a regularly
scheduled tour of duty on one or more work days during each administrative
work week in the weekly pay period will be credited with one hour of sick
leave for each 20 hours in a pay status.



(‘73 Code, § 7-43)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.079  PROVISIONS GOVERNING GRANT OF SICK LEAVE.



   Sick leave with pay may be granted to regular employees in accordance
with the following provisions:



   (A)   Sick leave shall not normally exceed the total amount credited
to an employee at the time of his absence.



   (B)   After sick leave credits have been used, absences due to
illness may be charged to annual leave, or leave without pay.



   (C)   Sick leave shall not be debited for absence on observed
holidays or other non-work days.



('73 code, § 7-45)



§ 37.080  ADVANCE SICK LEAVE.



   (A)   Advance sick leave, not to exceed four work-weeks, may be
granted by the Town Administrator to regular employees after the first six
months of employment in cases of serious disability or ailments when it is to
the advantage of the town to do so. This authority may not be redelegated.



   (B)   Advance sick leave may be granted irrespective of whether the
employee has annual leave to his credit.



   (C)   Requests for advance sick leave shall be submitted in writing
stating the circumstances and the need for such leave, the time and date when
the accrued sick leave will be exhausted, the amount of advance sick leave
requested, and the date to which such leave will extend.



   (D)   Requests for advance sick leave shall be evaluated against the
following considerations:



      (1)   The employee's past leave record.



      (2)   The nature, seriousness and extent of illness or
disability.



      (3)   The probability of return to duty and prospect for
continued employment.



      (4)   The probability of the employee liquidating the leave to
be advanced.



('73 Code, § 7-45)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.081  SEPARATION FROM SERVICE AND SICK LEAVE.



   (A)   An individual who, upon separation from town employment, is
indebted for advance sick leave shall reimburse the town, or appropriate
deductions shall be made from his salary and any leave due him. This
requirement may be waived in cases of separation for a serious illness (does
not include maternity situations) or disability which is confirmed by the
statement of a licensed physician.



   (B)   Sick leave credits shall not be paid to an employee upon
separation. However, a regular employee who is laid off or resigns for
maternity reasons and returns to town employment within one year from the
date of separation shall have her former unused sick leave credits restored.



('73 Code, § 7-46)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.082  REPORTING AND INVESTIGATING SICKNESS.



      Reporting and investigating sickness, together with other
miscellaneous factors relative to sick leave, shall be handled as follows:



   (A)   Reporting of Sickness. Employees, except Police and Fire
employees, who are absent from duty for reasons which entitle them to sick
leave shall insure that their respective supervisors are notified within two
hours after their usual reporting time, if physically able to do so. Upon
return to work the employee shall immediately submit to his supervisor an
authorization-for-leave form. Police and fire employees shall notify their
respective supervisors before their scheduled duty.



   (B)   Medical Certificate. A medical statement may be required for
any absence chargeable to sick leave; such statement shall normally be
required for sick leave in excess of five workdays.



('73 Code, § 7-47) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.083  MILITARY DUTY DEFINED.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the term MILITARY DUTY shall mean
training and service performed by an inductee, enlistee or reservist, or any
entrant into a component of the armed forces of the United States for a
temporary period; and time spent in reporting for and returning from such
training and service, or if a rejection occurs, to and from the place or
reporting therefor. It also includes active duty training as a reservist in
the armed forces of the United States or as a member of the National Guard of
the United States where the call is for training only.



('73 Code, § 7-48)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.084  MILITARY LEAVE WITHOUT LOSS OF PAY.



   A regular employee who has completed his probationary period and who is
a member of any reserve component of the United States armed forces will be
allowed leave of absence for required military training or duty without loss
of pay for a period not exceeding 15 working days during any one calendar
year. In the event that the time of such training is optional. the time shall
be designated at the discretion of the town. By loss of pay it is meant that
the town shall make up the difference, if any, of the pay received from
military training and the employees normal pay salary.



('73 Code, § 7-49) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.085  MILITARY LEAVE WITH, WITHOUT PAY.



   (A)   Except as provided in section § 37.084, any regular employee
who has completed his probationary period and who leaves the town service for
military duty shall be placed on military leave without pay, such leave to
extend through a date 40 days after his release, or hospitalization
continuing after release for not more than one year.



   (B)   Also, a regular employee who has completed his probationary
period shall be granted a leave of absence for the purpose of being inducted
or otherwise entering military duty. If not accepted for such duty, the
employee shall be reinstated in his position without loss of seniority or
status, or reduction in his rate of pay. During such period the employee
shall for all purposes be considered to have rendered service and to have
been compensated therefor at his regular rate of pay.



   (C)   A regular employee who leaves the service of the town directly
for military leave without pay may elect to be paid for any accrued annual,
personal or compensatory leave as he may be entitled to if he were actually
separating from the town service. His decision shall be noted on the
personnel action form effecting the leave. If the employee elects not to be
paid for such leave, the accrued leave credits shall be reinstated upon
return of the employee.



('73 Code, § 7-50) (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.086  RESTORATION UPON TERMINATION OF LEAVE.



   (A)   A town employee returning from military leave without pay
shall be entitled to restoration to a position in the classified service of
the town, provided that he makes application within forty days after the date
of his release from duty or hospitalization continuing after release for not
more than one year, that his discharge is under honorable conditions, and
that he is physically and mentally capable of performing the duties of the
position involved.



   (B)   Any such returning employee shall normally be restored to the
position which he vacated upon entering the military service. In the event
that the vacated position no longer exists at the time he qualifies for
return to work, such person shall be entitled to be reemployed in another
existing position of the same class specification; provided, that such
reemployment does not necessitate the laying off of another person with
greater seniority as of the date the returning employee was placed upon
military leave without pay.



('73 Code, § 7-51)



§ 37.087  OTHER LEAVE WITHOUT PAY.



   The Town Administrator may grant a regular employee leave without pay
for a period not to exceed one year, subject to the following conditions:



   (A)   Leave without pay may be granted only when it is in the
interests of the town to do so. The needs of the employee shall be considered
when he has shown by his record to be or more than average value to the town
and when it is desirable to return the employee even at some sacrifice.



   (B)   During an employee's approved leave of absence, his position
may be filled by temporary appointment, a temporary promotion, or detail of
another employee. At the expiration of a leave without pay, the employee has
the right to and shall be reinstated in the position he vacated if the
position still exists; or, if not, to any other vacant position in the same
class. If this is not possible, he shall be transferred to another position
for which he qualifies and a vacancy exists or normal lay-off procedures
shall be used to assign the employee to a position, or to determine which
employee shall be separated.



   (C)   Approved leave without pay shall not constitute a break ln
service.



   (D)   Failure on the part of the employee to report promptly at the
expiration of a leave without pay may be cause for dismissal.



('73 Code, § 7-52)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.088  BEREAVEMENT PAY.



   Bereavement leave without loss of pay, for death in the immediate
family, up to three working days may be granted at the discretion of the
department head to any full-time employee. "Immediate family" is defined as
father, mother, sister, brother or children of the employee, unless set forth
otherwise by a collective bargaining agreement.



('73 Code, § 7-53)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.089  DESIGNATED HOLIDAYS.



   The following holidays are observed by the town and shall be granted to
all employees without charge to leave; to regular employees with pay; and to
temporary employees without pay, unless such temporary employees are required
to be on scheduled duty, unless set forth otherwise in a collective
bargaining agreement :



      New Year's Day (January 1)



      Washington's Birthday (Third Monday in February)



      Memorial Day (Last Monday in May)



      Independence Day (July 4)



      Victory Day (August 14)



      Labor Day (First Monday in September)



      Columbus Day (Second Monday in October)



      Veterans Day (Fourth Monday in October)



      Thanksgiving Day (Fourth Thursday in November)



      Christmas Day (December 25)



('73 Code, § 7-54)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70)



§ 37.090  PROCEDURE WHEN HOLIDAY FALLS ON NON-WORK DAY.



   When a holiday falls on one of the employee's regularly scheduled
workdays in his basic workweek, that workday is the employee's holiday. When
a holiday falls on a day outside the employee's basic workweek, the workday
in the employee's basic workweek which is considered to be the employee's
holiday shall be determined as follows: When a holiday falls on Sunday, the
employee's holiday is Monday, and when a holiday falls on Saturday, the
employee's holiday is Friday.



('73 Code, § 7-55)



SEPARATION AND RETIREMENT



§ 37.100 SEPARATION FROM CLASSIFIED SERVICE.



   (A)   Types of separation. All separations of employees from
positions in the classified service shall be designated as one of the
following types and accomplished in the manner indicated: Resignation;
lay-off; dismissal; removal; disability; death; retirement.



   (B)   Accounting for town property; recovery of shortages. At the
time of separation and prior to final payment all records, assets or other
items of town property in the employee's custody shall be transferred to the
Town Administrator and a certification to this effect shall be executed by
the departing employee. Any amount due because of a shortage in the above
shall be withheld from the employee's final compensation or collected through
other appropriate action.



   (C)   Final payment of salary. Employees who separate shall receive
payment for all earned salary, all compensatory time due and earned annual
leave, subject to deduction for any indebtedness due the town and sick leave
advanced prior to accrual unless the separation is for disability.



   (D)   Separation for pregnancy. Separation because of pregnancy
shall be considered a resignation, and shall not be considered for disability.



   (E)   Resignation. An employee may resign by submitting in writing
the reasons therefor and the effective date to the Town Administrator as far
in advance as possible, but a minimum of two weeks’ notice is desired.
Failure to comply with this requirement may be cause for denying future
employment with the town.



(‘73 Code, § 7-12)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.101  PENSION PLAN ADOPTED.



   (A)   The plan for retirement benefits to be paid to employees of
the town hired prior to January 1, 1998 is established and embodied in a
document submitted by the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company, titled
"Deposit Administration Group Annuity Contract, No. 795GAC," including all
riders, schedules, certificates, and other instruments thereunto
appertaining, which has been approved by the insurance department of the
state and executed by the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company and
which is now and shall remain on file in the office of the Town Clerk, except
as may be negotiated by the town with any collective bargaining unit.



   (B)   The plan for retirement benefits to be paid to employees of
the town hired after January 1, 1998 is established as the Rhode Island
Municipal Employees Retirement System, except as may be negotiated by the
town with any collective bargaining unit.



   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Town
Council from implementing a retirement program other than the John Hancock
plan, described in § 37.101(A) above or the Rhode Island Public Employees
Retirement System referenced in § 37.101(B) above.



('73 Code, § 7-57)  (Ord. passed 7-1-63; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-98)



§ 37.102  PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR COVERAGE.



   All full-time non-elected officers and employees of the town, together
with the Town Clerk and the Tax Assessor who have completed at least ten
months of service in their employment, and will be able to complete ten years
service prior to normal retirement date, but excluding all certified School
Department personnel, shall be eligible for coverage under the retirement
income or pension plan for town officers and employees.



('73 Code, § 7-58)  (Ord. passed 7-1-63)



§ 37.103  CONTRIBUTIONS TO COSTS OF PLAN.



   (A)   Contributions to the costs of retirement plans for town
employees shall be required of all participating non-unionized employees of
the town and shall be in an amount equal to that which is negotiated with
unionized employees which they supervise or with whom they are affiliated. 
The required contributions shall be based upon gross annual earnings of the
employee and shall be deducted each pay period. The Finance Director is
hereby authorized to collect and directed to pay to the appropriate carrier
such contributions.



   (B)   Contributions to the costs of the retirement plans for town
employees shall be required of all participating unionized employees of the
town and shall be in an amount equal to that which is negotiated as part of
the collective bargaining agreement under which each employee is covered. 
The required contributions shall be based upon the gross annual earnings of
the employee and shall be deducted each pay period. The Finance Director is
hereby authorized and directed to collect and pay to the appropriate carrier
such contributions. The amount contributed by employee shall be no less than
the amount prescribed by the plan documents or statute.



   (C)   The remainder of the costs of the retirement plan shall be
contributed by the town and paid to the appropriate carrier as provided in
the contract.



(‘73 Code, § 7-59)  (Ord. passed 7-1-63; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord.
2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



§ 37.104  NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE.



   (A)   Normal retirement age for all town officers and employees,
except for those officers or employees covered by a collective bargaining
contract and as hereinafter set forth, shall be and hereby is defined as the
first day of the month next following the month in which the officer or
employee attains the age of 65. An officer or employee may elect to retire at
normal retirement age, or may, at the election of the said officer or
employee, continue employment until the age of seventy is attained, but
shall, in any event, retire on the first day of the month next following the
month in which the officer or employee attains the age of 70.



   (B)   Normal retirement age for town officers and employees whose
terms of employment are subject to a collective bargaining contract with the
town (union employees) or whose job description contain any physical
requirements or fitness standards (Bona Fide Occupational Qualification
employees - BFOQ employees) and are not otherwise union employees, shall be
and hereby is defined as follows:



      (1)   For union employees: Shall be defined in the collective
bargaining contract with the town which governs the terms of their
employment; and



      (2)   For BFOQ employees: Shall be based upon the employees'
ability to meet the physical standards required for their employment, as may
be adopted by the Council from time to time.



('73 Code, § 7-60) (Ord. passed 7-1-83)



§ 37.105  PENSION BENEFITS.



   (A)   Pension benefits shall accrue and be paid upon the terms and
conditions and in accordance with the Group Annuity Contract # 795GAC, as
amended, between the town and the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company
for employees enrolled in that plan.



   (B)   Armed Service Credit.



      (1)   Any active municipal employee who served  for  a 
period  of  six months  or  more  of continuous active duty in the armed
service of the United States or in the Merchant Marine Service of the United
States as defined in Section 2 of Chapter 1721 of the Rhode Island Public
Laws, 1946, may purchase credit for such service up to a maximum of four
years: provided, that any member who served at least six months or more in
any one year shall be allowed to purchase one year for such service and any
member who has served a fraction of less than six months in his total service
shall be allowed to purchase six months' credit for such service.



      (2)   The cost to purchase these credits shall be ten percent
of the member's first years' earnings as a municipal employee multiplied by
the number of years and fraction thereof of such armed service up to a
maximum of four years.



      (3)   Municipal employees on active service with the town must
purchase this credit not later than July 18, 1985. Employees hired after July
18. 1984, shall have one year from the date of employment to purchase service
credits.



      (4)   Purchase of service credits in the town pension system
will not be used to reduce requirements for active service with the town
prescribed under the presently established normal retirement system or by
collective bargaining agreements.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall apply only to employees
who are members of the John Hancock Group Annuity Contract #795GAC, as
amended.



(‘73 Code, § 7-61)  (Ord. passed 7-1-83; Am. Ord. passed 7-18-84; Am.
Ord. 2011-4, passed 4-4-11)



CHAPTER 38:  MUNICIPAL COURT



Section



   38.01   Established



   38.02   Appointment, term, qualifications of judge of the municipal
court



   38.03   Witnesses; attendance; subpoenas



   38.04   Municipal court clerk; appointment and duties



   38.05   Seal; oaths



   38.06   Sessions; time; place



   38.07   Jurisdiction



   38.08   Fines; penalties; imprisonment



   38.09   Complaints; warrants; writs



   38.10   Costs



   38.11   Compensation of municipal court judge and municipal court
clerk



   38.12   Acting judge; acting clerk



   38.13   Failure to appear



§ 38.01  ESTABLISHED.



   Pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-2-37, there is established a Municipal
Court in the town.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)



§ 38.02  APPOINTMENT, TERM, QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGE OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT.



   (A)   The court shall be composed of one judge appointed by the Town
Council.  The judge shall serve until his or her successor shall be duly
appointed as aforesaid.



   (B)   Except for the initial appointment, the term of the
appointment for judge shall be concurrent with the term of the Town
Council.  The initial term of appointment shall begin when the Town Council
appoints the first judge, and the appointment shall be for a term to run
concurrent with the term of the Town Council making the appointment.



   (C)   The judge shall be a lawyer admitted to practice before the
Supreme Court of the state, in good standing, and shall have not less than
five years experience in the active practice of law.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)



§ 38.03  WITNESSES; ATTENDANCE; SUBPOENAS.



   The court shall have the power to issue writs or summonses for
witnesses, and compel their attendance, and to punish for contempt by fine or
imprisonment.  The court may also issue writs of habeas corpus and
testificandum, upon continuance of any complaint or proceeding before it, may
take recognizance to the state, with surety or sureties in such sum as the
court shall deem proper, with the condition to appear before the court and
make further answer to such complaint or proceeding, and in the meantime to
keep the peace, and, in want thereof, may commit the same to the state adult
correctional institutions until such recognizance shall be given, or the
parties lawfully discharged therefrom.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)



§ 38.04  MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Town Council shall appoint a clerk of the court.



   (B)   The clerk of the court shall keep a regular docket of all
cases disposed of; shall record the judgments, orders, and sentences of the
court; and shall furnish certified copies thereof when required, for which
copies the clerk shall charge the same fees as are by law allowed to clerks
of the superior court.  The clerk shall keep the office open to the public
during such hours as the court shall determine and shall also serve as
magistrate and bail commissioner, setting bail for defendant until the court
is in session.



   (C)   Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the police department
or the town administration from providing the secretarial and administrative
assistance necessary for the court to perform its duties and responsibilities.



   (D)   Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Town Clerk from
also becoming the Municipal Court clerk.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)



§ 38.05  SEAL; OATHS.



   (A)   The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall contain such
words and device as the Town Council shall adopt and approve.



   (B)   The judge and the Municipal Court clerk shall have the power
to administer oaths and affirmations.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)



§ 38.06  SESSIONS; TIME; PLACE.



   (A)   The Municipal Court shall be considered to be in session at
all times, and at such place or places in the town as the court, or judge
holding same, shall appoint.



   (B)   In all cases involving motor vehicle violations, the court
shall operate under the Rules of Procedure of the Rhode Island Administrative
Adjudication Court, as amended. In all other cases, the court shall operate
under the Rhode Island District Court rules of Criminal Procedure, as
amended; provided however, that a case may be charged by complaint, or by
summons or citation issued by an authorized officer or official of the town.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94; Am. Ord. passed 3-6-95)



§ 38.07  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   Subject to division (B) of this section, the Town Council
hereby confers on the Municipal Court original jurisdiction to hear and
determine causes involving violation of:



      (1)   Any ordinance of the town;



      (2)   Minimum housing ordinances, including any violation of
R.I. Gen. Laws Title 45, Ch. 24.3, the state Housing, Maintenance, and
Occupancy code.



      (3)   Any other jurisdiction conferred by state law.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section applies, provided, however, that:



      (1)   Any defendant found guilty of any offense, excluding
violations of minimum housing ordinances, or R.I. Gen. Laws Ch. 45-24.3, may
within seven days of such conviction, file an appeal from the conviction to
the Superior Court and be entitled in the latter court to a trial de novo; and



      (2)   Any defendant found guilty of any violation of a minimum
housing ordinance, or of R.I. Gen. Laws Ch. 45-24.3, within seven days of
such conviction, file an appeal from the conviction to the First Division of
the District Court and be entitled to a trial de novo in accordance with R.I.
Gen. Laws §§ 8-8-3 (a)(4) and 8-8-3.2; and



      (3)   Any defendant found guilty of an offense over which the
Municipal Court has jurisdiction pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 8-18-3 may
file an appeal as set forth in R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 8-18-9 and 31-43-4.



   (C)   With respect to violations of municipal ordinances dealing
with minimum housing, or R.I. Gen. Laws Ch. 45-24.3, the Town Council hereby
confers upon the Municipal Court, in furtherance of the aforementioned
jurisdiction, the power to proceed, according to equity:



      (1)   To restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate, or correct a
violation;



      (2)   To order the repair, vacating, or demolition of any
dwelling existing in violation; or



      (3)   To otherwise compel compliance with all provisions of
ordinances and statutes.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)



§ 38.08  FINES; PENALTIES; IMPRISONMENT.



   The Municipal Court may impose a sentence not to exceed 30 days in jail
and impose a fine not in excess of $500, or both, and shall be empowered to
punish persons for contempt.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)



§ 38.09  COMPLAINTS; WARRANTS; WRITS.



   It shall be lawful for the judge of the court to prescribe and vary the
form of all complaints, warrants, writs, or other process as to make the same
consistent with the organization, style, and jurisdiction of the court; and
such complaints, warrants, writs, and other process shall have the same
effect, validity, and extent, and be served, obeyed, enforced, and returned,
in the same manner and by the same officers, as if issued from the district
courts; and they may be served by any constables of the town who are
authorized to serve process in civil or criminal cases.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)



§ 38.10  COSTS.



   (A)   In all cases involving offenses over which the Municipal Court
has jurisdiction pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 8-18-3, court costs shall be
assessed as set forth in R.I. Gen. Laws § 8-18-4. In all other cases, costs
shall be $43.50 for each offense charged. The payment of such costs shall be
a part of the sentence.



   (B)   All payments shall be deposited in the general treasury of the
town.



   (C)   The costs incurred by the town in securing a policeman's
presence, upon the request of the defendant, shall be charged to the
defendant in the event he or she should fail to appear.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94; Am. Ord. passed 3-6-95)



§ 38.11  COMPENSATION OF MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE AND MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK.



   (A)   The compensation of the judge of the Municipal Court shall be
set by the Town Council by resolution.



   (B)   The compensation of the clerk of the Municipal Court shall be
set by the Town Council by resolution.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)



§ 38.12  ACTING JUDGE; ACTING CLERK.



   (A)   In cases of sickness, absence, or other disability or
ineligibility of the Municipal Court judge or clerk which shall be less than
14 days, the judge may appoint an acting judge, and the clerk may appoint an
acting clerk, at the same compensation, or at such salary as the Town Council
may determine, for the term of such sickness, absence, disability, or
ineligibility of the judge or clerk.  An acting Municipal Court judge or
acting Municipal Court clerk shall perform all duties of the Municipal Court
judge or Municipal Court clerk, respectively.



   (B)   In case of a prolonged sickness, absence, or other disability
or ineligibility of the Municipal Court judge or the Municipal Court clerk
that shall be in excess of 14 days, the Town Council may, by resolution,
appoint an acting Municipal Court judge or an acting Municipal Court clerk,
respectively, for the term of such sickness, absence, disability, or
ineligibility of the  Municipal Court judge or Municipal Court clerk,
respectively, at the same compensation, or at such salary as the Town Council
may determine.  An acting Municipal Court judge or acting Municipal Court
clerk shall perform all duties of the Municipal Court judge or Municipal
Court clerk, respectively,  and in the  performance of  those duties,
shall have the same effect as if performed by the Municipal Court judge or
Municipal Court clerk, respectively.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)



§ 38.13  FAILURE TO APPEAR.



   Failure to appear in the Municipal Court, upon receipt of a summons or
complaint, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-16-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 38A:  JUVENILE HEARING BOARD



Section



   38A.01   Establishment



   38A.02   Membership



   38A.03   Referral to Juvenile Hearing Board



   38A.04   Duties of the Board



   38A.05   Quorum; rules



§ 38A.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws Ch. 45-2, a juvenile hearing board shall be
established in the town for the purpose of hearing all cases referred to it
by the juvenile division of the Police Department or the Chief of Police, or
his designee, with respect to persons under the age of 18 who are charged
with violating the criminal laws of the state or the town.  The board shall
be called the Middletown Juvenile Hearing Board.



(Ord. passed 9-18-00)



§ 38A.02  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The membership of the Middletown Juvenile Hearing Board (the
Board) shall consist of five members who shall be qualified electors of the
town.  In addition, there may be two auxiliary members who serve as active
members in the event a regular member or members are unable to serve at any
hearing or proceeding.



   (B)   The members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Town
Council.



   (C)   The term of appointment shall be for three years except that
the initial appointments may be for a term of less than three years in order
to stagger the appointments.



   (D)   Appointed members of the Board shall be eligible to be
reappointed, and upon expiration of their term shall continue to serve until
another member is appointed in their place or until reappointed.



(Ord. passed 9-18-00; Am. Ord. passed 6-2-03; Am. Ord. passed 2-17-09)



§ 38A.03  REFERRAL TO JUVENILE HEARING BOARD.



   (A)   Persons who are under the age of 18 years may be referred to
the Board, which shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the Rhode Island
Family Court, if the alleged act would support a finding of waywardness or
delinquency in the Family Court, including but not limited to violation of
compulsory school attendance laws or if such act constitutes an offense
which, if committed by an adult, would be a misdemeanor, provided however,
that no referral shall be made in the case of any person who:



      (1)   Shall have been twice previously referred to the Board;



      (2)   Shall have been once previously referred to the Board
and refused or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or to have made the
restitution recommended; or



      (3)   Shall at the time of the commission of the offense be
within the custody and control of the Rhode Island Family Court, with the
exception of guardianship proceedings.



   (B)   The juvenile division of the Police Department, the Chief of
Police or his designee may order referral to the Board of any other juvenile
offender where in the opinion of the juvenile division or the Chief of Police
or his designee such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile concerned
or the community at large.



   (C)   No referral to the Board shall be made until such person,
together with his/her legal guardian or legal representative, shall have in
writing waived such person's right to an initial hearing in the Family Court
with respect to the offense charged, has admitted to the offense and has
agreed to abide by the decision of the Board.



(Ord. passed 9-18-00)



§ 38A.04  DUTIES OF THE BOARD.



   (A)   The Board shall be authorized to hear all cases referred to it
by the juvenile division of the Police Department, the Chief of Police, or
his designee and to impose and order sanctions other than incarceration. 
Sanctions may include but are not limited to:



      (1)   Fines up to a maximum of $100 for each offense charged;



      (2)   Community service;



      (3)   Restitution for any injuries or property damage, where
appropriate, resulting from the commission of the offense;



      (4)   Imposition of a reasonable curfew;



      (5)   Denial, suspension or revocation of driving privileges
for a period of up to two years;



      (6)   Appropriate counseling.



   (B)   In any such proceedings the Board shall, prior to the
imposition of any sanctions, request the juvenile offender and his/her
parents, legal guardians and legal representatives to agree to the sanctions
imposed, the amount of restitution ordered and the manner of making
restitution.  In ordering restitution, the Board shall consider the juvenile
offender's ability to pay and the amount of actual damages caused as a result
of the commission of the offenses.



(Ord. passed 9-18-00)



§ 38A.05  QUORUM; RULES.



   (A)   A majority of the Board's members shall constitute a quorum
and a majority of the members present shall be required to take any action. 
Any juvenile offender may be represented by counsel and may present evidence
in his own behalf.



   (B)   The Board shall have power from time to time to adopt and
publish any and all rules and regulations necessary to carry out its
functions under the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   The Board shall give notice of the date, time and place of its
meetings to the juvenile division of the Police Department; the Chief of
Police, or his designee; the juvenile offender and his/her parents; and legal
guardians or legal representative not less than seven days prior to the date
of the hearing.



   (D)   Board proceedings shall be closed to the public and the
provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws Title 46, Ch. 42 shall not apply to such
proceedings.  All records of proceedings, including records concerning the
arrest, apprehension or detention of any juvenile offender shall be withheld
from public inspection, but such records shall be available to the parent,
legal guardian or legal representative of the juvenile for inspection.



(Ord. passed 9-18-00)



CHAPTER 39:  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM



Section



   39.01   Assessed valuation exemption for job creation



   39.02   Qualification for job creation exemption



   39.03   Exemption for renovation of existing facilities and
construction of new facilities



   39.04   Qualification for exemption for renovation of existing
facilities and construction of new facilities



   39.05   Use of exemption



   39.06   Property taxes



   39.07   Regulations



   39.08   Prior programs



§ 39.01  ASSESSED VALUATION EXEMPTION FOR JOB CREATION.



   (A)   The Town Council hereby grants and establishes, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, an exemption from assessed valuation of property
as herein provided:



 


JOB S EXEMPTION



Number of Jobs Established in Middletown
 

Amount of  Exemption

 
Term of Exemption


5 - 9
 
3% of assessed value
 
3 years


10 - 14
 
7% of assessed value
 
3 years


15 - 20
 
11% of assessed value
 
4 years


21 - 25
 
15% of assessed value
 
4 years


26 - 30
 
19% of assessed value
 
5 years



 



 


JOB S EXEMPTION (Cont'd)



Number of Jobs Established in Middletown
 

Amount of  Exemption

 
Term of Exemption


31 - 35
 
23% of assessed value
 
5 years


36 - 40
 
27% of assessed value
 
5 years


41 - 45
 
31% of assessed value
 
5 years


46 - 50
 
35% of assessed value
 
6 years


51+
 
40% of assessed value
 
6 years



 



   (B)   The Job Creation Exemption applies only to  jobs created in
Middletown, annually for office uses (non-retail/commercial, such as
financial/investment operation), industrial or manufacturing uses, and other
uses fitting the definition of a qualified facility in § 39.03(A)(1).



   (C)   In addition to the job creation exemption, additional credits
may be earned by a qualifying business by meeting the following confirmed
thresholds:



      (1)   If 10% or more of the newly created job hires are
Middletown Residents, an additional 3% exemption is earned for the duration
of the exemption period. If 5-14 jobs are created, a minimum of two jobs must
be created for Middletown residents in order to qualify for this additional
exemption.



      (2)   If 10% of the newly created jobs pay $35,000+ annually,
an additional 3% exemption is earned for the duration of the exemption period.



(Ord. passed 3-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-6-03)



§ 39.02  QUALIFICATION JOB CREATION EXEMPTION.



   (A)   In order to qualify for the exemption referred to in § 39.01,
the employer must meet the following criteria:



      (1)   Provide a written detail of the jobs that have been
created (including job description);



      (2)   Allow an audit of employees to confirm employment
levels, residency, wages, etc.;



      (3)   Sign a contract with the town committing to retention of
each job for a duration equal to the time period for which the exemption is
being sought;



      (4)   Have created and implemented new jobs after January 1,
2003;



      (5)   File an annual report no later than March 15 on forms
provided by the Tax Assessor; and



      (6)   File a timely annual account with the Tax Assessor
pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 44-5-15.



   (B)   Should an employer fail to meet their obligations during the
exemption period, the town shall attach the property to recapture tax funds
equal to the reduction that was granted.



   (C)   Should a business/property owner sell the business and/or
property, sublet or reorganize the business, the tax incentives shall be held
in abeyance until agreed by the Town Council that the originally agreed upon
conditions have been met and are transferable.



(Ord. passed 3-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-6-03)



§ 39.03  EXEMPTION FOR RENOVATION OF EXISTING FACILITIES AND CONSTRUCTION
OF NEW FACILITIES.



   The Town Council hereby grants and establishes, subject to the
limitations of this chapter, an exemption from assessed valuation of property
as herein provided:



   (A)   Qualified facility. A QUALIFIED FACILITY shall mean a building
or structure utilized  or proposed to be utilized for office uses,
(non-retail/commercial, such as financial/investment operation), industrial
or manufacturing uses, and other similar businesses that create predominantly
high-wage, skilled and professional jobs.  Specifically excluded are
businesses that create predominantly unskilled, and low-wage jobs, such as
retail businesses.



   (B)   Any new construction of a qualified facility, or any expansion
of an existing qualified facility which increases gross floor area by 50% or
more of any expansion, renovation, retrofit or combination thereof of an
existing qualified facility which results in an increased assessment of not
less than 50%, shall be entitled to an exemption from assessed valuation as
follows:



      (1)   Year 1: 100% of any increase in assessed value
attributable to new construction, expansion, retrofit or renovation.



      (2)   Year 2: 80% of any increase in assessed value
attributable to new construction, expansion, retrofit or renovation.



      (3)   Year 3: 60% of any increase in assessed value
attributable to new construction, expansion, retrofit or renovation.



      (4)   Year 4: 40% of any increase in assessed value
attributable to new construction, expansion, retrofit or renovation.



      (5)   Year 5: 20%of any increase in assessed value
attributable to new construction, expansion, retrofit or renovation.



      (6)   Year 6: 0% of any increase in assessed value
attributable to new construction, expansion, retrofit or renovation.



   (C)   Any project that qualifies for an exemption under this section
as an expansion, renovation, or retrofit of an existing facility, rather than
construction of a new facility, shall be eligible for an additional exemption
of 3% from assessed valuation of any increase in assessed value attributable
to the expansion,  retrofit  or  renovation.  Such  additional exemption
shall be applied in Years 2 - 6 on the above schedule of exemptions.  For
example, a qualified expansion, renovation, or retrofit of an existing
facility would be eligible for an exemption of 83% in Year 2, 63% in Year 3
and so on with such exemption terminating following an exemption of 3% in
Year 6.



(Ord. passed 3-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-6-03)



§ 39.04  QUALIFICATION FOR EXEMPTION FOR RENOVATION OF EXISTING FACILITIES
AND CONSTRUCTION OF NEW FACILITIES.



   Qualification for the exemption referred to in § 39.03 shall be based
upon present or proposed use of the property.  Permitted uses that qualify
for this exemption are office, industrial and manufacturing, and other uses
fitting the definition of a qualified facility in § 39.03(A)(1).  In the
event the property ceases to be used for a qualifying purpose, the tax
exemption shall terminate immediately.  In order to qualify for the
exemption referred to in § 39.03, the employer must file an annual report no
later than March 15 on forms provided by the Tax Assessor and file a timely
annual account with the Tax Assessor pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 44-5-15.



(Ord. passed 3-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-6-03)



§ 39.05  USE OF EXEMPTION.



   (A)   Exemptions granted under this chapter shall be used by the
property owner to reduce the taxable assessed valuation of the property in
question. If a business owner qualifies for an exemption under the terms and
conditions of this chapter, and leases business space from a building owner,
the tax exemption can be utilized in the following manner:



      (1)   Reduction or payment of personal property tax;



      (2)   Reduction or payment of any Middletown real estate, as
assigned by the business owner receiving the exemption; or



      (3)   Assign the exemption for reduction or payment.



   (B)   In the event the applicant shall qualify for an exemption
under §§ 39.01 and 39.03, the Tax Assessor shall first apply the exemption
granted by § 39.03 to the assessed value of the property.  The Tax Assessor
shall then apply the percentage exemption authorized pursuant to § 39.01 to
any remaining portion of the assessed value of the qualified facility.
(Example: If applicant is in third year of program under § 39.03 and has
created 11 jobs, [none Middletown residents; none over $35,000], assessment
would be: assessed value x 40% x 93%.)



(Ord. passed 3-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-6-03)



§ 39.06  PROPERTY TAXES.



   (A)   Final approval of any exemption referred to in this chapter is
contingent upon the applicant producing an affidavit from the Finance
Department that all taxes owed the town are current.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter prevents a business owner from
utilizing any and all state or federal incentives they may be eligible to
receive.



(Ord. passed 3-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-6-03)



§ 39.07  REGULATIONS.



   The Tax Assessor is hereby authorized to promulgate and adopt
regulations for the efficient administration of the economic development
incentive program set forth herein consistent with the purposes hereof and
subject to approval of the Town Administrator.



(Ord. passed 10-6-03)



§ 39.08  PRIOR PROGRAMS.



   Nothing herein shall be deemed to terminate the exemptions received by
any person under any existing economic development incentive program of the
town and said programs shall be deemed to continue until the end of the
exemption period in effect at the time of the applicant's qualification for
said program.



(Ord. passed 10-6-03)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE





         51.   SEWAGE WORKS





         52.   WATER WORKS





         53.   ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION




CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Depositing waste and other substances in public places
prohibited



   50.03   Depositing waste upon property of another without consent
prohibited



   50.04   Duty of drivers to prevent and clean up spillage



   50.05   Commercial vehicles to comply with town rules



   50.06   Haulers



   50.061   Exclusion for commercial haulers



   50.07   Enforcement



Mandatory Recycling



   50.20   Authority



   50.21   Implementation



   50.22   Recycling Coordinator



   50.23   Residential recycling



   50.24   Public events



   50.25   Ownership of recyclables



Pay-As-You-Throw Collection



   50.41   Introduction



   50.42   Application



   50.43   Obligations of PAYT contractor



   50.44   Obligations of residents



   50.45   Containers



 



   50.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BULKY WASTE.  Solid waste larger than two feet by two feet by two feet
or heavier than 75 pounds.  BULKY WASTE includes so-called "white goods,"
such as refrigerators, stoves, and other heavy appliances; sofas and chairs;
mattresses and box springs; carpet no larger than four feet wide and 12 feet
in length and rolled up; and building demolition materials generated by the
resident.  Pieces of wood must be cut to four feet or less and tied into
bundles weighing less than 50 pounds.  Doors to refrigerators and freezers
must be removed.



   COMMERCIAL HAULERS.  Those haulers who do not provide daily
residential pickup of waste or recyclables from residences in the town, but
rather, only provide a commercial service to businesses in the form of
dumpster service, roll-off type service or other similar services.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Any waste defined in the state Hazardous Waste
Management Act, R.I. Gen. Laws § 23-19.1-4, or in regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and as they may be amended.



   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.  Solid waste generated by the residents of
Middletown in the course of their daily living, the disposal of which the
Town Council has undertaken in the discharge of its duties to protect the
health of the municipality.  MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE does not include solid
waste generated by residents of a municipality in the course of their
employment or that generated by any manufacturing or commercial enterprise.



   PAYT CONTRACTOR.  The waste removal company that is under contract
with the town and is responsible for collecting and properly disposing of
various kinds of waste and recyclable materials generated by residents in the
PAYT program.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  All recyclables accepted by the Rhode Island
Resource Recovery Corporation (RIRRC), including paper and cardboard; glass
and plastic bottles, jars and jugs; and tin, aluminum and scrap metal.  This
definition incorporates by reference the complete list of residential
recyclables published by RIRRC in brochures and on its website, www.rirrc.org.



   RESIDENT.  Any person, corporation or other business entity, church,
nonprofit institution, or other organization or group residing or having a
place of business or operation within the corporate limits of the town.



   WASTE. All trash, rubbish, garbage, offal and other refuse or discarded
matter, including cigarette butts; provided, that WASTE shall not include
recognized byproducts of any business or industry having commercial value and
regularly handled in the ordinary course of business.



   YARD WASTE.  Leaves, grass clippings, vine cuttings, and tree
trimmings not greater than two inches in diameter or four feet in length.



('73 Code, § 10-1) (Ord. passed 7-15-57; Am. Ord. passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord.
passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)



§ 50.02  DEPOSITING WASTE AND OTHER SUBSTANCES IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.



    No person shall throw or pour, or in any way deposit, place or cause
to be placed, any filth, offal, brine, dirty water, dirt, rubbish or other
offensive substance of any description, or any other waste whatsoever, or any
sand, gravel, stone, paper, sawdust or shavings, or any refuse, animal,
marine or vegetable matter of any kind, in any street, commonage, beach,
watercourse or other public place in the town.



('73 Code, § 10-2)  (Ord. passed 1-15-17; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord.
passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 50.99



Statutory reference:



   Deposit of debris on Middletown beaches prohibited, see R.I. Gen. Laws
§ 11-44-19



§ 50.03  DEPOSITING UPON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER WITHOUT CONSENT PROHIBITED.



   No person shall deposit waste upon the property of another person, or
in a waste container of another person, without the latter's express
permission to do so; nor shall any person deposit waste upon any vacant lot,
regardless of the ownership of such vacant lot.



('73 Code, § 10-3)  (Ord. passed 7-15-17; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord.
passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  DUTY OF DRIVERS TO PREVENT  AND CLEAN UP SPILLAGE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person driving or in charge of
any vehicle while such vehicle is transporting any quantity of waste or other
cargo to stow and secure such cargo in such manner as to prevent the spilling
or blowing of any portion thereof from the vehicle onto the ground.  If
spillage occurs, the driver or other person in control shall ensure that it
is cleaned up without delay.



   (B)   Every person driving any earth-moving or hauling vehicle shall
remove any loam, gravel, stones or other material which falls or spills from
said vehicle onto any street or highway and which causes or is likely to
cause an obstruction or hazard to vehicular traffic.



('73 Code, § 10-4)  (Ord. passed 5-20-81; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord.
passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  COMMERCIAL VEHICLES TO COMPLY WITH TOWN RULES.



   Commercial vehicles operated upon the streets of this town shall
conform to such specifications and standards as may be established in rules
and regulations promulgated by the Director of Public Works and approved by
the Council; provided, that a copy of such rules and regulations shall be
placed on file in the office of the Clerk.



('73 Code, § 10-5) (Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07) 
Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.06  HAULERS.



   (A)   All qualified persons engaged in the business of the
collection and hauling of refuse or waste as part of the daily residential
pickup service offered to residents of the town shall be licensed by the
town, pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 23-18.9-1(b)(1).



   (B)   Licensed haulers shall maintain any separated recyclable
materials that are delivered to either a town, state, or state-designated
recycling facility in processable condition.



   (C)   Haulers of waste materials from Middletown residences as part
of a daily residential pickup service must offer recycling service, included
in the price for collecting waste, that is substantially the same as that
provided in the PAYT program under the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   All haulers of waste materials who provide daily residential
pickup from Middletown residences are subject to the time limitations for
picking up waste stated in § 50.43(B).



   (E)   All haulers of waste materials, recyclables and yard waste who
provide daily residential pickup shall maintain liability insurance and
Workers' Compensation insurance in an amount satisfactory to the town.



   (F)   All haulers of waste materials, recyclables and yard waste
from residential sources, shall report to the town on a quarterly basis,
commencing in January of each year, the tonnage collected for solid waste,
recyclables and yard waste.



   (G)   All haulers of waste materials, recyclables and yard waste in
the town shall display on the exterior of their vehicle a decal noticeable
from the street which indicates that the hauler is a licensed hauler by the
town.



(Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07) 
Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.061 EXCLUSION FOR COMMERCIAL HAULERS.



   Commercial haulers, as defined in § 50.01, are not subject to the
requirements of § 50.06.



(Ord. passed 12-3-07)



§ 50.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)



MANDATORY RECYCLING



§ 50.20  AUTHORITY.



   Mandatory recycling is hereby implemented in the town pursuant to R.I.
Gen. Laws §§ 23-18.8, 23-18.9, and 23-19 as amended.



(Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)



§ 50.21  IMPLEMENTATION.



   There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste by town residents and the
collection of such recyclable materials by a waste removal company under
contract to the town or by other waste removal companies under contract to a
resident.



(Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)



§ 50.22  RECYCLING COORDINATOR.



   The Town Administrator shall appoint an individual to provide recycling
education for residents and school children and to coordinate the recycling
program in a manner consistent with state and federal regulations.  This
appointment is subject to annual appropriations by the town.



(Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)



§ 50.23  RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING.



   (A)   All residents shall separate recyclable materials from
residential solid waste.  This subchapter does not, however, bar any
residents from giving recyclable materials to nonprofit organizations.



   (B)   Separated recyclable materials shall be put in a processable
condition.  Cans, bottles and other containers shall be empty and rinsed;
non-container glass or other non-recyclable material shall not be mixed with
the recyclables; and recyclable materials shall not be placed in plastic bags.



   (C)   All separated materials shall be disposed of in accordance
with the town's Pay-As-You-Throw (PAYT) program pursuant to this chapter, or
delivered to another licensed waste hauler or otherwise delivered to a
state-designated recycling facility in processable condition.



(Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07) 
Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.24  PUBLIC EVENTS.



   The separation of recyclables from solid waste shall be a condition of
licensing or authorization of any public event, the conduct of which
generates solid waste for which the town accepts disposal responsibility.



(Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)



§ 50.25  OWNERSHIP OF RECYCLABLES.



   Any recyclable materials placed in a designated pick-up place become
the property of the town, and no person not permitted by the town shall
collect such materials except as specifically authorized by the town.  The
town may issue permits to charitable organizations to collect recyclable
materials on the condition that a report is filed by said organizations
detailing the weights of each material collected in compliance with the state
Department of Environmental Management reporting requirements and provided
that the town determines that said collection does not conflict with the
town's recycling program.  Such permit shall be obtained from the Department
of Public Works after application is made on a form furnished by the
Department of Public Works.  The fee for such permit shall be established by
the Town Council from time to time, to be paid at the time of application.



(Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)



PAY-AS-YOU-THROW COLLECTION



§ 50.41  INTRODUCTION



   To compensate for the loss of the transfer station used by Middletown
residents on U.S. Navy property, the town hereby institutes a
Pay-As-You-Throw (PAYT) program under which a single waste removal company
under contract to the town will remove from residents' premises various types
of solid waste under the provisions of this subchapter, except that hazardous
waste is not covered by the program.  The PAYT program is not mandatory;
residents may contract for their waste to be removed by any waste removal
company licensed by the town, or may deliver it themselves to a town, state
or state-designated recycling facility.  However, all residents must follow
applicable provisions of this chapter to properly dispose of their waste.



(Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.42  APPLICATION.



   This subchapter applies only to individuals who reside in owned or
rented dwellings in Middletown, except for residents of one apartment or
condominium complexes of more than four units or two mobile homes located in
a mobile home park.  It does not apply to non-individual residents of the
town, such as businesses, churches or other institutions.



(Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07) 



§ 50.43  OBLIGATIONS OF PAYT CONTRACTOR.



   (A)   The PAYT contractor, in conjunction with the town, shall
establish and publicize pick-up schedules for all residents in the PAYT
program. Such schedules shall provide for weekly pickup of waste in PAYT bags
and carts; bi-weekly pickup of recyclable materials on a rotating basis, with
paper recyclables one week and other recyclables the next; on-request pickup
of bulky waste (limited to two requests per month); and pickup of yard waste
as follows: four weeks in April, every other week through October, and four
weeks in November plus the first week in January for Christmas trees only.



   (B)   Pickups may not begin before 7:00 a.m. except that pickups
from residents on East and West Main Roads and on Aquidneck Avenue may begin
at 6:30 a.m.



   (C)   The PAYT contractor shall inform all residents in the program,
at least annually, of a toll-free telephone number to be used for bulky waste
pickups and for requesting information or making complaints.



(Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.44  OBLIGATIONS OF RESIDENTS.



   Residents who elect to participate in the PAYT program are subject to
the following responsibilities:



   (A)   $150 Annual Participation Fee.



   (B)   The different types of waste, as defined in § 50.01, shall be
handled by residents as follows:



      (1)   Solid waste shall be placed only in color coded plastic
trash bags authorized for use by the town. Said plastic bags shall be placed
in the solid waste cart provided by the town.



      (2)   Recyclable paper and cardboard must be placed in a green
cart provided by the town. All other recyclable materials must be placed in a
blue cart provided by the town.



      (3)   Yard waste must be placed in standard 32-gallon garbage
cans labeled as yard waste or in paper bags, except that tree trimmings not
greater than two inches in diameter or four feet in length may be tied up
separately and not placed in a container.



      (4)   Bulky waste items need not be placed in a container but
must be affixed with a PAYT sticker, obtainable from the town hall, and will
only be picked up if a request is made therefor 72 hours in advance by
telephoning the PAYT contractor. Residential construction waste must be
placed in no more than two standard 32-gallon garbage cans, each weighing
less than 50 pounds. Bulky waste pickups are limited to two per month.



      (5)   All waste that does not qualify as recyclable materials,
yard waste, or bulky materials must be placed in special PAYT bags, which may
be purchased from hardware stores and other merchants, and the PAYT bags must
be placed in a waste cart provided by the town. Not more than 40 pounds of
waste may be placed in each PAYT bag.



   (C)   Time and manner of setting out waste.



      (1)   All waste containers and bulky waste items may be put
out for collection after 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the resident's
scheduled pickup day and before 7:00 a.m. on the resident's scheduled pickup
day, except that residents on East and West Main Roads and on Aquidneck
Avenue must put their containers in place before 6:30 a.m. on the scheduled
pickup day.



      (2)   Waste containers and bulky waste items shall be placed
at the curb or, if there is no curb, next to the roadway. Waste carts must
have their hinged covers fully down, so that no waste is overflowing.



   (D)   Time and manner of removing containers. All waste containers
and/or recyclable containers shall be removed from the curbside by 7:00 a.m.
on the day following pickup.



(Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-15-08; Am.
Ord. passed 6-21-10)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.45  CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Town ownership of containers. As part of instituting the PAYT
program, the town shall initially distribute three color coded containers
(for solid waste, paper recyclables and bottles/cans/plastic recyclables) to
each eligible household in the town. Said containers shall bear the seal of
the town. All containers distributed shall be the property of the town. All
containers shall be coded with a serial number which shall correspond to a
designated street address. Upon moving or vacating a household, residents
shall leave all town containers at the property for use by the next owner
and/or tenant. Violators shall be subject to penalties as contained in §
50.99.



   (B)   Container replacement. If a household or resident has a
container stolen or needs to replace a container, the Department of Public
Works can be contacted to secure a replacement. The replacement cost for a
container shall be paid by the resident.



(Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as follows:



   (A)   For residents failing to separate recyclable materials from
solid waste or to deliver recyclable materials in a processable condition, or
for any other violation of this chapter:



      (1)   First offense, $25 fine;



      (2)   Subsequent offense, $50 fine.



   (B)   For haulers found in violation of § 50.06:



      (1)   First offense, $200 fine;



      (2)   Subsequent offense, loss of license.



   (C)   For all other violations of this chapter:



      (1)   First offense, $25 fine;



      (2)   Subsequent offense, $50 fine.



(Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-07)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWAGE WORKS



Section



   51.01   Town authority with respect to sewerage works



   51.02   Sewer use and connections governed by Council regulation



   51.03   Sewer connections required



   51.04   Private sewers governed by Council regulation



   51.05   When private sewer may be accepted by town



   51.06   Wastes requiring silt basin



   51.07   Trade waste requiring permit



   51.08   Council may prevent entry of detrimental substances



   51.09   Trap or other obstruction prohibited; violation



   51.10   Oil, gasoline, steam, rubbish, and the like prohibited in
sewer system



   51.11   Other acts prohibited



Cross-reference



   For Charter provisions on sanitary sewers, see Division 2, Art. VII of
the Charter



§ 51.01  TOWN AUTHORITY WITH RESPECT TO SEWERAGE WORKS.



   This Chapter is enacted by the Council pursuant to the provisions of
Public Laws 1958, chapter 138, as amended, which, among other things,
provides that the town is authorized and empowered to lay out, construct,
maintain and operate sewerage works defines sewerage works to include sewers
and sewer service connections, pumping stations, disposal and filtration
plants and other works essential to the proper collection and disposal of the
sewage in the town, and vests in the Council the construction, operation,
maintenance and repair of such sewerage works and authorizes the Council from
time to time to prescribe rules and orders relative to the use of the sewer
system.



('73 Code, § 18-43)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69)



§ 51.02  SEWER USE AND CONNECTIONS GOVERNED BY COUNCIL REGULATION.



   The use and installation of all sewers (lateral mains), drains and
connections to existing sewer lines shall be in accordance with such rules
and regulations as may be adopted from time to time by the Council with
respect to such installations.  Sewer system extensions shall not be
permitted from January 1, 2003 through July 1, 2003 except as follows:



   (A)   Individual properties are permitted to tie in when the
owner(s) demonstrate failure of an existing system and the inability to
replace the system per RIDEM regulations or when the owner(s) demonstrate an
inability to obtain approval for an initial system per RIDEM regulations.



   (B)   Single sewer connections are permitted for residential or
commercial properties, which have direct access to an existing sewer line
from their property.



   (C)   Subdivision of properties approved by the Middletown Planning
Board prior to June 1, 1998 are allowed to tie in.



   (D)   Subdivision of properties of three or fewer lots are allowed
to tie in provided the original lot to be subdivided fronts on an existing
sewer main line and provided all lots to be created from the original lot
meet the minimum dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance or have
received the appropriate dimensional variances from the Zoning Board of
Review.



('73 Code, § 18-45)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69; Am. Ord. passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord.
passed 2-22-00; Am. Ord. passed 12-30-02)



§ 51.03  SEWER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.



   There shall be a separate connection for each house or business
establishment to the common sewer, force main, sewer service connection,
lateral sewer, submain sewer, or main sewer.  If additional connections are
required by a property owner, the total cost shall be at the expense of that
owner.



('73 Code, § 18-51)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.04  PRIVATE SEWERS GOVERNED BY COUNCIL REGULATION.



   The installation and construction of any private sewer mains, laterals
or pumping station shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and the related rules and regulations adopted by the Council and subject to
such inspections during construction as may be required by the Director of
Public Works. The cost of such inspection shall be borne by the property
owner.



('73 Code, § 18-52)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69)



§ 51.05  WHEN PRIVATE SEWER MAY BE ACCEPTED BY TOWN.



   No private sewer system shall be accepted as part of the sewerage
system of the town unless it conforms to the provisions of this chapter and
the rules and regulations of the Council relating thereto.



('73 Code, § 18-53)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69)



§ 51.06  WASTES REQUIRING SILT BASIN.



   All wastes from automotive washing floors, garages, stables and
buildings housing livestock or cattle must be passed through silt basins of
ample size, to be prescribed by the Director of Public Works, before delivery
to any part of the sewerage works, and these silt basins must be cleaned at
frequent intervals and maintained in effective condition at all times.



('73 Code, § 18-49)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.07  TRADE WASTES REQUIRING PERMIT.



   Certain trade-wastes, not injurious to the sewerage or sewage disposal
system, may be admitted to the sewerage works, but only upon recommendation
of the Director of Public Works and the issuance of a special permit by the
Council, at its discretion and revocable without recourse.



('73 Code, § 18-46)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.08  COUNCIL MAY PREVENT ENTRY OF DETRIMENTAL SUBSTANCES.



   The Council may, at any time in its discretion, stop and prevent the
discharge into the sewerage works of any substance liable to interfere with
their normal operation, or to obstruct the flow, or to hinder any processes
of sewage purification which may be put into operation; and it may at any
time, in its discretion, without notice and without recourse, sever the
connection and cause the removal of any tributary sewer or drain through
which such detrimental substances are discharged.



('73 Code, § 18-47)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69)



§ 51.09  TRAP OR OTHER OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED; VIOLATION.



   No trap or any manner of obstruction to the free flow of air through
the whole course of the drain and soil-pipe vent will be allowed; and any
drain-layer who shall directly or indirectly place, make, cause, or allow to
be placed or made, any trap, contraption, or other obstacle anywhere in the
course of such drain or soil-pipe shall, in addition to the penalty
prescribed in this chapter, forfeit his license from the Council, and shall
be ineligible to relicense for one year, and any other person offending as
above shall be subject to the penalties of this chapter and shall, in
addition, pay the costs of rectifying the wrong done.



('73 Code, § 18-48)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.10  OIL, GASOLINE, STEAM, RUBBISH, AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED IN SEWER
SYSTEM.



   No person owning, leaving or operating any garage, automobile repair
shop, machine shop, laundry, foundry, or any other business wherein oil,
gasoline, benzine, steam, rubbish, or by-products of coal, coal tar, gas or
petroleum is used shall introduce or turn into, or cause or suffer to be
introduced or turned into any part of the sewerage works or catch basins in
the Town of Middletown, any such oil, gasoline, benzine, steam, rubbish,
by-products, of coal, coal tar, gas or petroleum.



('73 Code, § 18-50)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.11  OTHER ACTS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person:



   (A)   To allow or permit the discharge of sewage from any house or
building in the town into any stormwater drain located in any highway or
public place.



   (B)   To open any street or public place in order to make or cause
to be made any connection with a house connection branch of a common sewer,
force main, sewer service connection, lateral sewer, submain sewer, except
under a special written permit signed by the Director of Public Works
allowing such specific connection, and under the supervision of such director.



   (C)   To break, cut or remove any pipe of the sewerage works, or to
make or cause to be made any connection with the sewerage works except
through the connection branches provided for such purposes, the location of
such connection branches to be designated by the Director of Public Works.



   (D)   To discharge or cause to be discharged into any part of the
sewerage works, directly or indirectly, any groundwater, surface-water or
rain-water from yards or areas or courts or roofs, or from any other source.



   (E)   To discharge or cause to be discharged into any common sewer,
force main, sewer service connection, lateral sewer, sub-main sewer, or main
sewer, directly or indirectly, any overflow or drainage from manure pits,
cesspools, or other receptacles storing or constructed to store organic
wastes.



   (F)   To connect or cause to be connected with any common sewer,
force main, sewer service connection, lateral sewer, submain sewer, or main
sewer, directly or indirectly any steamexhausts, boiler blowoffs, sediment
drips or any pipe carrying or constructed to carry considerable volumes of
hot water or acids, dyes, germicides, greases, brewery-mash, or any other
substance detrimental to the sewerage works or to operation of the sewerage
system.



   (G)   To throw or to deposit, or to cause or allow to be thrown or
deposited in any fixture, vessel, receptacle, inlet or opening connected
directly or indirectly with any common sewer, force main, sewer service
connection, lateral sewer, sub-main sewer, any unground garbage (except as
results from the use of an approved home type disposal), vegetable parings,
ashes, cinders, rags, or any other matter, or anything whatsoever, except
faeces, urine, necessary toilet paper, and liquid house-slops, or to allow
any house-sewer connected with the sewerage works to be likewise connected
with any privy vault or cesspool, or underground drain, or with any channel
conveying water or filth, except such drains and other plumbing work as shall
have been inspected and approved by the Director of Public Works.



('73 Code, § 18-44)  (Ord. passed 7-7-69)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 52: WATER WORKS



Section



   52.01   Planning and installation of water lines



   52.02   Assessment of costs of construction



   52.03   Uniform rate



   52.04   Term



   52.05   Annual assessment a lien on real estate



   52.06   Procedures relating to collection, correction and
cancellation of assessments



   52.07   Exemptions



   52.08   Construction and installation of water lines



   52.09   Connection fee



§ 52.01  PLANNING AND INSTALLATION OF WATER LINES.



   (A)   Subject to approval by the City of Newport, the Town of
Middletown shall design, plan, permit, layout and construct additional water
mains, connections and works to the water distribution system within said
town, and owned and maintained by the City of Newport, in order to provide
water service along existing, accepted streets and for such purposes to take
by eminent domain or otherwise acquire any lands, rights-of-way, or
easements, public or private in said town necessary for accomplishing the
purposes set forth in this chapter. Such mains, connections and works shall
include but not be limited to water mains, curb stops, service connections,
pumps, hydrants and other works essential to the provision of potable water
and fire protection in said town.



   (B)   The design, permitting, layout and construction of said water
lines and works is vested in the Town Council, subject to approval of the
City of Newport. The members of the Town Council and their duly authorized
agents may enter upon property within the town to examine, inspect and survey
same whenever necessary for the performance of their duties hereunder.



(Ord. passed 7-21-03)



§ 52.02  ASSESSMENT OF COSTS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The cost of construction of each such water line shall be assessed upon
all owners of land abutting upon that portion of any street or highway in
which said water line is constructed. Said assessment shall be imposed as of
the 31st day of December next following the installation of said water lines,
mains, connections and works have been installed and shall be formulated to
repay to the town the actual costs of construction of said water line and
works, including design, permitting, debt service and costs on any issuance
of bonds or notes issued to finance the same, or such portion thereof as the
town shall deem appropriate, over a period not to exceed 20 years, (or the
repayment term of any bonds or notes utilized to finance same, whichever may
be greater).



(Ord. passed 7-21-03)



§ 52.03  UNIFORM RATE.



   Said assessment shall be at a uniform rate for each foot of frontage of
land abutting on said street, highway or right-of-way, provided however that
a minimum rate may be established for any lot having foot frontage of less
than 50 feet which rate may be equal to that charged for a lot with foot
frontage of 50 feet, provided that a higher rate per foot frontage may be
assessed to a lot of land upon which a dwelling or other structure is located
than an unimproved lot of land. And further provided that whenever any lot is
located at the intersection of two streets, highways or rights-of-way in
which water lines have been constructed at the expense of the town 
hereunder the assessment on such lot shall be made only for the water line on
one street, highway or right-of-way, that being the street, highway or right
of way having the greatest linear foot frontage. The Town Council shall from
time to time establish the rate of assessment for each foot of frontage of
abutting land based upon the actual costs of construction of the water line.



(Ord. passed 7-21-03)



§ 52.04  TERM.



   Said assessment shall be payable to the town in equal annual
installments for a period not exceeding  20 years, (or the repayment term of
any bonds or notes utilized to finance same, whichever may be greater), with
interest thereon, if any, at a rate to be determined by the Town Council not
exceeding 6% per annum or the interest rate payable on any bonds or notes
issued to finance same whichever is greater, payable at such time as each
installment becomes due. Any property owner shall have the right to prepay
unpaid installments with interest to time of prepayment.



(Ord. passed 7-21-03)



§ 52.05  ANNUAL ASSESSMENT A LIEN ON REAL ESTATE.



   The Town Council shall annually, prior to the first day of July,
certify to the Finance Director all assessments made by it under the
authority of this section. Each such assessment made by the Town Council
pursuant to this section shall be a lien upon the lands, buildings and
improvements upon which it is made in the same way and manner in which taxes
assessed on real estate and if not paid as required shall be collected in the
same manner that taxes assessed on real estate are by law collected. Such
assessment shall be due and payable at the time the next regular town taxes
are first due and payable next after receipt by the Finance Director of the
certification of assessments from the Town Council, except that payment may
be made in quarterly installments and installment payments shall be due
beginning at such time, and the Finance Director shall forthwith certify to
the Tax Collector for collection, and the Tax Collector shall proceed to
collect such assessment in the same manner and at the same time the regular
taxes of the town are first due and payable, with provision for installments
as provided in this section. Interest at the rate per annum for nonpayment of
town taxes shall be charged and collected upon all overdue assessments and
installments from the date they are payable until paid.



(Ord. passed 7-21-03)



§ 52.06  PROCEDURES RELATING TO COLLECTION, CORRECTION AND CANCELLATION OF
ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   Notice.  The Collector, after receiving a list of the
assessments, shall forthwith, at the expense of the town send to each person
assessed a notice of the amount of the assessment. The notice shall
substantially identify the person assessed, state the amount of the
assessment and refer to the remedy available under R.I. Gen. Laws §
44-5-26.  The notice shall be mailed postage prepaid and directed to the
last known address of the person assessed. If there are persons whose address
is unknown similar notice covering the assessment against such person shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation published in Newport
County and such published notice may be a single collective notice for all
such persons. No irregularity in the notice required by this section shall
excuse the nonpayment of the assessment or effect the validity or proceeding
for collection thereof so long as there is substantial compliance with the
provisions hereof.



   (B)   Application of general laws to collection.  In proceedings
under R.I. Gen. Laws § 44-5-26 in connection with an assessment under this
section, R.I. Gen. Laws § 44-5-30 shall apply without regard to those
provisions of said section dealing with taxpayer accounts. R.I. Gen. Laws §
44-5-31 shall not apply. The Town Council shall be made a party in lieu of
the assessors.



   (C)   Corrected assessment. In the event an assessment is partly or
wholly invalid the Town Council may make a corrected assessment to replace
the invalid assessment and certify same to the Finance Director. The
corrected assessment shall be due and payable at the time regular town taxes
or installments thereof are first due and payable after receipt by the
finance Director of such certificate. The person assessed shall be eligible
to pay such corrected assessment in installments to the extent permitted by
the Town Council. Except as set forth herein said corrected assessment shall
be subject to the same provisions as the original assessment authorized
hereby.



   (D)   Cancellation of assessments.  The Town Council may at any
time cancel in whole or in part any assessment to the extent the Town Council
determines it to have been improperly imposed.



(Ord. passed 7-21-03)



§ 52.07  EXEMPTIONS.



   The Town Council may, by ordinance, exempt from the payment of any and
all assessments for the construction of water lines and works hereunder, the
land of any religious corporation on which are located buildings uses solely
for holding of religious services therein and all land in the town held by
cemetery corporations and used solely for cemetery purposes.



(Ord. passed 7-21-03)



§ 52.08  CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION OF WATER LINES.



   Nothing herein shall be construed to require the town to install any
water lines, mains or works in any existing street and installation of such
mains shall be in the discretion of the Town Council.



(Ord. passed 7-21-03)



§ 52.09  CONNECTION FEE.



   Subject to approval of the City of Newport and appropriate regulatory
authorities, the Town Council may impose and collect an initial, one time,
connection fee in addition to any fee charged by the City of Newport to any
user connecting to a water main installed at the expense of the town. Said
fee shall be payable to the order of the town prior to any permit being
granted for connection to any water main installed at the expense of the town.



(Ord. passed 7-21-03)



CHAPTER 53:  ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION



Section



General Provisions



   53.01   Purpose



   53.02   Authority



   53.03   Definitions



Provisions; Procedure



   53.11   Discharge prohibitions



   53.12   Suspension of MS4 access



   53.13   Industrial and construction activity discharge



   53.14   Inspections and monitoring



   53.15   Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater
pollutants



   53.16   Watercourse protection



   53.17   Notification of spills



Enforcement



   53.21   Notice of violation



   53.22   Appeal of notice of violation



   53.23   Settlements of appeal of notice of violation



   53.24   Enforcement measures after appeal



   53.25   Administrative orders



   53.26   Cost of abatement of the violation



   53.27   Injunctive relief



   53.28   Violations deemed a public nuisance



   53.29   Criminal prosecution



   53.30   Remedies not exclusive



Cross-reference:



   Construction Site Runoff Control, see Chapter 151 of this code of
ordinances



   Stormwater Management, see Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff is a major cause
of impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers,
wetlands and groundwater; contamination of drinking water supplies;
alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding.
Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm drain
system is necessary for the protection of the Middletown's water bodies and
groundwater, and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the
environment.



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent (or reduce to the maximum extent practicable)
pollutants entering Middletown's municipally owned separate storm sewer
system (MS4);



      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized
discharges to the MS4;



      (3)   To require the removal of all such illicit connections
and discharges;



      (4)   To comply with state law and federal statutes and
regulations relating to stormwater discharges; and



      (5)   To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry
out all inspection, monitoring and enforcement activities necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.02  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is promulgated pursuant to the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management's ("DEM") General Permit Rhode Island Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Discharge from Small Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer Systems and from Industrial Activity at Eligible
Facilities Operated by Regulated Small MS4s and in accordance with the
Administrative Procedures Act, R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 42-35-1 et seq.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLOWABLE NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES.  Discharges not comprised of
stormwater are allowed under the MS4 General Permit but are limited to the
following, provided these are not significant contributors of pollutants to
the MS4: discharges which result from the washdown of vehicles at retail
dealers selling new and used automobiles where no detergents are used and
individual residential car washing; external building washdown where no
detergents are used; the use of water to control dust; fire fighting
activities; fire hydrant flushings; natural springs; uncontaminated
groundwater; dechlorinated pool discharges; air conditioning condensate; lawn
watering; potable water sources including waterline flushings; irrigation
drainage; pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spilled materials have been removed)
and where detergents are not used; discharges from foundation or footing
drains where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as
solvents, or contaminated by contact with soils where spills or leaks of
toxic or hazardous materials have occurred; uncontaminated utility vault
dewatering; dechlorinated water line testing water; hydrostatic test water
that does not contain any treatment chemicals and is not contaminated with
process chemicals.



   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Director of Public Works.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from
raw materials storage.



   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to RIPDES Construction
Permits. As of March 2003, RIPDES Stormwater Phase II permits are required
for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of 1 acre or more.
Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.



   DISCHARGER.  Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise
responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a
construction site or industrial facility.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Either of the following:  Any drain or conveyance,
whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to
enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances
which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any
connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement officer or, any drain or
conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm
drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records and approved by an authorized enforcement officer.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer
that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a
RIPDES permit (other than the RIPDES permit for discharges from the municipal
separate storm sewer) and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):



      (1)   Owned or operated by a city or town or the state
district association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state
law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes,
stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such
as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar
entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a
designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the CWA that
discharges to waters of the state;



      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;



      (3)   Which is not a combined sewer; and



      (4)   Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works
(POTW) as defined in Rule 3 of the RIPDES Regulations.



   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge that is not composed entirely
of stormwater.



   OPERATOR. The party or parties that either individually or taken
together have the day-to-day operational control over the facility's
activities and the ability to make modifications to such activities.



   OWNER. The party or parties that either individually or taken together
has legal title to any premises.



   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.



   POLLUTANTS. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.



   STORMWATER.  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.



   UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE. A discharge of stormwater not authorized by a
RIPDES permit, or an allowable stormwater discharge found to be a significant
contributor of pollutants to the MS4.



   WATERCOURSE. A natural or manmade surface drainage channel or body of
water (including a lake or pond) through which a water flow occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



   WATERS OF THE STATE. Surface and ground waters within the boundaries of
the State of Rhode Island and subject to its jurisdiction.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



PROVISIONS; PROCEDURE



§ 53.11  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of unauthorized discharges. 



      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the municipal separate storm sewer system or watercourses any pollutant or
non-stormwater discharge unless such a non-stormwater discharge is outlined
in Part I.B.3 of the MS4 General Permit.  The allowable non-stormwater
discharges (described below) are permitted if deemed not to be a significant
contributor of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.



      (2)   Allowable non-stormwater discharges:



         (a)   Discharges which result from the washdown of
vehicles at retail dealers selling new and used automobiles where no
detergents are used and individual residential car washing;



         (b)   External building washdown where no detergents are
used;



         (c)   The use of water to control dust;



         (d)   Fire fighting activities;



         (e)   Fire hydrant flushings;



         (f)   Natural springs;



         (g)   Uncontaminated groundwater; dechlorinated pool
discharges;



         (h)   Air conditioning condensate;



         (i)   Lawn watering; potable water sources including
waterline flushings;



         (j)   Irrigation drainage;



         (k)   Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic
or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled materials have
been removed) and where detergents are not used;



         (l)   Discharges from foundation or footing drains where
flows are not contaminated with process materials such as solvents, or
contaminated by contact with soils where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have occurred;



         (m)   Uncontaminated utility vault dewatering;
dechlorinated water line testing water; and



         (n)   Hydrostatic test water that does not contain any
treatment chemicals and is not contaminated with process chemicals.



   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connection. The construction, use,
maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly
includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.



   (C)   In violation.  A person is considered to be in violation of
this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue and must provide corrective action.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.12  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.
The authorized enforcement officer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened non-stormwater discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the State. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
authorized enforcement officer may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the state, or to minimize
danger to persons.



   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any
person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have his or
her MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement officer will notify a violator
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
authorized enforcement officer for reconsideration and a hearing. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized
enforcement officer.



   (C)   Entry to perform duties under this chapter. To the extent
permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in
control of the property, the authorized enforcement officer, its agents,
officers, and employees may enter upon privately owned property for the
purpose of performing their duties under this chapter and may make or cause
to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the authorized
enforcement officer deems reasonably necessary.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.13  INDUSTRIAL AND CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGE.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity RIPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the authorized enforcement officer prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.14  INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING.



   The authorized enforcement officer shall be permitted, upon the
presentation of credentials and other documents as may be required by law, to:



   (A)   Enter the discharger's premises where a regulated activity is
conducted, or where records must be kept as required under the conditions of
this permit;



   (B)   Have access to and copy, at reasonable times, any records that
must be kept as required under the conditions of the permit;



   (C)   Inspect at reasonable times any equipment, practices, or
operations regulated or required under this permit; and



   (D)   Sample or monitor any substances or parameters at any
location, at reasonable times, for the purposes of assuring permit compliance
or as otherwise authorized by the CWA or R.I. law.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.15  REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS.



   In an attempt to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants,
any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or
property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the
storm sewer system or waters of the state shall implement Best Management
Practices to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and
reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system
or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or
operator's expense.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.16  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation,
and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard
the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee
shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall
not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for
maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the
vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner or lessee
shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the
watercourse that is within his or her property lines in order to protect
against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed
from his or her property. Nothing in this section shall preclude any
owner/lessee from compliance with relevant provisions of the Rhode Island
Freshwater Wetlands Act, R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 2-1-18 et seq. or other
applicable laws or regulations.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.17  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in
unauthorized discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm
drain system, or waters of the state from said facility, said person shall
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of
such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material said
person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release
of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized
enforcement officer no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the authorized enforcement officer within 14 business days of the phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years. Nothing in this section shall preclude any owner/lessee from
compliance with relevant provisions of the Rhode Island Clean Water Act, R.I.
Gen. Laws §§ 46-12-1 et seq. or other applicable laws or regulations.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 53.21  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Whenever the authorized enforcement officer finds that any
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
chapter, the authorized enforcement officer may order compliance by written
notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require
without limitation:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;



      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations
shall cease and desist;



      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and



      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental
agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.22 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination
of the authorized enforcement officer to the Town Administrator. The notice
of appeal must be received within 20 days from the date of the receipt of the
Notice of Violation. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and contain a
detailed basis upon which the appeal was taken. The procedure for said appeal
shall be in conformity with the Administrative Procedures Act, R.I. Gen. Laws
§§ 42-35-1 et seq.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.23  SETTLEMENTS OF APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this chapter, the authorized enforcement officer may enter into a
negotiated settlement to resolve the appeal of the Notice of Violation. Such
settlement may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions such
as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup,
and the like.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.24  ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.



   If no timely appeal of a Notice of Violation has been taken and the
violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in
the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of
the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
authorized enforcement officer, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement officer shall undertake all necessary actions, including
requesting injunctive relief through the Superior Court, to enter upon the
subject private property and take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.25  ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.



   The authorized enforcement officer is authorized to issue the following
administrative orders at any time they deem such action appropriate to secure
timely and effective compliance with this chapter or a discharge permit or
order issued pursuant to this chapter, whether or not any previous
notifications of violation have been provided to the user.



   (A)   Cease and desist order. The authorized enforcement officer may
issue an order to cease and desist a violation or an action or inaction which
threatens a violation and to direct the user to comply forthwith or to take
such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly
address the violation or threatened violation, including halting operations
and terminating the discharge.



   (B)   Compliance order. The authorized enforcement officer may issue
an order requiring a user to provide within a specified period of time, such
treatment, pretreatment or discharge control facilities or related
appurtenances as are necessary to correct a violation or to prevent a
threatened violation. A compliance order may also direct that a user provide
improved operation and maintenance of existing discharge facilities, conduct
additional self-monitoring or submit appropriate reports or management plans.



   (C)   Show cause order. The authorized enforcement officer may issue
an order to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for a
meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and
a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed,
additional enforcement action may be initiated.



   (D)   Consent order. The authorized enforcement officer may enter
into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with a user. Such orders shall include
specific actions to be taken by the user and specific time frames to correct
a violation or to remove the threat of a violation.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.26 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.



   Within 15 days after abatement of the violation, by or under the
direction of the authorized enforcement officer, the owner of the property
will be notified by the enforcement officer or municipality of the cost of
abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid
within a timely manner as determined by the enforcement agency or
municipality, the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall
become liable to the town by reason of such violation. The liability shall be
paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 12% per
annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the thirty-first day
following discovery of the violation.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.27  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement officer may petition for a temporary, preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of
the violation.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.28  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 53.29  CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.



   Any person who has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall
be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall
be subject to a criminal penalty of $500 per violation per day and/or
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 15 days. The authorized
enforcement officer may recover all attorney's fees, court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



Cross-reference:



   General penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.30  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the authorized enforcement officer to seek
cumulative remedies.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS





         72.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         73.   BICYCLES





         74.   PARKING SCHEDULES





         75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Rules exception for emergency vehicles



   70.03   Riding horses generally



   70.04   Where operation of minibike, dirtbike, recreational vehicle
prohibited



   70.05   Roller skating, roller blading, and in-line skating



 



   70.97   Payment of fine to Clerk in lieu of court



   70.98   Payment of parking fines by mail



   70.99   Penalties



Cross-reference:



   Offenses related to traffic, see § 130.50 et seq.



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE.  As used in this Title, a device having two wheels tandem,
with tires 20 inches or more in diameter, connected by a frame of metal or
wood and arranged to be propelled by human power.  It shall also include
tricycles propelled by human power.  This definition shall not be construed
to apply to toy bicycles, toy tricycles, or velocipedes.



('73 Code, § 5-1) (Ord. passed 5-7-56; Am. Ord. 8-20-79)



   CROSSWALK.  That part of a roadway at an intersection of streets which
is included within the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
traversable roadway.  Also, any portion of a roadway at an intersection of
streets or elsewhere which is distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other markings on the surface.



   MINIBIKE and/or DIRTBIKE. A motor vehicle with two tandem wheels, with
solid or pneumatic tires having a steering bar and a saddle seat.



(Ord. passed 4-21-80)



   OPERATE.  When used in reference to a minibike or dirtbike or
recreational vehicle, the use, putting into action or causing to function of
a minibike and/or dirtbike or recreational vehicle by a person mounted
thereon.



(Ord. passed 4-21-80)



   PARKING or STANDING.  When prohibited or restricted, any stopping or
standing of vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device.



   POLICE OFFICER.  Any person having lawful authority to regulate
traffic or to make arrests or give notices of violation for violations of
this chapter or for violations of Title 31 of the General Laws of Rhode
Island, 1965, as amended.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A motor vehicle designed to travel over
unimproved terrain, to include any three-wheel drive vehicle and any other
four-wheel drive vehicle, regardless of type or design, including all classes
of all-terrain vehicles. This shall not be construed to include golf mobiles
or golf carts, riding lawn mowers or garden tractors which are not registered
as farm vehicles.



   ROADWAY.  That portion of a street used or intended for use by
vehicles.



   SAFETY ZONE.  The area or space, set aside by competent authority,
within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected
or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at
all times while set apart as a safety zone.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. See § 10.05.



   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden, or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any highway for purposes
of travel.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.  All signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with chapters 1 to 27, inclusive, of title 31 of the General
Laws of Rhode Island, 1965, as amended, placed, installed or erected by
authority of the Council or other public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic or
for the purpose of prohibiting, limiting or regulating the parking or
standing of vehicles.  Also, any sign, signal or device erected, installed
or placed by authority of the Council or other public body or official having
jurisdiction, or by a railroad, and intended to give notice of the presence
of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.



   TRAILER, SEMITRAILER, POLE TRAILER.



      (1)   TRAILER.  Every vehicle without motive power, other
than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests
upon the towing vehicle.



      (2)   SEMITRAILER.  Every vehicle without motive power, other
than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and
that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.



      (3)   POLE TRAILER.  Every vehicle without motive power
designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by
means of a reach, or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the
towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long irregularly shaped
loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.



   VEHICLE.  Every object or device propelled or drawn on wheels,
rollers, runners or otherwise except road rollers and such vehicles as run
only upon rails or stationary tracks.



('73 Code, §§ 15-1, 15-37) (Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07)



§ 70.02  RULES EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   The provisions of this Title shall not apply to any authorized
emergency vehicle as defined in R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-1-3, subsection (k)
while the driver is operating the same in an emergency in the performance of
his duty; provided, that this exemption shall not protect the driver of such
vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of others,
or of a violation of the laws of the state.



('73 Code, § 15-12)  (Ord. passed 9-30-57)



§ 70.03  RIDING HORSES GENERALLY.



   Persons may ride horses on streets and highways located within the town
only between the hours of sunrise and sunset.  Persons riding horses on any
street or highway in groups of two or more shall ride in single file on the
sides of the roadway.  Persons riding horses may cross the roadway upon the
exercise of due care to avoid colliding with any vehicle thereon.  No person
riding a horse on any street or highway shall ride upon any improved portion
of the street or highway which is grassed or seeded and maintained, whether
publicly or privately owned, or upon any other private property abutting the
street or highway, except to gain lawful access to and egress from any
property abutting the street or highway or except in the case of emergency.



('73 Code, § 15-11A)  (Ord. passed 9-15-82)



§ 70.04  WHERE OPERATION OF MINIBIKE, DIRTBIKE, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a minibike and/or
dirtbike or recreational vehicle in the following locations:



   (A)   On the private property of another without the express written
permission of the owner or occupant of such property;



   (B)   On public school grounds, public park property, public
playgrounds, and public recreational areas;



   (C)   On any other property belonging to the town.



('73 Code, § 15-38) (Ord. passed 4-21-80; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07)



Cross-reference:



   Restriction on other play vehicles, see § 130.52



§ 70.05  ROLLER SKATING, ROLLER BLADING, AND IN-LINE SKATING.



   (A)   No person, riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle,
or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street
on a crosswalk, or except upon streets set aside as play streets designated
in accordance with this Code.



   (B)   Roller skating, roller blading, and in-line skating is
permitted on any public street, highway, or sidewalk exclusive of state
highways, unless specifically prohibited.



   (C)   No person shall ride or propel roller skates, roller blades,
or in-line skates upon any public street, highway or sidewalk, except in a
prudent and careful manner and under efficient control and such roller
skates, roller blades, and in-line skates are operated with reasonable regard
to the safety of the operator and other persons. Every person riding or
propelling roller skates, roller blades, or in-line skates shall ride or
propel as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable exercising due
care when passing a standing vehicle.



   (D)   No person shall ride or propel roller skates, roller blades,
or in-line skates upon any public street, highway or sidewalk while wearing
earphones or a headset.



   (E)   A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given
continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by a person
riding or propelling roller skates, roller blades, or in-line skates before
turning.



   (F)   No person shall ride or propel roller skates, roller blades,
or in-line skates upon any public street, highway or sidewalk during the time
from one-half hour  before  sunset  to  one-half  hour  after  sunrise
unless such person wears reflective material which is visible by low beam
headlamps from a distance of at least 500 feet.



   (G)   Roller skates, roller blades, and in-line skates shall be used
consistent with the town traffic ordinance.



(Ord. passed 9-7-93) Penalty, see § 70.99(H)



§ 70.97  PAYMENT OF FINE TO CLERK IN LIEU OF COURT.



   Whenever a person shall be charged with a violation of any provision of
Chapters 70, 71 or 72, the jurisdiction and cognizance of violations of which
is in the District Court and any authorized and established Municipal Court,
and such person is notified in writing by a police officer to appear on a day
and hour stated in such notice to answer such charge before the Second
Division of the District Court and any authorized and established Municipal
Court, such person, instead of personally appearing in court, may, in person
or by one duly authorized by him in writing, appear before the Clerk of the
Second Division of the District Court and any authorized and established
Municipal Court, admit the truth of the charge and pay to the Clerk such fine
as the court may from time to time, by standing order or rule, establish or
as may be fixed by the Council pursuant to § 70.99(D) as the fixed penalty
for such violation, not to exceed in any case the maximum fine imposed by
law; provided, that such appearance, admission and payment be made at the
office of the Clerk during his office hours within seven days of such
notification, and failure to appear within that time shall be deemed a waiver
of the right to dispose of such charge without personal appearance in
court.  The payment of the fine to the Clerk in the manner herein provided
shall operate as a final disposition of such charge and such proceedings
shall not be deemed criminal.  The notice above provided shall indicate the
offense charged and shall also contain such information as will enable the
person charged to take advantage of the provisions of this section, including
the amount of the fine prescribed for the alleged violation.



('73 Code, § 15-33)



§ 70.98  PAYMENT OF PARKING FINES BY MAIL.



   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, any person
charged with a parking violation may elect to waive appearance in court and
pay the fine imposed for such violation by mail as follows:



   (A)   An envelope shall be addressed to the Chief of Police of the
Town of Middletown, R.I., and mailed, postpaid, by depositing such envelope
in a receptacle provided by the United States for the mailing of letters, not
more than six days from the date of the offense.



   (B)   The envelope mentioned in division (A) above shall contain the
notice of violation and the amount of the fine as stated in such notice,
payment to be made in cash or by money order or personal check; provided,
that if any personal check is returned for insufficient funds, an additional
penalty of $10 is hereby levied, which shall be collectable in the same
manner as other fines and penalties are collected.



('73 Code, § 15-34)



Statutory reference:



   State requirement that parking fines be payable by mail, see §
45-6.1-1 et seq.



§ 70.99  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Fire lanes, owner.  The owner of any property who violates
any of the provisions of §§ 72.20 through 72.27 shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $25 for each offense, and each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense. 



   (B)   Fire lanes, driver.  Any persons violating any provisions of
§ 72.27 shall be subject upon conviction to a fine of $40 for each offense.



(Ord. passed 4-16-86; Am. Ord. 97-2, passed 1-21-97)



   (C)   Snow emergencies.  Vehicles parking in violation of § 72.06
shall be subject to a fine of $40.  (Ord. passed 11-6-89)



   (D)   Parking Violations.   The penalty for each violation of any
town ordinance regulating the parking of motor vehicles upon the public
highways within the town is hereby established as a fine in the amount of
$40. If not paid within 30 days, the fine shall be increased to $80. If not
paid within 60 days, the fine shall be increased to $120.



(Ord. passed 8-2-93; Am. Ord. 97-2, passed 1-21-97; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed
9-6-16)



   (E)   Minibikes, dirtbikes, recreational vehicles.  Any person that
violates any of the provisions of § 70.04 shall have his or her minibike
and/or dirtbike or recreational vehicle impounded for a period not to exceed
five days for the first offense, and for the second or subsequent offense for
up to 30 days impoundment for each subsequent offense at the discretion of
the Chief of Police or his representative.  No violation of such section
shall be considered a criminal offense or made a matter of court record where
the offender is under 18 years of age.  Any person 18 years of age or older
violating any of the provisions of this such section for the second time, in
addition to suffering impoundment of his or her minibike and/or dirtbike or
recreational vehicle, may be fined an amount not exceeding $100 or imprisoned
for a period not exceeding 30 days.



('73 Code, § 15-39)  (Ord. passed 4-21-80; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-07)



   (F)   Bicycles, minor.  Any person under 18 years of age who
violates any of the provisions of Chapter 73 shall, for the first offense, be
reprimanded and receive a warning, and the parent or legal guardian of such
minor shall be notified in writing of the violation.  For a second offense
the offender shall be summoned to appear at police headquarters with his
bicycle and notice of the summons shall be given to the parent  or  legal 
guardian.  After a hearing, the Chief of Police or his designated
representative may order the bicycle impounded for a period of time not
exceeding ten days.  For a third offense the license for the bicycle of the
offender may be suspended for  a period not exceeding three months.  A
violation by such minor shall not be considered a criminal offense or a
matter of court record.



('73 Code, § 5-10) (Ord. passed 5-7-56; Am. Ord. passed 8-20-79)



   (G)   Bicycles, adults.  Any natural person above the age of 17
years, or any corporation, partnership or other group violating any of the
provisions of Chapter 73, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
not exceeding $100 for each offense, and any license issued to such person,
corporation, partnership or other group may be suspended or revoked.



('73 Code, § 5-11)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56; Am. Ord. passed 8-20-79)



   (H)   Any person who violates the provisions of § 70.05 shall be
fined not more than $100.



   (I)   Any violation of any provision of this Title, for which
another penalty is not provided shall be subject to the penalty of § 10.99.



(Am. Ord. passed 8-21-00)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



Rules for Vehicles and Pedestrians



   71.01   Speed restrictions; general



   71.02   Speed restrictions in public parks



   71.03   Highway weight restrictions



   71.04   Restrictions on trucks, commercial vehicles



   71.05   One-way streets



   71.06   Through streets and stop intersections



   71.07   Yield intersections



   71.08   Driving on streets closed to traffic prohibited



   71.09   Where pedestrians required to use crosswalks



Traffic Control Devices



   71.25   Obedience to devices required



   71.26   Police Chief to recommend, place and maintain devices



   71.27   Specifications and standards for devices



   71.28   Existing devices continue in effect



   71.29   Effect of device which is not working



RULES FOR VEHICLES AND PEDESTRIANS



§ 71.01  SPEED RESTRICTIONS; GENERAL.



   (A)   R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-14-5 through § 31-14-8, inclusive
prescribe procedures whereby a safe and reasonable speed may be determined
and declared by the Council with respect to the several streets within the
town, which shall be effective at all times during hours of daylight or
darkness or at such other times as may be determined by the Council.



   (B)   When signs are erected along any street or portion thereof,
giving notice of the safe and reasonable speed thereon as so determined by
the Council, every driver of a vehicle upon such street shall comply with the
notice given by such signs and driving at a speed in excess of that indicated
on such signs shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable
or prudent and that it is unlawful.



('73 Code, § 15-5)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.02  SPEED RESTRICTIONS IN PUBLIC PARKS.



   (A)   R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-12-12 authorizes the Council to regulate
the speed of vehicles in public parks.



   (B)   When signs are erected at the entrances to or along the
streets within any public park giving notice of a speed limit, every driver
of a vehicle upon a street so posted shall comply with the notice given by
such signs, and it shall be unlawful to drive at a speed in excess of that
stated upon such signs.



('73 Code, § 15-6)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  HIGHWAY WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-12-12 authorizes the Council to designate
particular highways upon which the operation of vehicles is to be prohibited
or upon which the weight of vehicles is to be restricted for a total period
not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year whenever any such highway, by
reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions will be
seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles thereon is
prohibited or the permissible weights thereof reduced.



   (B)   When appropriate signs, giving notice of such prohibition or
restriction, are in place at the entrances to or along any such highway, no
person shall drive a vehicle upon such highway in violation of the notice.



('73 Code, § 15-7) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.04  RESTRICTIONS ON TRUCKS, COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-12-12 and § 31-25-26 authorize the
Council to designate particular highways upon which the operation of trucks
or other commercial vehicles is to be prohibited or upon which the weight of
such vehicles is to be restricted.



   (B)   When appropriate signs, giving notice of such prohibition or
restriction, are in place at the entrances to or along any such highway, no
person shall drive a truck or other commercial vehicle upon such highway in
violation of the notice.



('73 Code, § 15-8)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.05  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   (A)   R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-12-12 authorizes the Council to designate
particular highways is one-way highways and to require that all vehicles
thereon be moved in one specific direction.



   (B)   When one-way-street signs are erected at entrances to streets
so designated, every driver of a vehicle upon any such one way street shall
drive only in the direction indicated by such signs.



('73 Code, § 15-4)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.06  THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 31-12-12 and 31-20-6 authorize the Council
to designate any highway as a through highway and to require that all
vehicles stop before entry thereon or crossing thereof, and to designate any
street intersection as a stop intersection and to require that no vehicles
stop at one or more entrances to such intersection.



   (B)   Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or in the
event there is no crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line but if
none, then at a point nearest the intersecting highway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting highway before entering the
intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic
control signal.



(R.I. Gen Laws § 31-20-9) ('73 Code, § 15-2)  (Ord. passed 4-7-47) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.07  YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-20-6 authorizes the Council to designate
yield intersections and to erect yield signs at one or more entrances to such
intersections.



   (B)   When yield signs are erected at entrances to intersections
every driver of a vehicle shall approach such intersection with caution and
shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from any direction.



('73, Code § 15-3)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.08 DRIVING ON STREETS CLOSED TO TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall drive or cause to be driven any motor vehicle,
cart, wagon or vehicle of any description, howsoever propelled, over any part
of any street in the town, while such street or part thereof is being
reconstructed, altered or repaired and is closed to public travel by order of
the Council or the Director of Public Safety, or his or her designee.



   (B)   Barricades or obstructions denying vehicular access to any
such street or part thereof, in the absence of a sign, shall be prima facie
evidence that such street or part of street has been closed to vehicular
traffic by order of the Council or the Director of Public Safety, or his or
her designee.



('73 Code, § 15-10)  (Am. Ord. 2010-29, passed 10-18-10)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 71.09  WHERE PEDESTRIANS REQUIRED TO USE CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   No pedestrian shall cross any roadway within a business
district except in a crosswalk.  The term BUSINESS DISTRICT as used in this
section shall mean the territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for
business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks
or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at
least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides
of the highway.



   (B)   Where a marked crosswalk crosses a roadway anywhere within the
town, no pedestrian within the distance of one block or less from such marked
crosswalk shall cross such roadway except with such marked crosswalk.



('73 Code, § 15-9)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to require use of crosswalks, see R.I. Gen. Laws §
31-18-2



TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES



§ 71.25  OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES REQUIRED.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any traffic
control device applicable thereto unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle as provided by state law.



(R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-13-4)  ('73 Code, § 15-16)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.26  POLICE CHIEF TO RECOMMEND, PLACE AND MAINTAIN DEVICES.



   The Chief of Police shall place and maintain traffic control devices
upon highways under the town's jurisdiction when and as required under the
traffic ordinances and resolutions of the Council to make effective the
provisions thereof; and it shall be his duty to recommend to the Council from
time to time the placement and maintenance of such additional traffic control
devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic or the parking of
vehicles.



('73, Code § 15-14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.27  SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR DEVICES.



   All traffic control devices placed, installed, erected or maintained by
the town shall conform to the specifications and standards as prescribed in
the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways as
adopted by the state traffic commission pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-13-1.



('73, Code § 15-15)  (Ord. passed 4-7-47)



§ 71.28  EXISTING DEVICES CONTINUE IN EFFECT.



   All traffic control devices which are in place by authority of the
Council as of the effective date of this code shall be continued in place and
shall have full force and effect for their respective purposes until altered
or removed pursuant to authority of the Council.



('73 Code, § 15-13)



§ 71.29  EFFECT OF DEVICE WHICH IS NOT WORKING.



   No provision of this chapter for which a traffic control device is
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and
place of the alleged violation, the required traffic control device is not in
position and sufficiently legible or audible, as the case may be, to be seen
or heard by an ordinarily observant or attentive person; but whenever a
particular section does not state that a traffic control device is required,
such section shall be effective even though no such device is in place. 



('73 Code, § 15-17)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



General Parking Rules



   72.01   Parking prohibited in specified places



   72.02   When parking over 36 hours prohibited



   72.03   Obstructing traffic prohibited



   72.04   Unauthorized movement into prohibited area



   72.05   Parking for certain purposes prohibited



   72.06   Parking prohibited during storm emergency



   72.07   Compliance with traffic control devices required



   72.08   Notice of parking violation



   72.09   Parking of boats and boat trailers in residential districts



   72.10   Presumption that license plate owner is responsible



Through Traffic



   72.12   Through traffic



Fire Lanes



   72.20   Fires Chief designates lanes; owner's  responsibility



   72.21   Criteria used by Fire Chief



   72.22   Size of fire lanes



   72.23   Owner's compliance with designation; signs



   72.24   Appeal right of persons aggrieved



   72.25   General locations of fire lanes



   72.26   Parking, obstructing fire lanes prohibited



   72.27   Violations



Parking at Sachuest Beach, and Certain Areas Adjacent to Middletown Beaches



   72.35   Definitions



   72.36   Parking fees imposed



   72.37   Parking prohibited without payment of fee



   72.38   Sunset to sunrise parking prohibited



   72.39   Parking restricted to designated spaces; prohibited between
water marks



   72.40   Parking at Dunlap-Wheeler Park



GENERAL PARKING RULES



§ 72.01  PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or
the directions of a police office or traffic control device, in any of the
following places:



      (1)     On a sidewalk.



      (2)     In front of a public or private driveway.



      (3)     Within an intersection.



          (4)     Within eight feet of a fire hydrant or a fire
alarm or police signal box.



      (5)     On a crosswalk.



      (6)     Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.



      (7)     Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.



      (8)     Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within
30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the Chief of Police indicates a different length by signs or markings.



      (9)     Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly signposted).



      (10)    Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.



      (11)    On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of a street.



      (12)    Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a
highway.



      (13)    Within ten feet of a street corner at an intersection.



      (14)    Parallel to or at an angle with any curbing that is
painted yellow.



      (15)    In any prohibited parking area of a municipal parking
lot (when properly signposted).



      (16)    At any place where official signs prohibit stopping,
standing or parking.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A) of this section,
it shall not be necessary to post signs giving notice of places where
stopping, standing and parking are prohibited by this section.



('73 Code, § 15-18)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  WHEN PARKING OVER 36 HOURS PROHIBITED.



   No motor vehicle shall be parked upon any street or roadway for a
continuous period in excess of 36 hours, and any police officer may order the
removal of any such vehicle by towing, provided however, that any motor
vehicle validly registered, and displaying a current inspection sticker, and
appearing to be in operable condition, when parked in from of its owner,
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.



(Ord. passed 3-2-88)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.03  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 12
feet of width of roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.



('73 Code, § 15-19)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.04  UNAUTHORIZED MOVEMENT INTO PROHIBITED AREA.



   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.



('73 Code, § 15-20)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.05  PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:



   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale.



   (B)   Displaying of commercial advertising signs on any parked
vehicle for the purpose of directing customers to any business establishment.



   (C)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.



('73 Code, § 15-21)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.06  PARKING PROHIBITED DURING STORM EMERGENCY.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any town street
and/or highway  upon the declaration of a storm emergency by the Director of
Public Safety, or his designee, until said storm emergency has been declared
at an end by the Director of Public Safety or his designer.



   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, or his designee, after
consultation with the Chief of Police and/or the Director of Public Works, is
hereby authorized to declare a storm emergency upon snow reaching a depth of
two inches, or when in the opinion of the Director of Public Safety, or his
designee, such weather conditions exist as to constitute a hazard to the
public health and safety. Regular parking regulations will resume when the
Director of Public Safety, or his designee, has declared the storm emergency
at an end, based upon his judgement that the hazard has passed.



   (C)   Notice of the declaration of a storm emergency shall be made
through public service announcements in the media.



   (D)   Any vehicle parked in violation of this ordinance or impeding
snow removal shall be towed at the expense of the owner.



   (E)   Vehicles parking in violation of this section will be issued a
citation.



(Ord. passed 11-6-89; Am. Ord. passed 3-18-96)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.07  COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED.



   Wherever the standing of parking of a vehicle is prohibited, restricted
or otherwise regulated upon any street or portion of street or upon or within
any parking lot or other place within the town by ordinance or resolution of
the Council or pursuant to authority of the Council and appropriate signs,
markings or other traffic control devices are in place giving notice of such
prohibition, restriction or other regulation, each driver of a vehicle to
which any such sign, marking or other traffic control device is applicable
shall comply with the notice given by such sign, marking or other traffic
control device, and disobedience thereof shall be unlawful.



('73 Code, § 15-22)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.08  NOTICE OF PARKING VIOLATION.



   Traffic law enforcement officers, upon finding any vehicle to be
standing or parked in violation of any provision of this chapter, shall hand
to the driver of such vehicle, if he be present, or, if he not be present,
shall affix to the vehicle, a notice of violation which shall state:



   (A)   The specific violation charged;



   (B)   The date and hour such violation is found;



   (C)   The place of violation;



   (d)   The schedule of fines for such violation;



   (E)   The time and manner within which such fine may be paid at the
office of the Clerk of the District Court, second division, or by mail,
including the address to which the fine and notice may be mailed; and



   (F)   The name and badge number of the officer writing the notice of
violation.



('73 Code, § 15-35)



§ 72.09  PARKING OF BOATS AND BOAT TRAILERS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   No boat and/or boat trailer shall be parked or stored on or within 24
feet of the paved surface of a public road in any residential zoning
district, except that in the R-10 Zoning District, the required distance from
the paved surface of a public road shall be 12 feet.



(Ord. 2018-17, passed 9-17-18; Am. Ord. 2018-21, passed 12-3-18)



§ 72.10  PRESUMPTION THAT LICENSE PLATE OWNER IS RESPONSIBLE.



   When the person responsible for the standing or parking of any vehicle,
which is found standing or parked in violation of any provision of law, this
Code or other ordinance of the Council, is unknown to the police officer or
other person seeking to prosecute for such violation, the person in whose
name the state license plate upon such vehicle was issued shall be presumed
to be the person responsible for such violation, but this presumption shall
be subject to rebuttal by competent evidence.



('73 Code, § 15-36)



THROUGH TRAFFIC



§ 72.12  THROUGH TRAFFIC.



   (A)   Commercial vehicles prohibited on certain streets.



      (1)   The operation of through commercial vehicles on Forest
Avenue is prohibited.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, a COMMERCIAL VEHICLE is defined
as a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles used to transport passengers or
property if the motor vehicle:



      (1)   Has a gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more
pounds, or a towed unit with a gross vehicle rating of more than 10,000 or
more pounds, or has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds; or



      (2)   Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers including
the driver; or



      (3)   Is transporting hazardous materials and is required to
be placarded in accordance with 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as it may be
revised from time to time.



   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall affect the use of such
streets or highways by:



      (1)   Any fire truck, town public works department truck,
police vehicle, ambulance, school bus, bus serving the area or other motor
truck using such streets or highways in any emergency or engaged in
delivering goods, wares, merchandising or materials to or from any residence,
building or lot within the town bordering on such streets or highways; or



      (2)   Any farm vehicle as defined in R.I. Gen. Laws  §
31-1-8, which is registered with farm vehicle plates pursuant to R.I. Gen.
Laws § 31-3-31.



   (D)   In all instances where motor vehicle traffic is restricted or
prohibited under this section, the Town Administrator is directed to cause
signs to be erected on such streets or highways giving notice of such, in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



   (E)   Any driver who operated a commercial vehicle in contravention
of this section shall be subject to a fine not less than $25 for a first
violation, $50 for a second violation, and not less than $125, but no more
than $500 for each subsequent violation thereof.



(Ord. 2016-16, passed 10-17-16; Am. Ord. 2016-17, passed 12-5-16; Am. Ord.
2017-14, passed 11-6-17)



FIRE LANES



§ 72.20  FIRES CHIEF DESIGNATES LANES; OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY.



   The Fire Chief of any Fire District is hereby authorized to establish
fire lanes on property, either public or private, which is devoted to public
use or to which the public is invited or may reasonably be expected to
congregate, whenever he deems such fire lane necessary for the protection of
the lives of the persons or property at the location.  Such designation by
the Fire Chief or his designated representative of such fire lanes is not to
be construed as placing on the town the burden or responsibility for
maintenance of such fire lanes.  The owner of the real property upon which
the fire lane is located shall remain and continue to be responsible for
maintenance of the area upon which the fire lane is established and located.



(Ord. passed 8-16-86)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.21  CRITERIA USED BY FIRE CHIEF.



   The following criteria shall be considered by the Fire Chief or his
designated representative in determining the necessity for fire lanes:



   (A)   The nature and location of the facility under consideration.



   (B)   The necessity for access to the facility from public
thoroughfares.



   (C)   The necessity for fire lanes capable of handling fire
apparatus and equipment and free of parked vehicles and obstructions both to
and around the facility.



(Ord. passed 8-16-86)



§ 72.22  SIZE OF FIRE LANES.



   Fire lanes shall be not less than 20 feet of unobstructed width, able
to withstand live loads of fire apparatus and have a minimum of 13 feet 6
inches of vertical clearance. An approved turnaround for fire apparatus shall
be provided where and access road is a dead end and is in excess of 150 feet
in length. The turnaround shall have a minimum centerline radius of 45 feet.
Where acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction, turnaround
arrangements other than a cul-de-sac may be used.



(Ord. passed 8-16-93)



§ 72.23  OWNER'S COMPLIANCE WITH DESIGNATION SIGNS.



   Upon the designation of a fire lane pursuant to this subchapter, the
Fire Chief shall give notice of such designation to the owner of such
property upon which the fire lane is located, or to the Director of Public
Works of the town if such fire lane is located on property owned or
controlled by the town, directing the owner and at the expense of the owner
to cause such signs and markings to be posted on or about the designated fire
lane lettered "Fire Lane-No Parking Anytime."  Such signs and marking shall
be of standard size, color, lettering, and mounting conformed to
specifications established by the Fire Chief, Police Chief, and Director of
Public Works, and said signs shall contain a notation as to the maximum
penalty for violations of this subchapter.  Upon notification the owner
shall comply with the directions of the Fire Chief within a reasonable amount
of time, but in any event not to exceed 30 days.



(Ord. passed 8-16-86)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.24  APPEAL RIGHT OF PERSONS AGGRIEVED.



   Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Fire Chief, or his designated representative, relative to the
establishment of a fire lane pursuant to this subchapter may appeal such
decision to the Council by filing a complaint with the Town Clerk setting
forth the reasons for such appeal within 20 days after receipt of such
decision by such decision by any such person or persons aggrieved.



(Ord. passed 8-16-86)



§ 72.25  GENERAL LOCATIONS OF FIRE LANES.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said
vehicle at any time upon fire lanes designated at the facilities listed
below.  This list shall not be considered exclusive, but is intended as a
guide to the type of facility in need of fire lane protection:



   (A)   School, colleges and public facilities.



   (B)   Auditoriums.



   (C)   Churches and other places of religious worship.



   (D)   Hospitals, convalescent homes and nursing homes.



   (E)   Hotels, motels, boarding houses and other establishments
providing lodging or living accommodations.



   (F)   Manufacturing and commercial sites.



   (G)   Multiple residential dwellings.



   (H)   Shopping centers.



   (I)   Office buildings.



(Ord. passed 8-16-86)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.26  PARKING, OBSTRUCTING FIRE LANES PROHIBITED.



   Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes by any
means shall be prohibited at all times.  The owner of the property is
responsible for effecting compliance with this section.



(Ord. passed 8-16-86)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.27  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to
park said motor vehicle in any area designated as a fire lane pursuant to
this subchapter, and it shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to
obstruct passage at any time by any means in any area designated as a fire
lane.  Any vehicle found parked or otherwise obstructing any established
fire lane is hereby subject to be towed from said fire lane at the owner's
expense at the direction of the Town Administrator, any member of the town
Police Department of any member of the Department of State Police.  Any
persons violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to the
penalty set forth in § 70.99.



(Ord. passed 8-16-86)  Penalty, see § 70.99



PARKING AT SACHUEST BEACH, AND CERTAIN AREAS ADJACENT TO MIDDLETOWN BEACHES



§ 72.35  DEFINITIONS. 



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RESIDENTS.



      (1)   Persons who are legally domiciled within the town. Mere
seasonal or temporary residence in town, of whatever duration, shall not
constitute domicile for the purposes of this section. The burden of
establishing domicile in the town shall be on the applicant;



      (2)   Persons who are legally domiciled outside of the town,
but who are a lawful owner of a residential dwelling within the town, and who
reside in such dwelling unit for a period of at least 30 days during the
calendar year in which a resident parking pass is sought; and



      (3)   Active duty military personnel currently residing within
the town.



      (4)   Acceptable proof of residency shall include, where
applicable:



         (a)   Active Middletown voter registration;



         (b)   Middletown tax bill or other documentation
establishing ownership of a residential dwelling within the town;



         (c)   Motor vehicle actively registered to a Middletown
address;



         (d)   Residential lease in Middletown of at least 12
months duration; and



         (e)   Military orders.



   SUMMER SEASON.  The period from the May 1 to the September 15 in each
year.



('73 Code, §§ 15-26, 15-27)  (Ord. passed 5-3-48; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-60;
Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 5-7-18)



§ 72.36  PARKING FEES IMPOSED.



   Parking fees exist as set forth in Chapter 36 of this Code or as may be
amended.



§ 72.37  PARKING PROHIBITED WITHOUT PAYMENT OF FEE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a motor vehicle on
the property described in § 72.36 without paying the fee therein prescribed
unless exempted from payment under the provisions of this subchapter.



('73 Code, § 15-31)  (Ord. passed 5-3-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.38  SUNSET TO SUNRISE PARKING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park any motor vehicle
on the property described in § 72.36 between the hours of sunset and sunrise
of any day.



('73 Code, § 15-28)  (Ord. passed 5-3-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.39  PARKING RESTRICTED TO DESIGNATED SPACES; PROHIBITED BETWEEN WATER
MARKS.



   No person shall stand or park any vehicle upon Sachuest Beach or upon
that part of the shore between high and low water marks adjacent thereto, and
shall only stand or park any vehicle in such places designated by the town as
parking places.



('73 Code, § 15-29)  (Ord. passed 7-13-33; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-48; Am. Ord.
passed 7-2-51)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.40  PARKING AT DUNLAP-WHEELER PARK.



   No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than four
consecutive hours between the hours of sunrise and 4:00 p.m. at the
Dunlap-Wheeler Park parking area.  Such parking shall be limited to holders
of a Middletown resident beach parking pass issued under the provisions of §
72.36 (and all descendants of the Dunlap and Wheeler families).  Parking is
reserved for noncommercial purposes only.  No employees or owner of a
business shall use said lot for work related parking.  At least one space in
such lot shall be designated as reserved for persons with disabilities.



(Ord. passed 8-19-02; Am. Ord. passed 4-19-04)



CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES



Section



Rules of Operation



   73.01   Applicability of subchapter



   73.02   Rights and duties of operators generally



   73.03   Required obedience to traffic-control signals



   73.04   Operator to exercise care for persons and property, yield to
pedestrians



   73.05   Duty to ride on right, pass with care



   73.06   Hand and arm signals required



   73.07   Riding on sidewalks and footpaths prohibited



   73.08   Riding more than two abreast prohibited



   73.09   Riding on seat required



   73.10   Trick riding prohibited



   73.11   Clinging to other vehicles prohibited



   73.12   Towing vehicles or persons on roller skates prohibited



   73.13   Equipment required



   73.14   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles



Statutory references:



   Authority to license and regulate bicycles, see R.I. Gen. Laws §
31-12-12



Cross-reference:



   For definition of bicycle, see § 70.01



RULES OF OPERATION



§ 73.01  APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER



   The rules and regulations provided in this subchapter shall be observed
in the operation of each bicycle on the streets and public places of the town.



('73 Code, § 5-13)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56)



§ 73.02  RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF OPERATORS GENERALLY.



   Every person operating a bicycle shall be granted all the rights and be
subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a vehicle by the laws
of the state or by any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
town, except as to provisions in such laws and ordinances that by their
nature can have no application to bicycles.



(R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-19-3)  ('73 Code, § 5-14)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.03  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC- CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey all official traffic
control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles.



('73 Code, § 5-17)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.04  OPERATOR TO EXERCISE CARE FOR PERSONS AND PROPERTY, YIELD TO
PEDESTRIANS.



   Each person operating a bicycle shall at all times operate it with due
regard for the safety of other persons and vehicles lawfully on the streets
and public places, as well as for his own safety; and shall at all times
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.



('73 Code, § 5-15)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.05  DUTY TO RIDE ON RIGHT, PASS WITH CARE.



   Every person operating a bicycle shall ride as near to the right-hand
side of the roadway as practicable and exercise due care when passing a
parked vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



('73 Code, § 5-19)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.06  HAND AND ARM SIGNALS REQUIRED.



   Every person operating a bicycle shall, before turning or changing the
direction of the bicycle, give the appropriate hand and arm signal prescribed
by the motor vehicle laws.



('73 Code, § 5-18)  (Ord. passed 5-5-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   State signal requirements, see R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-16-10



§ 73.07  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS AND FOOTPATHS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall operate or propel any bicycle on any sidewalk or upon
any public footpath in the town.



('73 Code, § 5-16)  (Ord. passed 8-21-05; Am. Ord. passed 5-7-56) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.08  RIDING MORE THAN TWO ABREAST PROHIBITED.



   Persons operating bicycles shall not ride more than two abreast except
upon bicycle paths.



('73 Code, § 5-20)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.09  RIDING ON SEAT REQUIRED.



   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto; and no person shall be carried on the
frame or handle bar of the bicycle.



('73 Code, § 5-21)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.10  TRICK RIDING PROHIBITED.



     No person operating a bicycle shall engage in trick riding.



('73 Code, § 5-24)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.11  CLINGING TO OTHER VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   No person operating a bicycle shall attach the bicycle or himself to
any other moving vehicle.



('73 Code, § 5-23)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.12  TOWING VEHICLES OR PERSONS ON ROLLER SKATES PROHIBITED.



   No person operating a bicycle shall tow or draw any coaster, sled,
wagon or similar vehicle, or person on roller skates.



('73 Code, § 5-22)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.13  EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle that is not equipped with adequate
brakes, lights and a bell or other device capable of giving an audible
signal, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person
use on a bicycle any siren or whistle.



('73 Code, § 5-26)  (Ord. passed 5-7-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.14  LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.



   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front.



   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a red reflector of a type
approved by the registry which shall be visible for 600 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A
lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may
be used in addition to the red reflector.



   (C)   No person shall sell a new bicycle or a pedal for use on a
bicycle that is not equipped with a reflector of a type approved by the
department, on each pedal of such bicycle which is visible from the front and
rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet nor shall any
person operate a bicycle without such pedals.



   (D)    A bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.



   (E)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or brakes which
will enable the operator to stop the bicycle within 25 feet at a speed of 10
mph on dry, level, clean pavement.



   (F)   Every vehicle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with
a minimum of 20 square inches on each side of the bicycle of white reflective
material on the wheels or tires to indicate as nearly as possible the
continuous circular shape and size of the wheels or tires on each bicycle.
All reflective materials used in compliance with this section shall be
visible during the hours of darkness from 500 feet when viewed under lawful
low beam headlamps under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level,
unlighted roadway, and shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the
registry of motor vehicles.



(R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-19-10) Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   No parking on roadways



   II.   Limited parking on roadways



   III.   Handicapped parking



SCHEDULE I:  NO PARKING ON ROADWAYS.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park any portion of a vehicle in the
roadway on the hereinafter named streets:



 



Allston Avenue
 
Easton Way
 
Maloney Lane
 
Rogers Lane


Aquidneck Avenue
 
Ellery Avenue
 
Maple Avenue
 
Seascape Avenue


Ashurst Avenue
 
Esplande
 
Miantonomi Avenue
 
Sherman Lane


Beachview Terrace
 
Forest Avenue
 
Newport Avenue
 
Shore Drive


Berkeley Avenue
 
Gunning Court
 
O'Donnell Road
 
St. George's Avenue


Briarwood Avenue
 
Hanging Rocks Road
 
O'Donnell Way
 
Stimson Street


Burton Place
 
Harold's Lane
 
O'Neil Boulevard
 
Sunset Hill Road


Center Avenue
 
High Street
 
Orchard Avenue
 
Third Beach Road


Chases Lane
 
Hillside Avenue
 
Paradise Avenue
 
Toni-Lynn Terrace


Coddington Highway
 
Hoover Road
 
Peckham Avenue
 
Tuckerman Avenue


Crescent Road
 
Indian Avenue
 
Perry Avenue
 
Tuckerman Terrace


Crest Street
 
James Street
 
Purgatory Lane
 
Turner Road


Crest Street South
 
Jean Street
 
Purgatory Road
 
Warren Avenue


Dexter Street
 
Kane Avenue
 
Renfrew Avenue
 
Wave Avenue


Easton Terrace
 
Kent Road
 
Reservoir Road
 
Wayside Avenue


White Terrace
 
 
 
 
 
 


Windermere Terrace
 
 
 
 
 
 


Wolcott Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
 


Wyatt Road
 
 
 
 
 





 



 



   (B)   Exception for delivery, service or repair vehicles. The
prohibition set forth in division (A) of this section shall not apply to any
delivery, service or repair vehicle, if such vehicle: (i) is actually being
used to perform deliveries, service or repairs at a particular address for a
particular customer when that customer's address is clearly displayed on the
dashboard; (ii) is emblazoned with the name and business number of its owner;
and (iii) is lawfully parked in accordance with the general parking
requirements of this chapter. Provided, however, that nothing in this section
shall be construed to permit overnight parking by any delivery, service or
repair vehicle, except in the case of, and only for the duration of,
emergency delivery, service or repairs at a particular address for a
particular customer when that customer's address is clearly displayed on the
vehicle's dashboard.



(Ord. passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. passed 3-18-96; Am.
Ord. 2016-12, passed 9- 6-16; Am. Ord. 2017-4, passed 4-3-2017)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II:  LIMITED PARKING ON ROADWAYS.



   No person shall stand or park any portion of a vehicle in the roadway
as specified hereinafter.



 

Street
 
Distance
 
Side
 
Ord. No.
 
Passage Date




Beacon Street
 
From the intersection at West Main Road, west for a distance of 185 feet
 
Either
 
 
 
9-30-57


Bliss Mine Road
 
From the intersection of Green End Avenue, Boulevard and Bliss Mine Road,
south on Bliss Mine Road to intersection of Bliss Mine Road and Bliss Road
 
Either
 
 
 
4-16-73


Bliss Road
 
From the intersection of Bliss Mine Road and Bliss Road for a distance of 50
feet west on Bliss Road
 
Either
 
 
 
4-16-73


Ellen Road
 
From the northwest corner of #49 Ward Avenue, traveling east 245 feet to the
northwest corner of #47 Ward Avenue
 
Either
 
2017-4
 
4-3-17


North Fenner Avenue
 
From its intersection with Miantonomi Avenue, north for a distance of 150 feet
 
Either
 
 

2017-4
 
9-30-57

6-6-60

4-3-17


Fenner Avenue
 
From its intersection with Miantonomi Avenue, south for 50 feet
 
Either
 
 

09-10
 
9-30-57

6-6-60

7-6-09


Hart Street
 
From the intersection of West Main Road to a point 28 feet west
 
North
 
 

2017-4
 
5-1-61

8-7-61

4-3-17


Hart Street
 
From a point 83 feet west of the intersection of West Main Road to a point
222 feet west of the intersection of West Main Road
 
North
 
 

2017-4
 
5-1-61

8-7-61

4-3-17


Hart Street
 
From the intersection of West Main Road, west to the intersection of Yarnell
Street
 
South
 
 
 
5-1-61

8-7-61


King Road
 
182 feet west from the intersection of Hart Street and King Road, then
proceeding in a southwesterly direction 373 feet to the intersection of King
Road and Admiral Court
 
South
 
 
 
6-16-75


Kingfisher Right-of-Way
 
Except for five designated spaces, four on the north side and one on the
easterly side which is designated as a handicapped parking space
 
 
 
2018-11
 
5-7-18


Meadow Lane
 
From its intersection at East Main Road to a point 500 feet in an easterly
direction
 
Either
 
 

2017-4
 
7-17-95

4-3-17


Phelps Road
 
Along entire length
 
West
 
02-14
 
9-16-02


Phelps Road
 
For 105 feet south of intersection with Boulevard
 
East
 
2017-4
 
4-3-17


Third Beach

Connector Road
 
On any of the land between Second or Sachuest Beach and Third Beach including
all of the roads and ways in and across the same
 
Either
 
 

2017-4
 
6-5-61

4-3-17


Underwood Lane
 
From its intersection with Maple Avenue traveling north for 30 feet
 
Either
 
02-14

2017-4
 
9-16-02

4-3-17


Vaucaluse Aveue
 
From the intersection with Peckham Avenue to the intersection with Green End
Avenue
 
Either
 
2017-4
 
4-3-17


Ward Avenue
 
From the northwest corner of #50 Ward Avenue, traveling north for 236 feet
 
Either
 
 

2017-4
 
9-4-01

4-3-17


Woolsey Road
 
From the intersection with West Main Road for a distance of 225 feet in an
easterly direction
 
Either
 
 
 
12-5-77

9-5-89


Woolsey Road
 
From a point 225 feet in an easterly direction from the intersection of West
Main Road to Bristol Road (tow zone)
 
South
 
 
 
9-5-89




 



SCHEDULE III:  HANDICAPPED PARKING.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Number of Spaces
 
Ord. No.
 
Passage Date


Harbor View Court
 
In front of residence located at 5 Harbor View Court
 

1

 
2014-3
 
9-2-14


Kingfisher Right- of-Way
 
On the easterly side
 

1

 
2018-11
 
5-7-18


 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 



 



CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Stop intersections



   II.   Speed limits



   III.   Yield intersections



   IV.   Weight limits



   V.   School zones



SCHEDULE I:  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



 


Street

 

Intersection With

 

Designation

 

Ord. No.

 

Passage Date





Adelaide Avenue
 
Sherri Lane
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Airport Road
 
Forest Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Algonquin Drive
 
Brown's Lane
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Algonquin Drive
 
Pocahontas Drive
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Allston Avenue
 
Briarwood Avenue
 
Two-way
 
 
 
2-19-80


Allston Avenue
 
Newport Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92
8-3-92


Allston Avenue
 
Orchard Avenue
 
Three-way
 
 
 
8-17-88


Allston Avenue
 
Purgatory Road
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Aspinet Road
 
Squantum Drive
 
North
 
99-9
 
8-16-99


Barton Lane
 
Oliphant Lane
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
12-17-86


Beacon Street
 
Beacon Terrace
 
 
 
 
 
11-4-87


Beacon Street
 
North Beacon Terrace
 
 
 
 
 
11-4-87


Beacon Terrace
 
Beacon Street
 
 
 
 
 
11-4-87


Beacon Terrace
 
Rosedale Avenue
 
Four-way
 
 
 
11-4-87


Berkeley Avenue
 
Entrance to Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Berkeley Avenue
 
Entrance to Wyatt Road
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Bliss Road
 
Kay Boulevard
 
Eastbound
 
 
 
1-6-92


Bliss Mine Road
 
Entrance to Bliss Road
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Bliss Mine Road
 
Boulevard
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Boulevard
 
Green End Avenue
 
Two-way
 
 
 
7-15-91


Boulevard
 
Miantonomi Avenue
 
Two-way
 
 
 
2-19-80


Boulevard
 
Miantonomi Avenue
 
Four-way
 
 
 
2-19-80


Briarwood Avenue
 
Aquidneck Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
9-17-73


Briarwood Avenue
 
Center Avenue
 
Four-way
 
 
 
2-19-80
12-17-86


Briarwood Avenue
 
Entrance to Wolcott Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Bristol Road
 
Ludlow Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-5-89


Brookdale Avenue
 
Chestnut Hill Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-21-92


Brown's Lane
 
South driveway of Super Stop and Shop
 
 
 
 
 
8-21-85


Buck Road
 
Ludlow Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-5-89


Buck Road Extension
 
Forest Avenue
 
 
 
2015- 4
 
6-1-15


Burton Place
 
Entrance to Marshall Lane
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Burton Place
 
Entrance to Rogers Lane
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Busher Drive
 
Pasture Farm Drive
 
East and west
 
 
 
11-2-92


Carriage Trail
 
Goldenrod Drive
 
Southbound
 

02-11
 
6-3-02
8-19-02


Carriage Trail
 
Wintergreen Drive
 
Eastbound
 

02-11
 
6-3-02
8-19-02


Casey Drive
 
Entrance to Chases Lane
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Center Avenue
 
Newport Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Center Avenue
 
Orchard Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
8-5-87


Center Avenue
 
Purgatory Road
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Champlin Terrace
 
Forest Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Chases Lane
 
Access highway
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Chases Lane
 
Casey Drive
 
Two-way
 
 
 
10-20-82


Chases Lane
 
Read Street
 
Two-way
 
 
 
10-20-82


Christine Road
 
Busher Drive
 
 
 
 
 
11-2-92


Christine Road
 
Pasture Farm Drive
 
 
 
 
 
11-2-92


Coggeshall Circle
 
Coggeshall Way
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Coggeshall Way
 
Oliphant Lane
 
Both intersections
 
 
 
12-17-86


Commerce Drive
 
Corporate Place
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Compton View Drive
 
Green End Avenue
 
Facing north
 
98-7
 
5-4-98


Compton View Drive
 
Morrison Avenue
 
Facing west
 
98-7
 
5-4-98


Concord Drive  (lower end)
 
Continental Drive (lower end)
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-89


Continental Drive
 
Concord Drive (upper end)
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-89


Continental Drive
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
3-20-89


Corey Lane
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Corporate Place
 
Commerce Drive (two)
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Cows Path
 
West View Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-8-92


Crescent Road
 
Purgatory Road
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Crest Street
 
Purgatory Road
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Debbie Road
 
Busher Drive
 
 
 
 
 
11-2-92


Debbie Road
 
Pasture Farm Drive
 
 
 
 
 
11-2-92


Dudley Avenue
 
Dudley Avenue North/ Dudley Avenue South
 
 
 
 
 
8-25-94


Easton Terrace
 
Wolcott Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
05-12
 
5-16-05


Ellery Avenue
 
Briarwood Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
12-19-94


Ellery Avenue
 
Newport Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Ellery Avenue
 
Purgatory Road
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Elmwood Avenue
 
High Street
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
12-19-94


Elmwood Avenue
 
West Main Road
 
 
 
 
 
12-19-94


Esplande (north end)
 
Entrance to Tuckerman Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Esplande, Crest Street
 
Tuckerman Avenue
 
Four-way
 
 
 
2-19-80


Everett Street
 
Boulevard
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Everett Street
 
Paul Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Evergreen Avenue
 
Linden Street
 
 
 
02-02
 
1-24-02


Evergreen Avenue
 
Willow Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Fairway Drive
 
Browns Lane
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-89


Freeborn Street
 
Miantonomi Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Green End Avenue
 
Indian Avenue
 
Three-way
 
 
 
3-5-79


Green End Avenue
 
Third Beach Road
 
Four-way
 
 
 
10-5-70
2-19-80


Green Lane
 
Burma Road
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Hammarlund Way
 
Entrance to Johnnycake Hill
 
 
 
 
 
6-4-79
2-19-80


Harbor Village Drive
 
Chases Lane
 
 
 
 
 
9-2-87


Harold Lane
 
Reservoir Road
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Harvest Road
 
West View Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-8-92


High Street
 
Boulevard
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


High Street
 
Commercial Boulevard
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


High Street
 
O'Neil Boulevard
 


Four-way
 


09-17
 
2-19-80
7-15-91
9-21-09


High Street
 
Paul Avenue
 
Three-way
 
98-19
 
11-2-98


High Meadow Court
 
West View Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-8-92


Honeyman Avenue
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
8-7-89


Honeyman Avenue
 
Ward Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
8-7-89


Hoover Road
 
Tuckerman Avenue
 
Three-way
 
04-02
05-08
 
1-5-04
4-18-05


Hoover Road
 
Wolcott Avenue
 
Westbound
 
04-02
 
1-5-04


Howland Avenue
 
Third Beach Road
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Indian Avenue
 
Green End Avenue
 
Three-way
 
 
 
2-19-80


Indian Avenue
 
Peckham Avenue
 
Three-way
 
 
 
2-19-80


Indian Avenue,
Third Beach Road
 
Hanging Rock Road
 
Four-way
 
 
 
2-19-80


Indian Hill Road
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Islander Avenue
 
Entrance to Valley Road
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


J.H. Dwyer Drive
 
Green Lane
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Jepson Lane
 
Oliphant Lane
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
12-17-86


Jib Court
 
Atlantic Drive
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-89


John Clarke Road
 
Aquidneck Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
6-4-79


John Clarke Road
 
Entrance to Johnnycake Hill
 
 
 
 
 
6-4-79
2-19-80


John Clarke Road
 
Silva Lane
 
Northbound
 
 
 
6-4-79
2-19-80


Johnnycake Hill
 
Valley Road
 
 
 
 
 
6-4-79


Kane Avenue
 
Purgatory Road
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Kane Avenue
 
Tuckerman Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
9-21-88
7-15-91


Kay Boulevard
 
Bliss Road
 
 
 
 
 
10-21-91


Laura Road
 
Busher Drive
 
 
 
 
 
11-2-92


Laura Road
 
Pasture Farm Drive
 
 
 
 
 
11-2-92


Lighthouse View Drive
 
Compton View Drive
 
Facing east and south
 
98-7
 
5-4-98


Ludlow Road
 
Woolsey Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-5-89


Maidford River Road
 
Propsect Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Maloney Lane
 
Wolcott Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Maple Avenue
 
Sherman Lane
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-00


Maplewood Road
 
Rego Road
 
 
 
 
 
8-7-85


Maplewood Road
 
Ridgewood Road
 
Three-way
 
 
 
8-7-85


Maplewood Road
 
Wood Road
 
Four-way
 
 
 
8-7-85


Massachusetts Avenue
 
Race Street
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Mast Court
 
Atlantic Drive
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-89


Meadow Lane
 
Its north and south loops
 
Three-way
 
 
 
4-4-05


Meadow Lane
 
Southwest corner abutting property identified as 113 Meadow Lane
 
 
 
 
 
11-1-04


Miantonomi Avenue
 
Boulevard
 
Two-way
 
 
 
7-15-91


Miantonomi Avenue
 
Fenner Avenue
 
Four-way
 
 
 
7-15-91


Miantonomi Avenue
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Miantonomi Avenue,
Fenner Avenue
 
North Fenner Avenue
 
Four-way
 
 
 
2-19-80


Mitchell's Lane
 
Wyatt Road
 
Two-way
 
 
 
1-7-91


Newport Avenue
 
Renfew Avenue
 

Four-way
 
 
 
2-19-80
12-16-87


Newport Avenue
 
Wolcott Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


North Beacon Terrace
 
Beacon Street
 
 
 
 
 
11-4-87


North Fenner Avenue
 
Boulevard
 
Northbound
 
 
 
11-21-05


O'Donnell Way
 
Wolcott Avenue
 
Westbound
 
05-12
 
5-16-05


Oak Forest Drive
 
Amesbury Circle
 
 
 
 
 
9-21-88


Oak Forest Drive
 
Oliphant Lane
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Oak Forest Drive
 
Swan Drive
 
 
 
 
 
9-21-88


Old Farm Way
 
West View Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-8-92


Old Mill Lane
 
Wapping Road
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Orchard Avenue
 
Ellery Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Paradise Avenue
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Paul Avenue
 
High Street
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Paul Avenue
 
Entrance to Willow Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Peace Street
 
Beacon Street
 
 
 
 
 
11-4-87


Peckham Avenue
 
Indian Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-5-79
3-6-89


Peckham Avenue
 
Vaucluse Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
5-1-95


Peckham Avenue
 
Wapping Road
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
3-6-89


Peckham Lane
 
Wapping Road
 
 
 
 
 
3-4-91


Plymouth Avenue
 
Concord Drive
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-89


Plymouth Avenue
 
Continental Drive
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-89


Pocahontas Drive
 
Brown's Lane
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Pocono Road
 
Squantum Drive
 
North
 
99-9
 
8-16-99


Post Office
 
Commercial Boulevard
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Prospect Avenue
 
Paradise Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Public Library Avenue
 
Commodore Perry Boulevard
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Race Street
 
Beacon Street
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Renfrew Avenue
 
Entrance to Briarwood Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Renfrew Avenue
 
Orchard Avenue
 


Four-way
 
 
 
2-19-80
12-16-87
8-18-92


Renfrew Avenue
 
Reservoir Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
12-16-87


Renfrew Avenue
 
Seascape Avenue
 
Two-way
 
 
 
2-19-80


Renfrew Park
 
Ellery Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Reservoir Avenue
 
Wolcott Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Reservoir Road
 
Renfrew Avenue
 
Three-way
 
 
 
3-2-09


Ridgewood Road
 
Maplewood Road
 
 
 
 
 
3-6-89


Ridgewood Road
 
Oakwood Road
 
Northbound
Southbound
 
 
 
3-6-89


River Run Lane
 
Prospect Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Riverview Avenue
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Riverview Avenue
 
Wapping Road
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Roosters Way
 
West View Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-8-92


Rosedale Avenue
 
Beacon Terrace
 

Four-way
 
 
 
2-19-80
11-4-87


Rosedale Avenue
 
Stockton Drive
 

Four-way
 
 
 
2-19-80
11-4-87


Rosedale Terrace
 
Rosedale Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
11-4-87


St. Georges Avenue
 
Wolcott Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Sail Court
 
Atlantic Drive
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-89


Sakonnet Terrace
 
Riverview Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
6-19-00


Sachuest Road
 
Paradise Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Sachuest Road
 
Purgatory Road
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Sauchest Way
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Seaboard Court
 
High Street
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Seascape Avenue
 
Newport Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Seascape Avenue
 
Renfrew Avenue
 
Four-way
 
 
 
12-16-87


Seascape Avenue
 
Wolcott Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Shaw Court
 
Entrance to High Street
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Sherman Lane
 
Maple Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Sherwood Road
 
Bliss Road
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Shore Drive
 
Esplande
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Silva Lane
 
John Clarke Road
 
 
 
 
 
6-4-79


South Crest Street
 
At its bend
 
Northbound
Eastbound
 

05-08
 
1-7-91
4-18-05


Spinnaker Court
 
Atlantic Drive
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-89


Spruce Street
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Squantum Drive
 
Aspinet Road
 
East and west
 
99-9
 
8-16-99


Squantum Drive
 
Nakomis Road
 
East and west
 
99-9
 
8-16-99


Stockton Drive
 
Rosedale Avenue
 
Four-way
 
 
 
11-4-87


Third Beach Road
 
Hanging Rocks Road and Indian Avenue
 
Four-way
 
 
 
8-20-73


Trout Drive
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Tuckerman Avenue
 
Southerly entrance to Crest Street and southerly entrance to Esplande
 
Four-way
 
 
 
12-4-78


Tuckerman Avenue
 
Purgatory Road (east and west)
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Turner Road
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Turner Road
 
Wyatt Road
 
Four-way
 
 
 
2-19-80


Underwood Lane
 
Maple Avenue
 
North on Underwood for southbound traffic
 
2-14
 
9-16-02


Unity Drive
 
Burton Place
 
 
 
 
 
9-8-92


Vaucluse Avenue
 
Green End Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Vaucluse Avenue
 
Indian Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Vaucluse Avenue
 
Peckham Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Vernon Avenue
 
Boulevard
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Vernon Avenue
 
Fenner Avenue
 
Four-way
 
 
 
9-5-72
2-19-80


Wanumetonomy Country Club
 
Brown's Lane
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Warren Avenue
 
Entrance to Briarwood Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80


Warren Avenue
 
Newport Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-16-92


Wave Avenue
 
Aquidneck Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
7-16-79


Wave Avenue
 
Purgatory Road
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Wave Avenue
 
Second and First Beach Road
 
 
 
 
 
7-16-79


Wayside Avenue
 
Loring Street
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Wayside Avenue
 
Wolcott Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Wedgewood Drive
 
William Drive
 
 
 
 
 
12-17-86


Weetamoe Road
 
Namquid Drive
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Weetamoe Road
 
Squantum Drive
 
 
 
 
 
7-15-91


Wintergreen Drive
 
Goldenrod Drive
 
Southbound
 

02-11
 
6-3-02
8-19-02


Wolcott Avenue
 
Briarwood Avenue
 
Three-way
 
04-10
 
3-1-04


Wolcott Avenue
 
Easton Terrace
 
Southbound
 
 
 
11-6-95


Wolcott Avenue
 
Newport Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
9-18-95


Wolcott Avenue
 
O'Donnell Way and Easton Terrace
 

Four-way
 
95-15
 
11-6-95
7-18-05


Wolcott Avenue
 
Purgatory Road
 
 
 
 
 
2-19-80
7-15-91


Wolcott Avenue
 
Tuckerman Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
9-21-88
7-15-91


Wood Road
 
In front of 26 Wood Road
 
North
 
2013-1
 
1-7-13


Woolsey Road
 
Bristol Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-5-89


Wyatt Road
 
Mitchell's Lane
 

Three-way
 
 
 
2-19-80
1-7-91


Wyatt Road
 
Turner Road
 
Four-way
 
 
 
9-18-72


Wyndham Hill Road
 
Berkeley Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-20-89


Y.M.C.A. Drive
(unnamed road)
 
John Clarke Road
 
 
 
 
 
9-21-88


Yarnell Street
 
Hart Street
 
 
 
 
 
3-4-91


Yarnell Street
 
Maple Avenue
 
 
 
 
 
3-4-91




 



SCHEDULE II:  SPEED LIMITS.



 


Street

 

Speed Limit (mph)

 

Ord. No.

 

Passage Date





Amesbury Circle
 

15

 
 
 
9-21-88


Aspinet Road
 

15

 
 
 
11-2-70


Beacon Street
 

20

 
 
 
11-4-87


Beacon Terrace
 

15

 
 
 
11-4-87


Bliss Mine Road
 

20

 
 
 
8-19-87


Bristol Road
 

20

 
 
 
9-5-89


Buck Road
 

20

 
 
 
9-5-89


Buck Road Extension
 

20

 
2015-4
 
6-1-15


Burton Place
 

20

 
 
 
9-8-92


Busher Drive
 

20

 
 
 
11-2-92


Casey Drive
 

15

 
2012-7
 
6-18-12


Center Avenue
 

20

 
 
 
8-5-87


Chases Lane
 

25

 
 
 
7-16-79


Christine Road
 

20

 
 
 
11-2-92


Coggeshall Circle
 

15

 
 
 
12-17-86


Coggeshall Way
 

15

 
 
 
12-17-86


Colony Drive
 

15

 
 
 
11-2-70


Connecticut Avenue
 

15

 
 
 
12-17-86


Cows Path
 

20

 
 
 
9-8-92


Crescent Road
 

15

 
 
 
3-6-89


Debbie Road
 

20

 
 
 
11-2-92


Donald Drive
 

15

 
2012-7
 
6-18-12


Elmwood Avenue
 

20

 
 
 
12-5-94


Fairway Drive
 

20

 
 
 
8-7-89


Fenner Avenue
 

20

 
2010-04
 
4-5-10


Hammarlund Way
 

15

 
 
 
6-4-79


Harvest Road
 

20

 
 
 
9-8-92




 



 


Street

 

Speed Limit (mph)

 

Ord. No.

 

Passage Date





High Meadow Court
 

20

 
 
9-8-92


Honeyman Avenue
 

20

 
 
8-7-89


Indian Hill Road
 

15

 
 
12-17-86


Island Drive
 

20

 
 
9-4-07


J.H. Dwyer Drive
 

15

 
 
12-17-86


John Clarke Road
 

25

 
 
6-4-79


Johnnycake Hill
 

25

 
 
6-4-79


Laura Road
 

20

 
 
11-2-92


Loring Street
 

15

 
 
12-17-86


Ludlow Road
 

20

 
 
9-5-89


Meadow Lane
 

15

 
 
11-1-04
4-4-05


Maidford River Road
 

15

 
 
12-17-86


Massachusetts Avenue
 

15

 
 
12-17-86


Morrison Avenue
 

15

 
 
12-17-86


Murphy Circle
 

15

 
2012-7
 
6-18-12


Nakomis Drive
 

15

 
 
11-2-70


Namquid Drive
 

15

 
 
11-2-70


Newport Avenue
 

20

 
 
8-5-87


North Fenner Avenue
 

20

 
 
11-21-05


Oak Forest Drive
 

15

 
 
9-21-88


Ocean View Avenue
 

20

 
 
9-8-92


Old Farm Way
 

20

 
 
9-8-92


Orville Drive
 

15

 
2012-7
 
6-18-12


Paddock Lane
 

20

 
 
9-4-07


Pasture Farm Drive
 

20

 
 
11-2-92


Pocono Road
 

15

 
 
11-2-70


Race Street
 

15

 
 
12-17-86




 



 


Street

 

Speed Limit (mph)

 

Ord. No.

 

Passage Date





Reardon Drive
 

15

 
 
2-18-92


Renfrew Avenue
 

20

 
 
8-5-87


Reservoir Avenue
 

20

 
 
8-5-87


Ridgewood Road
 

15

 
 
9-6-94


River Run Lane
 

15

 
 
12-17-86


Rogers Lane
 

15

 
 
9-20-93


Roosters Way
 

20

 
 
9-8-92


Sachuest Way
 

15

 
 
12-17-86


Sherman Lane
 

15

 
 
11-2-70


Silva Lane
 

15

 
 
6-4-79


Squantum Drive
 

15

 
 
11-2-70


Stockton Drive
 

15

 
 
11-4-87


Swan Drive
 

15

 
 
12-17-86
9-21-88


Unity Drive
 

20

 
 
9-8-92


Valley View Estates
Carriage Trail
Goldenrod Drive
Wintergreen Drive
 


15

 

02-11
 
6-3-02
8-19-02


Wave Avenue
 

15

 
 
7-16-79


Wedgewood Drive
 

15

 
 
12-17-86


Weetamoe Road
 

15

 
 
11-2-70


West View Road
 

20

 
 
9-8-92


William Drive
 

15

 
 
12-17-86


Woolsey Road
 

20

 
 
9-5-89




 



SCHEDULE III:  YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



 


Street

 

Intersection

 

Ord. No.

 

Passage Date



Hanging Rock Road (north)
 
Paradise Avenue triangle
 
 
8-19-87


Kay Boulevard
 
Bliss Road (northbound)
 
 
12-17-86
8-19-87


Mitchell's Lane
 
Wyatt Road (southbound)
 
 
8-19-87


Rosedale Court
 
Stockton Drive
 
 
11-4-87


Third Beach Road
 
Sachuest Road
 
 
8-19-87


Third Beach Road
 
Wapping Road
 
 
10-5-70



 



SCHEDULE IV: WEIGHT LIMITS.



 


Street

 

Weight Limit

 

Ord. No.

 

Passage Date



High Street
 
4 tons
 
98-20
 
11-2-98



 



SCHEDULE V:  SCHOOL ZONES.



 


School

 

Location

 

Speed Limit

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Aquidneck School
 
On Reservoir Road, where warning signs will be posted in proximity with the
boundaries of the area within 300 feet of the school house grounds,
entrances, and exits pursuant to  R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-14-2 (All signage
installed shall be ANSI certified)
 

15 mph

 

2012-11

 

9-4-12



Aquidneck School
 
On Renfrew Avenue, where warning signs will be posted in proximity with the
boundaries of the area within 300 feet of the school house grounds,
entrances, and exits pursuant to  R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-14-2 (All signage
installed shall be ANSI certified)
 

15 mph

 

2012-11

 

9-4-12



Forest Avenue School
 
On Forest Avenue, where warning signs will be posted in proximity with the
boundaries of the area within 300 feet of the school house grounds,
entrances, and exits pursuant to  R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-14-2 (All signage
installed shall be ANSI certified)
 

20 mph

 

2012-11

 

9-4-12



Gaudet School
 
On Turner Road, where warning signs will be posted in proximity with the
boundaries of the area within 300 feet of the school house grounds,
entrances, and exits pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-14-2 (All signage
installed shall be ANSI certified)
 

20 mph

 

2012-11

 

9-4-12



St. Georges School
 
On Purgatory Road, where warning signs will be posted in proximity with the
boundaries of the area within 300 feet of the school house grounds,
entrances, and exits pursuant to  R.I. Gen. Laws § 31-14-2 (All signage
installed shall be ANSI certified)
 

20 mph

 

2012-11

 

9-4-12




 



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



        Chapter



         90.   ANIMALS



         90A.   FEEDING NON-DOMESTICATED ANIMALS



         91.   FIRE PROTECTION



         91A.   FIRE ALARM USERS



         92.   ACCUMULATION OF WASTE ON PROPERTY



         92A.   OUTDOOR STORAGE OF BUSINESS MATERIALS, TRASH AND
WASTE



         92B.   PLASTIC BAG REGULATIONS



         93.   HARBOR RULES AND REGULATIONS



            APPENDIX:   THIRD BEACH HARBOR RECREATIONAL CHART,
DATED JULY 1986



         94.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PLACES



         95.   TOW TRUCKS AND PARKING LOTS



         96.   TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION



         97.   STONE WALLS



         98.   SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL LEASES



         99.   PRIVATE ALARM USERS



         100.   SPECIAL EVENTS



         101.   TENTS



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



Animals Generally



   90.01   Hunting restricted, permit required



   90.02   Burial of carcasses restricted



   90.03   Disposition of carcasses and waste



   90.04   Maintenance of places where animals kept; violation;
nuisance abatement



Dogs



   90.20   Definitions



   90.21   Purpose of subchapter



   90.22   Dogs to be kept under restraint or leashed



   90.23   Licensing



   90.24   Confinement of vicious and dangerous dogs



   90.25   Confinement of female dogs in heat



   90.26   Limit on dogs at residences



   90.27   Places prohibited to dogs



   90.28   Abandonment prohibited



   90.29   Rabies treatment and control



   90.30   Enforcement of subchapter by dog officer, police



   90.31   Authority of officers to apprehend dogs



   90.32   Impoundment



   90.33   Repossession of impounded dog generally



   90.34   Repossession of dog as nuisance



   90.35   Disposition of unredeemed dogs



   90.36   Abatement of dog constituting nuisance



   90.37   Complaint procedure



   90.38   Interference with officers prohibited



   90.39   Annual dog census required



   90.40   Records



Cats



   90.60   Cat breeding



   90.61   Permits



   90.62   Enforcement of permits



   90.63   Revocation of permits



 



   90.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Noise as nuisance, see § 130.30



ANIMALS GENERALLY



§ 90.01  HUNTING RESTRICTED, PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall hunt, take or kill any wild bird or animal at
any time within the town; provided, that nothing herein contained shall
prohibit an owner or a tenant of land from hunting and killing wild animals
or birds thereon, nor shall it prohibit not more than three persons at any
one time, inclusive of an owner or tenant of land, from hunting and killing
wild animals or birds that are causing destruction to the crops, livestock or
nursery stock of any owner or tenant of land.



   (B)   No persons, including an owner or tenant of land, shall hunt,
take, or kill any wild animal or bird at any time without a seasonal and
daily written permit from the Chief of Police or his authorized deputy.  The
Chief of Police or his authorized deputy shall provide the application for
any such permits and shall be responsible to conduct any and all background
checks or other investigations necessary prior to the issuance of any such
permits.  The Chief of Police or his authorized deputy may reject any such
permits if, in the opinion of the Chief or his authorized deputy, there are
no wild animals or birds causing destruction to crops, livestock, or nursery
stock, or the granting or any such permits would impact adversely on public
health, safety, or welfare.



   (C)   No person shall hunt, take, or kill any wild animal or bird
with any firearm other than a shot gun.



   (D)   No person shall, while hunting or pursuing wild animals or
birds, shoot or discharge any firearm or other deadly weapon within 500 feet
of any occupied dwelling, house, residence, or other building occupied by
human beings, or any barn, stable, or other  buildings  used  in 
connection  therewith.  In addition to the foregoing, any discharge from a
firearm must be in a direction to insure that the discharge will land on the
property being hunted.



   (E)   The Chief of Police or his/her authorized Deputy may at
his/her discretion allow the hunting, taking or killing of any wild animal or
bird with a firearm other than a shotgun to address a compelling public
safety threat or continuous public nuisance.  If authorized no caliber of
ammunition higher than .229 is allowed from April 1 through September 30.



('73 Code, § 4-1)  (Ord. passed 10-30-62; Am. Ord. 4-4-94; Am. Ord. 2011-2,
passed 4-4-11)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.02  BURIAL OF CARCASSES RESTRICTED.



   No person shall bring or suffer to be brought into the town the carcass
of any dead horse or other animal, for the purpose of burying or depositing
such carcass; provided, that this section shall not be construed so as to
forbid or prevent any inhabitant of this town from bringing into and burying
in this town the carcass of any animal which belonged to him while such
animal was in full health and life.



('73 Code, § 4-2)  (Ord. passed 12-21-91)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  DISPOSITION OF CARCASSES AND WASTE.



   (A)   Any person owning, keeping or harboring an animal or fowl
which dies within the town shall, promptly upon becoming aware of such death,
bury or cremate the carcass of such animal or fowl in a lawful and sanitary
manner.



   (B)   Each occupant of private property within the town and each
owner or person in charge of unoccupied private property within the town,
upon becoming aware of the presence thereon of any animal or fowl carcass,
shall promptly notify the owner, keeper or harborer of such dead animal or
fowl, if known, to comply with the provisions of division (A) of this
section; and if such owner, keeper or harborer is not known, then the
occupant, owner or person in charge of the private property upon which such
carcass is found shall promptly bury or cremate such carcass in a lawful and
sanitary manner; provided, that if such carcass be that of a horse or other
large animal, such occupant, owner or person in charge may request the town
officer designated by the Town Administrator for such purpose to dispose of
such carcass.



   (C)   Animal and fowl carcasses found upon the streets, 
sidewalks,  commonages  and  other  public places within the town shall
be disposed of promptly by the town officer designated by the town
administrator for such purpose, but the town shall have recourse against the
owners, keepers and harborers, when known, of such dead animals and fowl, for
the costs incurred thereby.



   (D)   Any person in control of horse which defecates on any street,
sidewalk or public place must remove the waste as soon as circumstances
allow, having due regard for the safety of horse, rider and general public. 
Penalty, see 94.99(D)



('73 Code, § 4-3)  (Am. Ord. passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-06) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  MAINTENANCE OF PLACES WHERE ANIMALS KEPT; VIOLATION; NUISANCE
ABATEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of each person owning, keeping or
harboring an animal or fowl within the town to maintain the place in which
such animal or fowl is kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times
and to prevent such place from becoming a hazard to the health or safety of
any person and from otherwise becoming a public nuisance.



   (B)   The Town Administrator, upon investigation and finding that a
public nuisance exists in violation of division (A) of this section, shall
notify the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property whereon such
nuisance exists to abate such nuisance by reconstruction, cleansing or
removal within a time, not more than ten days, to be stated in the notice,
and if the terms of such notice be not complied with within the time stated
in the notice the Town Administrator shall cause such nuisance to be abated
and the costs thereby incurred shall be subject to collection from the owner
of the property upon which such nuisance existed, in the same manner as taxes
are subject to collection.



('73 Code, § 4-4)  Penalty, see § 90.99



DOGS



§ 90.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DOG OFFICER.  The person employed by the Town Administrator to
administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter, and who shall be a
special policeman in the Police Department directly responsible to the Chief
of Police.



   DOG POUND.  Any premises designated by authority of the town for the
purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large in
violation of this subchapter.



   EXPOSED TO RABIES.  A dog has been exposed to rabies within the
meaning of this subchapter if it has been bitten by, or been exposed to, any
animal known to have been infected with rabies.



   KENNEL.  Any person engaged in buying, selling or boarding dogs.



   LICENSE.  The license issued annually by the Town Clerk's office,
pursuant to § 90.23 of this chapter.



   NUISANCE.  Any dog which by reason of its vicious or destructive
nature, or by reason of its habitual howling, yelping or barking, constitutes
a danger or causes undue annoyance to persons or their property.



   OWNER.  Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog.



   RESTRAINT.  A dog is under restraint within the meaning of this
subchapter if it is leashed, confined in a vehicle being driven or parked on
the streets or if it is within the property limits of its owner or keeper.



   SERVICE ANIMAL. As defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act.



   SPAYED FEMALE.  Any bitch which has been operated upon to prevent
conception.



(‘73 Code, § 4-6)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord. passed 2-5-86; Am. Ord.
passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 2010-5, passed 6-7-10; Am. Ord. 2013-13, passed
10-21-13)



§ 90.21  PURPOSE OF SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws
Title 4, Chapter 13, for the  purpose of regulating  the care, custody,
control, impounding and destruction of dogs in the town and amended pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 400 of the Public Laws of 1985 (R.I. Gen. Laws
4-13-1-9(d)(1)) for the purpose of licensing dogs in the town.



('73 Code, § 4-5)  (Ord. passed 2-5-86)



§ 90.22  DOGS TO BE KEPT UNDER RESTRAINT OR LEASHED.



   (A)   The owner, agent of the owner, or person having possession or
custody, or exercising control or dominion over a dog shall keep the dog
under restraint at all times and shall not permit such dog to be at large,
off the premises or property of the owner, or keeper, unless under restraint
except for such area specifically designated and posted by the town for use
as a dog park.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to a person using a dog under his
or her direct supervision while lawfully hunting, engaged in a supervised
formal obedience training class or show or during formally sanctioned field
trials, or to a certified seeing eye dog engaged in the act of guiding its
owner.



('73 Code, § 4-8)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord. passed 8-30-79; Am. Ord.
passed 3-25-86; Am. Ord. 97-3, passed 2-3-97; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-05) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.23  LICENSING.



   (A)   All dogs kept, harbored, or maintained by their owners or
keepers within the town must be licensed and registered by the same in the
Town Clerk's office within 30 days of obtaining ownership or possession and
every owner or keeper of such a dog shall annually in the month of April
cause such dog to be licensed and registered from the first day of the
ensuing May in the Town Clerk's office.  Every owner or keeper applying for
a license shall furnish the Town Clerk with the following information:  name
and address of owner or keeper, and breed, sex, color and name of dog to be
licensed.  The Town Clerk shall assign a registered number for each dog so
licensed, and shall enter on such license the registered number and the above
required information.  The owner or keeper must pay a fee of $7 for
licensing and registration, $2 for a license tag and any fee pursuant to R.I.
Gen. Laws § 4-24-9.



   (B)   The Town Clerk shall, annually, in the month of March, give
notice by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in
the town of the licensing requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Owners of dogs used for guiding blind persons shall be
licensed and issued with a license tag without charge.



   (D)   No license may be issued to a dog that has not been vaccinated
for rabies. Proof of rabies vaccination shall be a current, valid rabies
certificate.



('73 Code, § 4-26)  (Ord. passed 2-5-86; Am. Ord. 09-07, passed 4-20-09;
Am. Ord. 2011-8, passed 9-6-11)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 4-13-4 and 4-13-31



§ 90.24  CONFINEMENT OF VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   All vicious dogs shall be confined in an enclosure. It shall
be unlawful for any owner or keeper to maintain a vicious dog upon any
premises which does not have a locked enclosure.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to allow any
vicious dog to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or keeper or outside
of the enclosure unless it is necessary  for the owner or keeper to obtain
veterinary care for the dog or to sell or give away the dog or to comply with
commands or directions of the dog officer with respect to the dog. In such a
case, the dog shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain and shall
be under direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper.



(R.I. Gen. Laws § 4-13.1-4) Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   For further provisions regarding vicious dogs, see R.I. Gen. Laws,
Chapter 13.1



§ 90.25  CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT.



   Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure
enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such manner
that such female dog cannot come in contact with another dog or animal,
except for intentional breeding purposes.



('73 Code, § 4-15)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.26  LIMIT ON DOGS AT RESIDENCES.



   It shall be unlawful to keep more than three licensed dogs at the same
residence, except as permitted by the dog officer.  This provision shall not
apply to licensed kennels.



('73 Code, § 4-19)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.27  PLACES PROHIBITED TO DOGS.



   (A)   No dogs shall be allowed in school yards or on school
property, whether at large or under restraint, without obtaining a permit
issued at the discretion of the School Department; service animals excepted.



   (B)   No dogs shall be allowed in any stores or eating places within
the town, whether at large or under restraint; service animals excepted.



   (C)   No dogs shall be allowed on any athletic or sports fields
managed by the town, service animals excepted.



(Ord. passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord. passed 7-15-91; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-96; Am.
Ord. passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 2013-13, passed 10-21-13) Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.28  ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any dog within the town.



('73 Code, § 4-13)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see 90.99



§ 90.29  RABIES TREATMENT AND CONTROL.



   (A)   The treatment and control of rabies shall be governed by the
provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws, Title 4, Chapter 13, §§ 26 through 32, as
amended.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical
practitioner to report to the dog officer at the Police Department the names
and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together
with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report
to the dog officer any animal considered by him to be a rabies suspect.



('73 Code, § 4-16)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.30  ENFORCEMENT OF SUBCHAPTER BY DOG OFFICER, POLICE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced by the dog officer
and any police officer of the town.



('73 Code, § 4-7)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68) 



§ 90.31  AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS TO APPREHEND DOGS.



   In the discharge of the duties imposed by this subchapter, the dog
officer, or any police officer of the town, shall have the authority to take
possession of any dog roaming at large which is allegedly in violation of the
provisions of this subchapter.



('73 Code, § 4-22)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68) 



§ 90.32  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Any dog found to be without license or to be a nuisance,
either or both, shall be taken up by the dog officer and impounded in the
shelter designated as the town dog pound, and there confined in a humane
manner for a period of not less than five days, unless previously claimed by
the owner as hereinafter provided, and may thereafter be disposed of in a
humane manner if not claimed by its owner.  Whenever, by reason of the
diseased or injured condition of a dog, the dog officer may determine that it
is in the best interests of the dog or the public that the dog be destroyed,
the dog officer may destroy such dog prior to the expiration of such five-day
period.



      (1)   The five day impoundment period shall not include any
day or part thereof that the public pound is not open for a specified period
of time, not to be less than one-half the normal hours of business, for the
purposes of reclaiming any such dog by its rightful owner.



      (2)   All periods of time shall be listed in a prominent
location at the entrance to all public pounds.



   (B)   The dog officer may transfer title of any dog held at the dog
pound to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals or the Robert
Potter League for Animals after the legal detention period has expired and
such dog has not been claimed by its owner.



   (C)   When dogs are found to be unlicensed, and their ownership is
known to the dog officer, such dogs need not be impounded, but such officer
may cite the owners of such dogs to appear in court to answer to charges of
violation of this subchapter.



   (D)   Immediately upon impounding any dog, the dog officer shall
make every reasonable effort to ascertain the owner of such dog so impounded,
and inform such owner of the conditions whereby he may regain custody of such
dog.



(R.I. Gen. Laws § 4-13-15) ('73 Code, § 4-9) (Ord. passed 8-5-68)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to appoint agent of Robert Potter League, see R.I. Gen. Laws,
§ 4-13-37



§ 90.33  REPOSSESSION OF IMPOUNDED DOG GENERALLY.



   (A)   The owner shall be entitled to regain possession of any
impounded dog, except as provided in the cases of certain dogs, upon the
payment of impoundment fees set forth herein.  (Proof of ownership might
include a license receipt, affidavits of neighbors, a photograph, etc.).



   (B)   Any dog impounded hereunder may be reclaimed as herein
provided upon payment by the owner to the dog officer of the sum of $10 and
the per diem rate charged the town by the Robert Potter League for Animals,
Inc., for each day the animal is kept.



('73 Code, § 4-10)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord. passed 8-20-79)



§ 90.34  REPOSSESSION OF DOG AS NUISANCE.



   Any dog may, the first time it is impounded for being a public
nuisance, be reclaimed as provided in § 90.33, but may not be reclaimed when
so impounded on subsequent occasions, except at the discretion of the dog
officer, unless reclamation is authorized by a court having jurisdiction in
such matters.



('73 Code, § 4-11)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68)



§ 90.35  DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED DOGS.



   Any dog impounded under the provisions of this subchapter and not
reclaimed by its owner within five days, may be humanely destroyed by the dog
officer, or have its title transferred to the Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals or the Robert Potter League for Animals, as provided for
in § 90.32(B) or placed in the custody of some person deemed to be a
responsible and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions
of this subchapter and such other regulations as shall be fixed by the town.



('73 Code, § 4-12)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord. passed 8-20-79)



§ 90.36  ABATEMENT OF DOG CONSTITUTING NUISANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any dog
which constitutes a nuisance, and such nuisance is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, and each day during which such nuisance shall continue
unabated, shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   For the purposes of discharging the duties imposed by this
subchapter and to enforce its provisions, the dog officer, or any police
officer, is empowered to investigate any complaint and, if warranted, to
enter upon any premises, not to include the dwelling unit of the owner, upon
which a dog is kept or harbored and to demand the exhibition by the owner of
such dog of the license for such dog.  It is further provided that the dog
officer or, in his absence, any other police officer, may enter the premises
where any animal is kept in a cruel and inhumane manner and demand to examine
such animal and to take possession of such animal when, in his opinion, it
requires humane treatment.



('73 Code, § 4-17)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord. 8-20-79)  Penalty, see
§ 90.99



§ 90.37  COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.



   All complaints made under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
made to the dog officer, or if not available, to the Police Department, to
which the complainant shall furnish his name, address and telephone number,
if any, and the details of the alleged offense.



('73 Code, § 4-20)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord. passed 8-20-79) 



§ 90.38  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the dog officer or any
police officer of this town in the performance of his duties, or seek to
release any animal in the custody of the dog officer or any police officer,
except as herein provided.



('73 Code, § 4-23)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.39  ANNUAL DOG CENSUS REQUIRED.



   It shall be the duty of the dog officer to take a complete annual dog
census in the town.



('73 Code, § 4-21)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68)



§ 90.40  RECORDS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the dog officer to keep, or cause to
be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of
all dogs coming into his custody.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the dog officer to keep, or cause to
be kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to him and
his investigation thereof.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the dog officer to keep, or cause to
be kept, accurate and detailed records of all money in his possession
belonging to the town, which records shall be open to inspection at
reasonable times by such persons responsible for similar records of the town
and shall be audited by the Town of Middletown annually in the same manner as
other town records are audited.



('73 Code, § 4-24)  (Ord. passed 8-5-68)



CATS



§ 90.60  CAT BREEDING.



   No person shall cause or allow any male or female cat which he or she
owns or harbors in the Town of Middletown to breed without first obtaining a
breeding permit under § 90.61. Holders of cat-breeding permits must comply
with all relevant requirements in this subchapter and in state law.



(Ord. passed 6-21-10)



§ 90.61  PERMITS.



   Persons desiring to breed one or more cats must apply to the Animal
Control Officer for a breeding permit for each cat, which shall be valid for
12 months, or until the licensed cat is transferred, sold, or otherwise
disposed of, whichever occurs first. The fee for each original or renewal
cat-breeding permit is $100. Cat-breeding permits shall contain the following
terms and conditions and are subject to the following requirements:



   (A)   No offspring may be sold or adopted and permanently placed
until reaching an age of at least eight weeks;



   (B)   No offspring may be sold or adopted until immunized against
common diseases, as determined by the Director of the Rhode Island Department
of Environmental Management in accordance with R.I. Gen. Laws Title 4, Ch. 4,
so as not to be contagious or injurious to public health or to the health of
other animals;



   (C)   Any permit holder advertising to the public the availability
of one or more cats for adoption or sale must prominently display the permit
number in the advertisement. The permit number must also be provided to any
person adopting or purchasing any cat bred by the permit holder; and



   (D)   The permit holder shall adhere to minimum standards regarding
the care and keeping of animals pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws Title 4, Ch. 19.



(Ord. passed 6-21-10)



§ 90.62  ENFORCEMENT OF PERMITS.



   The Animal Control Officer shall be responsible for the enforcement and
administration of permits under this section. Violations shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $200 for a first offense and not more than $500 for
each succeeding offense.



(Ord. passed 6-21-10)



§ 90.63  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   A cat-breeding permit may be revoked by the Animal Control
Officer if he or she has reasonable cause to believe any of the following to
be true:



      (1)   The permit holder has violated the provisions of R.I.
Gen. Laws Title 4, Ch. 19, or this subchapter of the Middletown Code of
Ordinances.



      (2)   The permit holder is in violation of any other state
health or safety law or regulation regarding animal care or control;



      (3)   The permit holder has failed to comply with any
condition or requirement of the permit or has failed to pay the fee imposed
under § 90.61; or



      (4)   The permit holder refuses to allow inspection, upon 48
hours of prior written notice, of any cat covered by the permit or the
premises on which the cat is kept.



   (B)   If, after investigation, the Animal Control Officer concludes
that it is probable that one or more of the above grounds for revocation has
occurred, said Officer shall cause written notice thereof to be sent by mail
to the address of the permit holder. The notice shall specify the grounds of
possible revocation of the permit and shall specify a date and time for an
informal hearing to be held before the Animal Control Officer. The date shall
be not less than five days from the date the notice is mailed. After the
informal hearing, the Animal Control Officer may modify the terms of the
permit or revoke the permit, provided that if the health or well-being of the
animal(s) is in danger, the Animal Control Officer may take custody and
control of the animal(s) until such time that a hearing is conducted pursuant
to this division.



(Ord. passed 6-21-10)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating § 90.04 shall upon conviction be fined
$50 for each day of such violation.



('73 Code, § 4-4)



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person
convicted of violating any provision of §§ 90.20 through 90.40 shall be
punished as follows:



         (a)   A fine not exceeding $50 for the first offense
within a calendar year;



         (b)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the second offense
within a calendar year;



         (c)   A fine not exceeding $150 for the third and each
subsequent offense within a calendar year.



      (2)   The person charged with a violation of any provision of
§§ 90.20 through 90.40 shall, for a first offense within a 12-month period,
be given the opportunity to pay the fine assessed by mail which shall be
indicated on the summons issued by the charging officer.  Should the alleged
violator elect not to pay the fine assessed by mail, said person shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Municipal Court. 



('73 Code, § 4-25)  (Ord. passed 8-20-79; Am. Ord. passed 8-21-00; Am. Ord.
2011-7, passed 9-6-11)



   (C)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
there is not otherwise a penalty shall be subject to the penalty of § 10.99.



CHAPTER 90A:  FEEDING NON-DOMESTICATED ANIMALS



Section



   90A.01   Purpose



   90A.02   Definitions



   90A.03   Prohibitions



   90A.04   Exceptions



   90A.05   Enforcement



§ 90A.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health and safety of
residents in the Town of Middletown with respect to dangers associated with
coyotes and other non-domesticated animals by minimizing opportunities for
such animals to obtain food from sources controlled or controllable by humans.



(Ord. 2011-6, passed 9-6-11)



§ 90A.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ATTRACTANT. Any substance which could reasonably be expected to attract
or does attract coyotes or other non-domesticated animals, including but not
limited to, garbage, food products, pet food, carcasses, feed, grain.



   FEEDING. The leaving of food of any kind where it is accessible to
coyotes or other non-domesticated animals.



   FOOD.  All substances consumed by humans or animals for nourishment
except grass and other vegetation, growing crops, and food that is canned or
stored in sealed or closable containers.



(Ord. 2011-6, passed 9-6-11)



§ 90A.03  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall feed or in any manner provide an attractant to
coyotes or other non-domesticated animals; provided that domestic pets are
not attractants, and feeding pets outdoors does not create an attractant if
the pet eats all the food immediately, or the remaining food is removed as
soon as the pet stops eating, or the pet is fed in a secure cage or other
enclosure.



   (B)   No person shall leave, store, or maintain any food or
attractant in a manner, area, or location accessible to coyotes or other
non-domesticated animals.



(Ord. 2011-6, passed 9-6-11)



§ 90A.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Food for birds or squirrels that is in a feeder located within
100 feet of a residence and elevated to  be inaccessible to coyotes.



   (B)   Outdoor feeding of farm animals, provided:



      (1)   Animal food, when not being fed to animals, is stored in
a building or a closed container;



      (2)   Excessive amounts of food, based on the animals' eating
history, are not provided to the animals;



      (3)   Injured, old, feeble, or prey-sized animals are not left
outside unattended; and



      (4)   All other reasonable efforts are made to reduce
attractants to coyotes and other non-domesticated animals.



(Ord. 2011-6, passed 9-6-11)



§ 90A.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   Violations of this chapter are punishable by a civil penalty of from
$100 to $500 for each day of violation.



(Ord. 2011-6, passed 9-6-11)



CHAPTER 91:  FIRE PROTECTION



Section



   91.01   Fire Chief to specify fire protection equipment



   91.02   Maintenance of equipment



   91.03   Requirements for storing combustible material



   91.04   Requirements for handling combustible material



   91.05   Construction, maintenance of chimneys, incinerators, and the
like



   91.06   Open flames, lights, and the like restricted



   91.07   Smoking restrictions, signs



   91.08   Flammable decoration restricted in buildings



   91.09   Requirements for using torch to remove paint



   91.10   Accumulation of waste prohibited



   91.11   Depositing burning, smoldering substances restricted



   91.12   Open burning



   91.13   Obedience to orders at scene of fire



   91.14   Fire Plan review



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department, see § 32.35



§ 91.01  FIRE CHIEF TO SPECIFY FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT.



   The Fire Chief shall survey each commercial and industrial
establishment, mercantile, educational and institutional occupancy, place of
assembly, hotel, motel, multi-family house and trailer camp and shall specify
suitable fire detecting devices or extinguishing appliances which shall be
provided in or near boiler rooms, kitchens of restaurants, clubs and like
establishments, storage rooms involving considerable combustible material,
rooms in which hazardous manufacturing processes are involved, repair
garages, and other places of a generally hazardous nature.  Such devices or
appliances may consist of automatic fire alarm systems, automatic sprinkler
or water spray systems, standpipe and hose, fixed or portable fire
extinguishers of a type suitable for the probable class of fire, or suitable
asbestos blankets, manual or automatic covers, or carbon dioxide or other
special fire extinguishing systems.  In special hazardous processes or
storage, appliances of more than one type or special systems may be required.



('73 Code, § 9-1) 



§ 91.02  MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT.



   Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems, and other
fire protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been
installed in compliance with any license, permit or order, or because of any
law or ordinance, shall be maintained in operative condition at all times,
and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the
effectiveness of the protection so required; except this shall not prohibit
the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing or discontinuing the
protection where necessary to make tests, repairs, alterations or
additions.  The Fire Chief shall be notified before such tests, repairs,
alterations or additions are started unless the work is to be continuous
until completion.



('73 Code, § 9-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.03  REQUIREMENTS FOR STORING COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person shall store in any building or
upon any premises in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume of combustible
empty packing cases, boxes, barrels or similar containers, or rubber tires,
or baled cotton, rubber or cork, or other similarly combustible material
without a permit from the Fire Chief.



   (B)   Storage requirements.  Storage in buildings shall be orderly,
shall not be within two feet of the ceiling, and not so located as to
endanger exit from the building.  Storage in the open shall not be more than
20 feet in height, shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings,
as not to constitute a hazard, and shall be compact and orderly.



('73 Code, § 9-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.04  REQUIREMENTS FOR HANDLING COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL.



   No person making, using, storing or having in charge or under his
control any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or
combustible waste materials shall fail or neglect at the close of each day to
cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked in an
orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable vaults
or in metal or metal lined, covered, receptacles or bins.  The Fire Chief
shall require suitable baling presses to be installed in stores, apartment
buildings, factories and similar places where accumulations of paper and
waste materials are not removed at least every second day.



('73 Code, § 9-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.05  CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE OF CHIMNEYS, INCINERATORS, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   All chimneys, smokestacks or similar devices for conveying
smoke or hot gases to the outer air and the stoves, furnaces, restaurant type
cooking equipment, incinerators, fire boxes or boilers to which they are
connected shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner as not to
create a hazardous condition.



   (B)   Commercial and industrial type incinerators used for burning
of rubbish or other readily combustible solid waste material and flue-fed
incinerators shall be provided with spark arresters or other effective means
approved by authority of the state or the Fire Chief for arresting sparks and
fly particles.



('73 Code, § 9-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.06  OPEN FLAMES, LIGHTS, AND THE LIKE RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No person shall take an open flame or light into any building,
barn, vessel, boat or any other place where highly flammable, combustible, or
explosive material is kept, unless such light or flame shall be well secured
in a glass globe, wire mesh cage or similar device approved by authority of
the state or the Fire Chief.



   (B)   No heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of
igniting flammable materials of the types stored or handled shall be used in
the storage area of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, hair or other
highly flammable or combustible material; nor in the work area of any shop or
factory used for the manufacture, repair or renovating of mattresses or
bedding; nor in the work areas of any establishment used for the upholstering
of furniture.



   (C)   No person shall kindle a fire upon the land of another without
permission of the owner thereof or his agent.



('73 Code, § 9-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.07  SMOKING RESTRICTIONS, SIGNS.



   (A)   "Smoking" shall mean and include the carrying of a lighted
pipe, cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any form.



   (B)   Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any
area of piers, wharves, warehouses, stores, industrial plants, institutions,
places of assembly and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored
or handled, the Fire Chief is empowered and authorized to order the owner or
occupant in writing to post "No Smoking" signs in each building, structure,
room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited.  The Fire Chief shall
designate specific safe locations, if necessary, in any building, structure
or place in which smoking may be permitted.



   (C)   "No Smoking" signs of approved sized lettering and location
required in accordance with division (B) hereof shall read "By Order of the
Fire Chief."



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any legally
required "No Smoking" sign or to smoke in any place, where such signs are
posted.



('73 Code, § 9-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.08  FLAMMABLE DECORATION RESTRICTED IN BUILDINGS.



   Highly flammable materials such as cotton batting, straw, dry vines,
leaves, trees, artificial flowers or shrubbery and foam plastic materials
shall not be used for decorative purposes in show windows or other parts of
mercantile and institutional occupancies unless flameproofed.  Electric
light bulbs in mercantile and institutional occupancies shall not be
decorated with paper or other combustible materials unless such materials
shall first have been rendered flameproofed.



('73 Code, § 9-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.09  REQUIREMENTS FOR USING TORCH TO REMOVE PAINT.



   Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device for removing
paint from any building or structure shall provide one approved fire
extinguisher or water hose connected to the water supply on the premises
where such burning is done.  In all cases, the person doing the burning
shall remain on the premises one hour after the torch or flame-producing
device has been used.  The word "approved" as used in this section shall
mean approved by authority of the state or the Fire Chief.



('73 Code, § 9-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.10  ACCUMULATION OF WASTE PROHIBITED.



   Roofs, courts, yards, vacant lots and open spaces shall be kept free
and clear of deposits or accumulations of waste paper, hay, grass, straw,
weeds, litter or combustible waste or rubbish of any kind.  All weeds,
grass, vines or other growth, when such endangers property, or are liable to
be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the
property.



('73 Code, § 9-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.11  DEPOSITING BURNING, SMOLDERING SUBSTANCES RESTRICTED.



   No person shall deposit hot ashes or cinders, or smoldering coals, or
greasy or oily substances liable to spontaneous ignition, into any
combustible receptacle, or place the same within ten feet of any combustible
materials, except in metal or other noncombustible receptacles.  Such
receptacles, unless resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground
outside the building, shall be placed on noncombustible stands, and in every
case shall be kept at least two feet away from any combustible wall or
partition or exterior window opening.



('73 Code, § 9-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.12  OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person may engage in the open burning of
any material, including but not limited to domestic refuse, construction
debris, and/or yard waste, with the exception of the following activities as
permitted by the Fire Chief.



      (1)   Open burning of yard waste conducted in accordance with
Rhode Island State Fire Codes, Rhode Island General Laws and ordinances of
the Town of Middletown.



      (2)   A fire set in conjunction with the production of
agricultural commodities in their unmanufactured state on the premises of the
farm operation.



      (3)   Any fire set for the purpose of instructing personnel in
firefighting.



      (4)   A fire set to prevent or abate a fire hazard.



      (5)   A fire set for the prevention and control of disease or
pests.



   (B)   Location restricted.  No person shall kindle or maintain any
open fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any
public street, commonage or other public ground without a permit from the
Fire Chief or other proper authorization by the town. No person shall kindle
or maintain any open fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or
maintained on any private land unless the location is not less than 100 feet
from any structure or combustible material and adequate provision is made to
prevent fire from spreading to within 100 feet of any structure, or the fire
is in a container approved by authority of the state, or the Fire Chief, and
which is located safely not less than 15 feet from any structure without a
permit from the Fire Chief or other proper authorization by the town. No open
burning of yard waste shall be permitted between May 1st and September 30th.



   (C)   Permit exempted. The following activities are exempt from the
requirement to acquire an open burning permit:



      (1)   Outdoor cooking in hibachis, gas or charcoal grills for
personal use.



      (2)   A fire set solely for recreational or ceremonial
purposes in a fire pit or an appropriate container. APPROPRIATE CONTAINER
includes outside fireplace, fire pit, chiminea, wood stove, or similar
fire-resistant container; provided however any such fire shall not emit smoke
which in the determination of the Fire Chief, or his or her designee,
constitutes a nuisance to neighboring properties.



   (D)   Burn barrel. No person shall use or maintain a burn barrel in
the Town of Middletown.



   (E)   Attendance of outside fires. All outside fires and
recreational fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until
such fire is extinguished. Any permitted open burning must be attended by a
person who shall have a garden hose connected to a water supply, or other
fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use.



   (F)   Chief may prohibit.  This section is intended to promote the
public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort,
living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of
Middletown due to the air pollution and fire hazards of open burning. The
Fire Chief may prohibit any or all outdoor burning when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous or constitute a
nuisance to neighboring properties.



   (G)   Emergency situations. In emergency situations such as natural
disasters, burning that would otherwise be prohibited is allowed if
specifically authorized by the Town Administrator and permitted by the Fire
Chief.



   (H)   Liability. A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire
shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability
resulting from damage caused by the fire.



   (I)   Enforcement and penalties. The Fire Chief or any authorized
officer, agent, employee or representative of the Town of Middletown who
presents credentials may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining
compliance with the provisions of this section. The penalty for violation of
any portion of this section shall be a forfeiture of not less than $25 or
more than $500 plus the cost of prosecution. Penalties are doubled for second
and subsequent offenses.



(‘73 Code, § 9-3)  (Am. Ord. 2012-5, passed 5-21-12)



§ 91.13  OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS AT SCENE OF FIRE.



   Every person present at the scene of a fire shall be subject and
obedient to the orders of firemen and police officers in all matters relating
to extinguishing the fire, removal and protection of persons and property
endangered by fire, smoke or water, freedom of Fire Department and medical
personnel and equipment to perform their duties or to function properly, and
the maintenance of order at or near the scene of the fire, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to disobey any such order of a fireman or police
officer.  Firemen and police officers shall have authority to arrest persons
who disobey such orders and to hold them in custody until the fire has been
extinguished, at which time the violators shall be dealt with according to
law.



('73 Code, § 9-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.14  FIRE PLAN REVIEW.



   The town's Deputy Fire Chief shall act as the town's Fire Marshal and
shall perform the duties of the Fire Marshal in accordance with the State
Fire Code.



   (A)   Fire Plan Review Program.  The town Fire Marshal is
responsible for the administration of Fire Plan Review Program.  The town
Fire Marshal shall approve or disapprove completed sets of plans submitted to
his or her office within a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days.



   (B)   Applications.  Applications for plan review shall be made on
the forms provided by the Middletown Fire Department and shall be accompanied
by a plan review fee in accordance with the town fee schedule and not less
than four copies of construction drawings drawn to scale with sufficient
clarity and detailed dimensions to show the nature and character of the
proposed work.



   (C)   Appeal process.  Appeals shall be made to the Fire Safety
Code Board of Appeals and Review in accordance with the State Fire Safety
Code.



   (D)   Use of fees.  All fees collected by the town Fire Marshal
shall be deposited as general revenue and shall be utilized exclusively for
supporting the operations of the town Fire Marshal.



(Ord. passed 3-1-04)



CHAPTER 91A:  FIRE ALARM USERS



Section



   91A.01   Definitions



   91A.02   Alarm user's registration required



   91A.03   User instructions



   91A.04   Confidentiality



   91A.05   Central station protection stations



   91A.06   False alarms



   91A.07   Smoke or fire alert alarms or detectors



   91A.08   Fire alarm service



   91A.09   Maintenance of the system



   91A.10   Enforcement



 



   91A.99   Penalties



§ 91A.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The words used herein shall be construed according to their common use
and definition.



   The word "shall" as used herein is used in its mandatory sense.
Whenever not inconsistent within the context thereof, words used herein in
the singular sense shall include the plural sense, and used in one gender
shall be deemed to include all genders.



   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings hereinafter
ascribed to them:



   Alarm System or Device. Any equipment or assembly of equipment, of
whatever nature, designed to detect and signal a fire in or upon premises.



   Alarm User. Any person, group of persons, association, firm,
partnership, corporation or any organization of any kind, in ownership,
possession or control of any building, structure or facility, including
vehicles, vessels, campers or trailers, wherein or whereupon such system is
maintained or installed for activation in the event of fire in, upon or at
such building, structure or facility.



   Audible-Visual Alarm. Any device designed for the protection of fire
thereon which generates an external audible sound or flashing light, or both,
when it is activated.



   False Alarm. hereinafter sometimes referred to as "alarm," shall mean
any alarm or signal through the activation of such system when no fire
exists. The term shall include any alarm or signal occasioned by a
malfunction or other defect in the system, improper installation or
maintenance, or by any intentional act or negligent act of the user or by any
agent, servant or employee of the user, or by any member of the users
household or any person testing a system without notice to the Middletown
Fire Department or any other person lawfully having access to such system. It
shall not include a signal caused by acts of nature or other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm user.



(Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-17-08)



§ 91A.02  ALARM USER'S REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, every alarm user utilizing an
automatic system shall obtain a user's registration for each system
installed, or to be installed, from the office of the Chief of the Fire
Department prior to the use of a new system. Application for each user's
registration shall be filed with the Fire Marshal and a $100 fee shall be
paid to the Town of Middletown prior to the installation of each system.



   (B)   If a residential alarm user is over the age of 65 years,
blind, deaf or physically handicapped to the extent that his mobility is
substantially limited and is a primary resident of the residence and if no
business is conducted in, upon or from said residence, a user registration
shall be obtained from the Fire Marshal without the requirement of payment of
a registration fee.



   (C)   A user required by federal or state statute, rule or
regulation to install, maintain and operate an alarm system, shall be subject
to this chapter and such a user shall pay the above described fee.
Notwithstanding the above, no fee shall be required of any unit of federal,
state or municipal government.



   (D)   Any Middletown property owner required by the Rhode Island
Fire Safety Code to have a municipal fire alarm system whose alarm is
automatically transmitted to the Middletown Fire Department, shall pay an
annual fee of $200 for the supervisory services provided by the Middletown
Fire Department or any other services provided by the Middletown Fire
Department in connection with the same from time to time.



   (E)   Each fire alarm registration shall be renewed yearly. No fee
shall be required for renewal.



(Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-1-04; Am. Ord. passed 3-17-08)



§ 91A.03  USER INSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   Any alarm user who has a false alarm as a result of a
malfunction or defect in said system shall have the system repaired
immediately. Failure to repair said alarm system may, at the discretion of
the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal, result in the need for a fire watch detail. A
fire watch may either be a properly trained employee whose sole duty is fire
safety, or a uniformed Middletown firefighter as required by the Rhode Island
Fire Safety Code.



   (B)   The silencing or resetting of a fire alarm system shall be by
licensed fire alarm technicians, fire department personnel or properly
trained facility managers only.



(Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-17-08) Penalty, see § 91A.99



§ 91A.04  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   All statements and information relating to the installation and
location of a system given to the Fire Chief, or his respective designees,
shall be maintained in strict confidence, and may be made public only when
required in a prosecutive action resulting from the violation of any part of
this chapter, or by order of a court of appropriate jurisdiction.



(Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-17-08) Penalty, see § 91A.99



§ 91A.05  CENTRAL STATION PROTECTION STATIONS.



   Any system or group of systems operated for its customers by a person,
firm or corporation, in which the operation of electrical protection circuits
and devices are transmitted to, recorded in and maintained, supervised and
monitored from a central station having trained operators, guards and
attendants at all times who have the duty to take appropriate action upon
receipt of a signal or message, including the relaying of messages by direct
line to the communication center of the Fire Department shall not be exempt
from paying any fee for a user registration.



(Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-17-08)



§ 91A.06  FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   A maximum of four false alarms within any 365-day period shall
be allowed from any alarm system without penalty. Receipt of additional false
alarms within 365 days shall constitute a violation of this chapter and will
be subject to penalty.



   (B)   Each false alarm in excess of four within any 365-day period
shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the second false alarm in any consecutive
12-month period from the same alarm system, the Fire Department shall notify
the alarm user of such fact in writing, in order to develop a plan to
eliminate further false alarms.



   (D)   The alarm user shall file a plan with the Fire Chief or Fire
Marshal, and upon request, a plan designed to eliminate false alarms.



   (E)   If the alarm user fails to submit a satisfactory plan within
30 days, then the alarm user shall be charged a fee of $500 for each
additional false alarm until a plan is approved by the Fire Chief or Fire
Marshal.



   (F)   If the alarm user submits a satisfactory plan and subsequently
has additional alarms in the aforementioned 12-month period, the alarm user
shall be charged a fee of $100 for each additional false alarm.



(Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-17-08)



§ 91A.07  SMOKE OR FIRE ALERT ALARMS OR DETECTORS.



   Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the installation and use of
"smoke detectors or carbon monoxide detectors" designed for internal use for
the protection, safety and well being of occupants at any private residence,
and no permit shall be required for the installation of the same.



(Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-17-08)



§ 91A.08  FIRE ALARM SERVICE.



   Resetting or silencing of the fire alarm system, by trained personnel,
shall not be done until cleared through the Fire Department and/or Alarm
Service Company. The Fire Department is not obligated to silence the alarm
system or to reset it. The Fire Department is an emergency service, and not
liable for the functioning of the system.



(Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-17-08)



§ 91A.09  MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM.



   It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user of said properties to
ensure that the system and all of its components are in 100% operating
condition at all times as per Rhode Island Fire Code 23-28.25-9.



(Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-17-08)



§ 91A.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Middletown Fire Chief or designee shall enforce these rules and
regulations. In the event of a violation, a summons shall be issued and the
violation shall be heard in Middletown Municipal Court.



(Ord. passed 3-17-08)



§ 91A.99  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 dollars or imprisonment of not
more than 30 days or both.



   (B)   In the event of a violation by a corporation, a responsible
officer of the corporation shall be liable to like penalties, in addition to
those applicable to the corporation.



(Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-17-08)



CHAPTER 92:  ACCUMULATION OF WASTE ON PROPERTY



Section



   92.01   Accumulation of waste on property prohibited



   92.02   Building Inspector to abate nuisances



   92.03   Service of notice to abate



   92.04   Show cause hearing on nuisance



   92.05   Abatement of nuisance, cost to owner



   92.06   Owner's right to appeal costs



   92.07   Record of enforcement expenses to be kept; collection of
unpaid amounts due



   92.08   Temporary bulk storage of household waste



 



   92.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Garbage and refuse, see Chapter 50



   Definitions related to waste, see § 50.01



§ 92.01  ACCUMULATION OF WASTE ON PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the accumulation of any
filth or solid wastes, including garbage, rubbish, dead animals, trash,
litter, junked automobiles or parts of accessories thereof, scrap metal,
broken and unused lawn furniture and furnishings, mattresses, bedding,
cardboard, empty boxes and cartons, construction debris (except during the
course of construction),  tin cans, bottles, papers, rags,  refuse of any
description, or any stagnant or standing water, or other material upon
premises owned or occupied by him, or to permit a dense growth of vines,
weeds, hedges, grass or other underbrush to develop upon such premises so as
to encourage the breeding or collection of rats, flies and/or mosquitoes, and
the accumulation or development thereof, is hereby declared to be a 
nuisance.



('73 Code, § 10-6)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-03) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 92.02  BUILDING INSPECTOR TO ABATE NUISANCES.



   It shall be the duty of the Building Official, upon complaint or
report, or otherwise upon learning of the existence upon any premises of one
or more of the conditions described in § 92.01 to notify the occupant, owner
or agent of the owner of such premises, in writing, of the existence upon
those premises of any nuisance as above described, and to order him to abate
and remove such nuisance forthwith.



('73 Code, § 10-7)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-03)



§ 92.03  SERVICE OF NOTICE TO ABATE.



   The notice referred to in § 92.02 shall be in writing and signed by
the Building Official as designated officer of the town and Town Clerk and
shall be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may
require, and shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent,
or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is:



   (A)   Served upon him personally; or



   (B)   Left at his dwelling or usual place of abode with some person
of suitable age or discretion residing therein or delivering a copy to an
agent authorized by appointment or by law to receive this notice; or



   (C)   Upon a person for whom a guardian or conservator has been
appointed by serving copies of the notice upon the guardian or conservator; or



   (D)   Upon a public or private corporation, domestic or foreign, by
delivering a copy of the notice to an officer, a managing or general agent,
or by leaving a copy of the notice at the office of the corporation with a
person employed there or by delivering a copy of the notice to an agent
authorized by appointment or by law to receive service of process; or



   (E)   By mailing a copy of the notice to the individual or
corporation by regular and registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested; or



   (F)   If a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises; or



   (G)   If he is served with such notice by any other method
authorized or required under the laws of this state.



('73 Code, § 10-8)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-03)



§ 92.04  SHOW CAUSE HEARING ON NUISANCE.



   Within ten days after the service of the notice described in § 92.03,
the owner of such property shall have the right to request a hearing before
the Town Council to show that the condition does not exist, or to show why
such condition should not be remedied by the town at the expense of the owner
of such property.  Such hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after
the hearing has been requested, and the town and the property owner may
introduce such evidence as deemed necessary by the Council in hearing the
matter.



('73 Code, § 10-9)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-03) 



§ 92.05  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE, COST TO OWNER.



   If the condition described in the notice prescribed by this chapter has
not been remedied within ten days after service thereof or, in the event
there is a hearing as provided in § 92.04, after notice to the property
owner of the decision of the Council sustaining the order of the Building
Official, the Town Administrator shall cause the condition to be remedied by
the town at the expense of the owner of the property.  After causing the
condition to be remedied, the Town Administrator shall certify to the
Director of Finance the expense incurred in remedying the condition, together
with a statement as to the condition of the property which necessitated
incurring such expense, and a copy of the notice mentioned above with proof
of service thereof and a copy of the decision of the hearing before the
Council, if any.  All expenses incurred in remedying the condition shall be
paid by the owner, occupant or person who caused or permitted such condition
to exist and if the expense is not paid within a reasonable time, then the
expense may be recovered in an action brought in the name of the town
including placing a lien on the property for all expenses incurred by the
municipality. Any expenses not paid within 30 days of notice served as set
forth in § 92.03 shall be a lien against the property.  The lien shall be
recorded in the records of land evidence of the town and shall bear legal
interest from date of recording.  The costs incurred by the town plus the
interest shall be added to the amount of taxes due on said real estate, if
any. The Tax Collector shall have the same powers and shall be subject to the
same duties with respect to this claim as in the case of the annual taxes
upon said real estate, and the provisions of law relative to the collection
of any annual taxes and the redemption of this sold and taken land shall
apply to this claim.  Provided however that such action shall not be deemed
to preclude the town from collecting said sums by other lawful means.



('73 Code, § 10-10)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69; Am. Ord. passed 4-2-86; Am. Ord.
passed 9-2-03)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 92.06  OWNER'S RIGHT TO APPEAL COSTS.



   Any property owner shall have a right to have a hearing before the
Council to show cause, if any, why the expenses and charges should not be
collected against him; provided, that the finding by the Building Official
that the condition described in § 92.01 exists shall be final, unless an
appeal is taken to the Council as provided in this chapter, in which case the
finding of the Council with reference to such property shall be final and
conclusive.



('73 Code, § 10-11)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-03)



§ 92.07  RECORD OF ENFORCEMENT EXPENSES TO BE KEPT; COLLECTION OF UNPAID
AMOUNT DUE.



   The Finance Director shall keep a complete set of files and records
relating to all expenses incurred by the town in the enforcement of this
chapter and after notice to the owners of the property involved of the
amounts due, and if the same are not paid as provided elsewhere herein,
within a reasonable time, he shall refer the statement of expense to the Town
Solicitor's office for collection.



('73 Code, § 10-12)  (Ord. passed 2-17-69; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-03)



§ 92.08  TEMPORARY BULK STORAGE OF HOUSEHOLD WASTE.



   (A)   Any container of two yards capacity or greater, utilized for
storage of household waste, if located in a yard abutting residential
property, shall be screened from view from abutting properties or any public
way by solid opaque fencing or evergreen shrubbery and shall not be located
within the applicable zoning setbacks for accessory structures.  Such
containers shall be adequately secured to prevent the blowing or spilling or
waste therefrom onto surrounding property.



   (B)   This provision shall apply to all properties in the town not
governed by the provisions of Chapter 92A and any storage facility not in
conformance herewith shall have 90 days from the date hereof to comply with
the requirements set forth herein.  Violations of this provision shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $100 per day, and each day in which the
property is in violation shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. passed 3-17-03)



§ 92.99  PENALTY. 



   Any owner or occupant who neglects to remove, at his own expense, any
nuisance, refuse, filth or solid waste as set forth in § 92.01 within the
time set forth in the notice sent pursuant to § 92.03 shall be in violation
hereof and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50 for every day
during which he or she knowingly permits the nuisance, solid waste, refuse,
filth or source of filth to remain after the time prescribed for removal.



(Ord. passed 9-2-03)



CHAPTER 92A:  OUTDOOR STORAGE OF BUSINESS MATERIALS, TRASH AND WASTE



Section



   92A.01   Generally



   92A.02   Storage of materials



   92A.03   Storage of trash and waste



   92A.04   Applicability and enforcement



§ 92A.01  GENERALLY.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the outdoor storage of
materials, trash and waste on commercial and industrial properties to protect
nearby properties, especially those of residential abutters, from the
negative effects of such storage, while preserving the right of business
owners to make reasonable arrangements for onsite storage of materials used
or collected in their businesses and for temporary accumulation and storage
of trash and waste until it can be removed from the property.  This chapter
shall not be interpreted to render lawful any conduct prohibited by Chapter
92, dealing with the accumulation of waste on property, or by Chapter 152,
the Zoning Code.



(Ord. passed 9-16-02)



§ 92A.02  STORAGE OF MATERIALS.



   All outdoor areas of commercial and industrial properties used for the
storage of materials used in the business or collected in the course of
operating the business, such as discarded automobiles, auto parts, engines,
tires, barrels and other containers, wooden pallets, and the like, shall, if
located in a yard abutting residential property or a public way, be screened
from view by solid opaque fencing or evergreen shrubbery and shall not be
located within the applicable zoning setback for principal structures.  This
section does not apply to materials held as stock in trade, such as lumber
and building materials at building supply stores, new or used automobiles at
automobile dealerships, and other goods or materials held for sale.



(Ord. passed 9-16-02)



§ 92A.03  STORAGE OF TRASH AND WASTE.



   Trash and waste collected on commercial and industrial properties must
be held in dumpsters or other secure receptacles on a paved or graveled level
surface.  If such receptacles are in a yard abutting residential property or
a public way, they shall be screened from view by solid opaque fencing or
evergreen shrubbery and shall not be located within the applicable zoning
setback for principal structures. All receptacles used to store hazardous
waste as defined in R.I. Gen. Laws § 23-19.1-4; explosive or highly
combustible materials; or sexually explicit films, videos, photographs,
books, magazines, and the like, whether they are legally permitted to be sold
or not, shall be kept locked at all times except;  (1) when opened to
receive materials or for cleaning or other direct and immediate use by an
employee, and (2) for a reasonable time, not to exceed two hours, prior to a
scheduled pickup for emptying.



(Ord. passed 9-16-02)



§ 92A.04  APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all commercial and industrial
properties in the town, regardless of the zoning district in which they are
located, except that existing businesses which have already established
storage areas or trash or waste receptacles within the Section applicable
setback shall not be required to move them. Existing businesses shall have 90
days from the effective date of this chapter to comply with its requirements.



   (B)   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than one $100 per day, and each day in which the property is in
violation shall be considered a separate violation.



(Ord. passed 9-16-02)



CHAPTER 92B:  PLASTIC BAG REGULATIONS



Section



   92B.01   Legislative findings and intent



   92B.02   Purpose



   92B.03   Definitions



   92B.04   Prohibited acts



   92B.05   Exemptions



   92B.06   Enforcement; violations; penalties



   92B.07   Hardship variance



   92B.08   Effective date



§ 92B.01  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND INTENT.



   (A)   The Town Council has the authority under Article 13 of the
Rhode Island Constitution and the Middletown Town Charter to regulate issues
of solid waste, litter and pollution as a local concern.



   (B)   The production, use and disposal of plastic checkout bags,
which are commonly not recycled, has been shown to have significant
detrimental impacts on the environment, including but not limited to
contributing to pollution of the terrestrial and coastal environment,
clogging storm water drainage systems, and contributing to the injury and
death of terrestrial and marine life through ingestion and entanglement.



   (C)   The manufacture, transport and recycling of plastic checkout
bags requires substantial energy consumption and contributes to greenhouse
gases.



   (D)   Plastic checkout bags create a burden to solid waste
collection and recycling facilities.



   (E)   Prohibiting the use of plastic checkout bags is necessary to
protect the environment and the public health, safety, and welfare of all
residents and visitors.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 5-1-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 11-20-17)



§ 92B.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to improve the environment in and around
the town and the health, safety, and welfare of its residents by reducing the
number of plastic and paper bags being used, encouraging the use and sale of
reusable checkout bags and banning the use of plastic bags for retail
checkout of goods.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 5-1-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 11-20-17)



§ 92B.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any commercial enterprise that provides
carryout bags to its customers, including sole proprietorships, joint
ventures, partnerships, corporations, or any other legal entity, and includes
all employees of the business and any independent contractors associated with
the business. BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT does not include sales of goods at yard
sales, tag sales, other sales by residents at their homes, and sales by
nonprofit organizations.



   CARRYOUT BAG. A bag provided by a business establishment to a customer,
typically at the point of sale, for the purpose of transporting purchases.



   DOUBLE-OPENING PLASTIC BAGS.Any thin plastic bag with a double opening
(top and bottom) to protect clothing or other items for transport.



   PLASTIC BARRIER BAG. Any thin plastic bag with a single opening used to:



      (1)   Transport fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, small
hardware items, or other items selected by customers to the point of sale;



      (2)   Contain or wrap fresh or frozen foods, meat, or fish,
whether prepackaged or not;



      (3)   Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items
where damage to a good or contamination of other goods placed together in the
same bag may be a problem; or



      (4)   Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods.



   PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG. Any plastic carry-out bag that is provided by a
business establishment to a customer, typically at the point of sale, for the
purpose of transporting purchases. PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG does not include
plastic barrier bags or double-opening plastic bags, as defined herein, or
plastic bags measuring larger than 28 inches by 36 inches.



   RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG.  A paper bag that is fully recyclable overall
and contains a minimum of 40% post-consumer recycled content and contains no
old growth fiber. The bag should display the words "Reusable" and
"Recyclable" or the universal recycling logo on the outside of the bag.



   REUSABLE BAG . A bag with handles that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse and is made primarily of cloth or other
nonwoven textile or durable plastic with a minimum thickness of four mils.
Any straps must be stitched and not heat fused.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 5-1-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 11-20-17)



§ 92B.04  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No business establishment shall provide or make available any
plastic carryout bag (either complementary or for a fee) for any sales
transaction or other use to members of the public, that does not comply with
the definition of a reusable bag under § 92B.03 of this chapter.



   (B)   All business establishments that provide plastic barrier bags
or double opening bags shall offer a recycling opportunity onsite for the
recycling of any plastic bags or clean plastic bag film as defined by the
Rhode Island Resource Recovery Corporation RESTORE program.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall preclude business establishments
from making reusable bags or recyclable paper bags, as defined in § 92B.03
of this chapter,  available to customers, by sale or otherwise.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 5-1-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 11-20-17)



§ 92B.05  EXEMPTIONS.



   This chapter does not apply to:



   (A)   Laundry dry cleaning bags, door-hanger bags, newspaper bags,
or packages of multiple bags intended for use as garbage, pet waste, or yard
waste;



   (B)   Bags provided by pharmacists or veterinarians to contain
prescription drugs or other medical necessities, provided that the bags are
recyclable within the state's recycling program; and



   (C)   Plastic barrier bags, double opening plastic bags and bags
used by a consumer inside a business establishment to:



      (1)   Contain bulk items, such as produce, nuts, grains,
candy, or small hardware items;



      (2)   Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether or
not prepackaged;



      (3)   Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items to
prevent moisture damage to other purchases;



      (4)   Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods; or



      (5)   Bags used by a non-profit corporation or other hunger
relief charity to distribute food, grocery products, clothing, or other
household items.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 5-1-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 11-20-17)



§ 92B.06  ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.



   This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, or any other
Town Department designated by the Town Administrator. Any person who violates
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following
penalties:



   (A)   For a first offense, the person charged with a violation of
this chapter shall be served with a warning letter by delivering it to him or
her personally, or by posting a copy upon a conspicuous portion of the retail
sales establishment and sending a copy of the same by certified mail to the
person to whom the notice is directed. The warning letter shall inform the
person charged of the nature of the violation and that it must be corrected
within 14 days of the date of the letter, and shall include a copy of this
chapter.



   (B)   For a second offense more than 14 days after service of a
warning letter, a fine of $150. The person charged shall, for a second
offense, be given the opportunity to pay the fine assessed by mail, which
shall be indicated on the summons issued by the charging officer. Should the
alleged violator elect not to pay the fine assessed by mail, said person
shall be entitled to a hearing before the Municipal Court.



   (C)   For a third or subsequent offense, a fine of $300, and a
hearing before the Municipal Court shall be required.



   (D)   Each occurrence of a violation more than 14 days after service
of a warning letter, and each day that such violation continues, shall
constitute a separate violation and may be cited as such.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 5-1-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 11-20-17)



§ 92B.07  HARDSHIP VARIANCE.



   The Town Administrator may grant a variance from the requirements of
this chapter only after determining that:



   (A)   Application of this chapter would cause undue hardship based
upon unique circumstances; or



   (B)   Application of this chapter would deprive a person or business
of a legally protected right.



   (C)   The requested variance shall be submitted on the towns
prescribed forms.



   (D)   Any variance granted under this section must be the minimum
variance necessary to address the hardship.



   (E)   The Administrator shall prepare a written report of findings
to support the grant or denial of the variance.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 5-1-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 11-20-17)



§ 92B.08  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall take effect on passage and its provisions shall
supersede any inconsistent or contrary provision in any other ordinance,
provided however, that enforcement shall be stayed until November 30, 2017.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 5-1-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 11-20-17)



CHAPTER 93:  HARBOR RULES AND REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   93.01   Goals of chapter



   93.02   Intent and authority; chart



   93.03   Definitions



Mooring Regulations



   93.10   Permitting



   93.11   Permit renewal



   93.12   New mooring permits



   93.13   Available space



   93.14   Waiting list



   93.15   Permit ratios



   93.16   Relocation of existing permitted mooring



   93.17   Mooring associated with residential waterfront properties



   93.18   Mooring fields



   93.19   Mooring records



   93.20   Numbering



   93.21   Rafting



   93.22   Occupation of mooring area



   93.23   Boat sewage waste



   93.30   Registration fees



   93.31   Registration penalties



   93.32   Forfeit of mooring space



Specifications of Tackle



   93.40   Minimum requirements



   93.41   Transient and commercial moorings



   93.42   Pennant and pennant lines



   93.43   Scope of chain



   93.44   Shackles, swivels, anchors and other hardware



   93.45   Abandonment of tackle



   93.46   Inspections



   93.47   Winter mooring spars



   93.48   Anchoring



Safety Regulations



   93.60   Third beach regulations



   93.60.1   Dinghy/kayak rack rental



   93.61   Second beach regulations



Enforcement and Liability



   93.70   Enforcement



   93.71   Liability



 



   93.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01 GOALS OF CHAPTER.



   The following are the goals of this chapter:



   (A)   To manage the coastal waters and harbor areas of the town, as
described herein and hereafter referred to as the town, by establishing
regulations that balance and manage the diverse uses of the waters, harbor
areas and water front off Second and Third Beach, and to minimize user
conflicts.



   (B)   To maintain, improve and develop public access opportunities
to the coastal waters of the town for the benefit of all user groups.



   (C)   To remain consistent with the goals and regulations of the
Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Council, the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management, The State Guide Plan and the United
States Army Corps of Engineers.



   (D)   To maintain compliance with the town Comprehensive Community
Plan.



   (E)   To maintain and preserve the water quality of Type I in the
coastal waters and harbor of the town.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



§ 93.02  INTENT AND AUTHORITY; CHART.



   (A)   Pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws 46-4-6.12, as amended, it is the
intent of these rules and regulations to implement and establish regulations
for the recreational use of the waters off Second and Third Beach in the
town, and to establish thereby, in the interests of the public health, safety
and welfare, regulations related to the mooring and anchoring of boats and to
boating safety.



   (B)   A chart, entitled "Third Beach Harbor Recreational Chart,"
dated July 1986 (the "chart"), which is hereby duly adopted by the Town
Council, delineating boundaries of the harbor in the waters off Third Beach,
is annexed hereto and is made a part hereof. The chart also delineates the
boundaries of mooring areas, swimming areas, access lanes to the launching
ramp at Third Beach and general traffic patterns to be maintained within the
harbor. Copies of the chart and regulations shall be made available to
interested parties by the Harbormaster.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



§ 93.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOAT.  Ship, vessel, or any other type of water craft.



   COMMERCIAL MOORING.  Any mooring which does not meet the definition of
a private mooring.



   HARBOR.  The area shown as the Third Beach Harbor on the chart adopted
simultaneously herewith and attached as an appendix to this chapter.



   HARBORMASTER. The harbormaster appointed by the Town Administrator.



   MOORING AREA. Those portions of town waters which shall be designated
as such by the Town Council and shown on the chart.



   MOORING ASSIGNMENT COMMITTEE.  The Harbormaster and two other people
to be appointed by the Town Council.



   NONRESIDENT.  Any individual, business, or corporation which does not
meet the definition of a RESIDENT.



   PERSON.  Individuals, corporations, societies, associations and
partnerships.



   PERSONAL WATERCRAFT.  A motorized recreational water vehicle normally
ridden by straddling a seat, although it may be operated from a sitting,
standing or kneeling position, and powered by a water jet pump.



   PRIVATE MOORING.  Any mooring owned by and registered to an individual
and used exclusively for his/her own recreational purposes.



   QUALIFIED INSPECTOR.  Any person approved as an inspector of tackle by
the Harbormaster.



   REGISTERED MOORING OWNER.  The holder of licensed mooring space
assigned to him/her by the Harbormaster.



   RESIDENT. Any permanent, full-time inhabitant of the town.



   TOWN. Those water-delineated portions of the town as shown on the chart.



   TOWN BEACH RECREATION FACILITIES.  Second and Third Beaches and the
waters immediately adjacent thereto.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 8-19-02)



MOORING REGULATIONS



§ 93.10  PERMITTING.



   (A)   The Town Council shall set by resolution of the Council the
maximum number of moorings, both private and commercial, to be allowed within
the harbor area.



   (B)   No mooring shall be located in the coastal waters and harbor
areas of the town until a permit has been issued for the use of such mooring
by the Harbormaster. No mooring shall be located nor shall be maintained
unless the mooring owner has received a valid mooring permit issued by the
Harbormaster for the mooring and that the mooring conforms to the
specifications and standards set forth in this chapter and permit.



   (C)   No person or firm shall in any case be entitled to more than
one mooring in the harbor during any one season, unless granted at the
discretion of the Mooring Assignment Committee.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.11  PERMIT RENEWAL.



   (A)   Applications for renewal of a valid mooring permit shall be
submitted to the Harbormaster on the application forms provided by the
Harbormaster by April first of each year. All applications shall be
accompanied by the appropriate fee and shall be received by April first by
U.S. mail and addressed to the Harbormaster, c/o Finance Department,
Middletown Town Hall, 350 East Main Road, Middletown, Rhode Island 02842.
Failure to submit a complete and accurate application by April first shall
result in the loss of the mooring space.



   (B)   The Finance Department shall mail the application forms in the
month of February of each year to those persons who held valid mooring
permits at the end of the previous calendar year, to the address listed on
their last mooring permit. It shall be the responsibility of the mooring
permit holder to notify the Finance Department of any changes in address.



   (C)   Renewal applications for private mooring spaces without
identification of the boat to be moored will be accepted for two consecutive
renewals only. Renewal rate shall be at the prevailing rate of the previous
registration. Additional renewals shall be with the approval of the Mooring
Advisory Committee for reasons of good cause only. Such applications shall be
accompanied by the appropriate fee.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



§ 93.12  NEW MOORING PERMITS.



   (A)   To be eligible for a new mooring permit, an applicant must own
a boat for which a mooring permit is being sought or be a commercial mooring
operator. Requests for new mooring permits shall be submitted to the
Harbormaster on the application forms provided by April first of each year.
Applications and the appropriate fee shall be received by U.S. mail by the
Harbormaster c/o Finance Department, Town Hall, 350 East Main Road,
Middletown, Rhode Island 02842.



   (B)   A complete and accurate mooring permit application must be
provided before the Harbormaster can act to approve or deny such application.
All such applications shall contain the following information and no
incomplete applications shall be accepted:



      (1)   Name, address and telephone number (work and home) of
applicant;



      (2)   Size and type of boat;



      (3)   Overall length of boat;



      (4)   Breadth of boat;



      (5)   Draft of boat;



      (6)   Name of boat with copies of title documents or state
registration, if applicable; and



      (7)   Appropriate application fee.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



Cross-reference:



   Application fee, see § 93.30



§ 93.13  AVAILABLE SPACE.



   As of April first of each year, the Harbormaster shall determine the
number of mooring spaces available for mooring placement as the sum of all
authorized mooring spaces less those for which acceptable applications for
renewal were not received.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



§ 93.14  WAITING LIST.



   The Harbormaster shall maintain a waiting list of all applications for
private and commercial mooring permit requests when no mooring space is
available within the coastal waters and harbor areas of the town.  There
shall be paid annually a $10 fee for each applicant on the waiting list. 
The fee shall be paid to the Harbormaster on or before April 1 of every year.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 3-19-07)



§ 93.15  PERMIT RATIOS.



   Mooring space for commercial moorings may be granted by the
Harbormaster in a ratio of one commercial mooring for every three private
moorings. Unassigned mooring shall be granted in a ratio of three town
residents to each nonresident.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



§ 93.16  RELOCATION OF EXISTING PERMITTED MOORING.



   A registered owner during the immediately preceding year, who shall
need or desire a new location, shall file an application containing the
information set forth in § 93.12, along with the existing mooring space
registration number, size and type of new boat. All such applications shall
be deemed mooring relocation applications and shall be entitled to such
priority as the Mooring Assignment Committee may grant in accordance with the
standards herein provided.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



§ 93.17  MOORING ASSOCIATED WITH RESIDENTIAL WATERFRONT PROPERTIES.



   Moorings owned by persons who own residential waterfront property are
allowed to be placed in the coastal waters and harbor areas of the town in
those waters immediately adjacent to the upland residential waterfront
property. The mooring owner must comply with all mooring permit application
requirements and receive a mooring permit from the town as described herein.
The mooring must meet all mooring tackle standards and inspections as
described hereinafter, before placement by residential waterfront property
owner.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.18  MOORING FIELDS.



   (A)   No mooring shall be located or placed within the coastal
waters and harbor areas of the town without a valid mooring permit issued by
the Harbormaster and without having the mooring inspected as detailed herein
and approved by the Harbormaster. The Harbormaster must direct the placement
of the mooring.



   (B)   No vessel so moored or anchored shall extend beyond the
designated mooring areas as detailed herein.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.19  MOORING RECORDS.



   (A)   The Harbormaster shall keep a detailed record of all moorings,
both private and commercial, including:



      (1)   Location of mooring;



      (2)   Owner's name;



      (3)   Telephone number of owner (business and home);



      (4)   Date mooring was set; and



      (5)   Name, length and type of boat.



   (B)   Registration numbers will also be required, if applicable.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



§ 93.20  NUMBERING.



   (A)   Each mooring located in the coastal waters and harbor areas of
the town, once permitted, shall be assigned a number by the Harbormaster. The
number will be displayed in contrasting color in two places on each mooring
buoy or pickup buoy in block letters at least four inches height.



   (B)   All assignments of mooring space shall be made by permit
issued by the Harbormaster. Moorings shall be assigned in chronological order
of receipt of completed applications.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.21  RAFTING.



   Vessels may raft on a single mooring when such activity does not
interfere with the proper functioning of adjacent single mooring or vessel
anchorages. Vessels at raft shall be manned at all times.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.22  OCCUPATION OF MOORING AREA.



   No vessel shall occupy a mooring other than the one for which it is
registered. The Harbormaster shall have authority to move any vessel
violating the provisions of this section and such movement shall be at the
owner's expense and risk.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.23  BOAT SEWAGE WASTE.



   (A)   The disposal of untreated boat sewage wastes by any means into
coastal waters of the town is prohibited.



   (B)   Owners are required to have clean sewage tanks prior to
entering the Third Beach Mooring Area.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



REGISTRATION FEES AND PENALTIES



§ 93.30  REGISTRATION FEES.



   (A)   All applications for mooring permits shall be accompanied by
the appropriate fee.  All such fees shall be nonrefundable.  The
Harbormaster shall collect from the applicant a mooring permit fee to be paid
by the applicant on or before April 1 of every year.  The mooring permit
fees are as follows:



 

Registered Boat Length (feet)
 

Resident

 

Nonresident

 

Commercial





Under 16
 

$200

 

$350

 

$550



16-19
 

$200

 

$350

 

$550



20-22
 

$200

 

$350

 

$550



23-25
 

$200

 

$350

 

$550



26-30
 

$230

 

$410

 

$650



31-35
 

$290

 

$530

 

$850



36-40
 

$350

 

$650

 

$1050



41-50
 

$410

 

$770

 

$1350



51-65
 

$500

 

$950

 

$1550





 



   (B)   Daily mooring fee: $20.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 2-17-04; Am.
Ord. passed 3-19-07; Am. Ord. 09-09, passed 6-1-09; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-10)



§ 93.31  REGISTRATION PENALTIES.



   If the fee and application are not received by April first, the mooring
tackle may be pulled by the Harbormaster and the registered owner shall lose
all right to his/her former mooring space. No mooring permit shall be
transferable except within the immediate family. Immediate family shall
include brother, sister, children, mother, father and spouse. No person shall
cause any boat to be attached to any private mooring unless said boat is
described in the application, provided, however, that the Harbormaster may
permit the temporary use of the mooring by another boat upon application by
the registered owner.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.32  FORFEIT OF MOORING SPACE.



    Any registered owner shall be deemed to have forfeited his registered
mooring space by reason of the following:



   (A)   Removal of tackle and no notification to the Harbormaster that
the space is available;



   (B)   Failure to re-register for such space by April first of any
season or failure to replace any piece of mooring tackle not complying with
the mooring tackle standards hereinafter set forth;



   (C)   Failure to resurface or replace mooring within 60 days after
being advised by the Harbormaster that the mooring is down; or



   (D)   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



SPECIFICATIONS OF TACKLE



§ 93.40  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   Mooring tackle shall meet the following minimum requirements as shown
on the table below:



 




SPECIFICATIONS OF TACKLE




REGISTERED BOAT LENGTH (FEET)

 

MUSHROOM ANCHOR (POUNDS)

 

BOTTOM CHAIN (INCHES)

 

TOP CHAIN (INCHES)

 

PENNANTS
(INCHES)




NYLON DACRON

 

STAINLESS STEEL



Under 16
 
75
 
3/8
 
5/16
 
1/2
 
1/4


16-19
 
150
 
3/8
 
5/16
 
1/2
 
1/4


20-22
 
200
 
1/2
 
5/16
 
5/8
 
1/4


23-25
 
250
 
1/2
 
5/16
 
3/4
 
1/4


26-30
 
300
 
5/8
 
3/8
 
3/4
 
1/4


31-35
 
400
 
5/8
 
3/8
 
3/4
 
3/8


36-40
 
500
 
3/4
 
1/2
 
7/8
 
3/8


41-50
 
600
 
3/4
 
1/2
 
1
 
1/2


51-65
 
750
 
1
 
1/2
 
1-1/4
 
1/2




 



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.41  TRANSIENT AND COMMERCIAL MOORINGS.



   Transient rental moorings, if any, shall consist of a 500 pound
mushroom anchor and 3/4 inch bottom chain and 3/8 inch top chain. The weight
of the anchor shall be clearly painted on the mooring ball. All commercial
moorings shall have specially designated mooring hours.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.42  PENNANT AND PENNANT LINES.



   (A)   The maximum length of the pennant shall be 2½ times the
distance from the bow chock to the water plus the distance from the bow chock
to the mooring clear or post.



   (B)   All pennant lines running through a chock or any other object
where chafing may occur shall have adequate chafe guards. A second pennant
shall be fastened to moorings made of cable or chain and used in heavy
weather.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.43  SCOPE OF CHAIN.



   The total scope of the chain shall be 2½ times the depth of the water
at high tide. This scope will be considered as a total of 50 feet in the
Third Beach harbor. The bottom and top chain shall each consist of
approximately 50% of the scope.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.44  SHACKLES, SWIVELS, ANCHORS AND OTHER HARDWARE.



   (A)   All shackles, swivels and other hardware used in the mooring
hookup shall be proportionate in size to the chain used.



   (B)   All shackles shall be properly seized.



   (C)   It is recommended that the pennant be spliced or shackled into
the bitter end of the top chain below the buoy so the strain is not carried
by the buoy.



   (D)   Only mushroom anchors will be acceptable on permanent moorings.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.45  ABANDONMENT OF TACKLE.



   (A)   Any registered owner who owns his/her tackle and is abandoning
a mooring space, may offer to sell the tackle occupying such space to the
next person assigned the same. If such tackle is not sold or rented, it shall
be removed by such registered owner. Failure of the registered owner to
remove such tackle shall constitute the abandonment thereof, and such tackle
may be removed by the Harbormaster at the expense of such registered owner
thereof.



   (B)   The moving of any tackle to assigned space shall be at the
applicant's expense, and tackle may not be moved from any registered mooring
space without the prior written approval of the Mooring Assignment Committee.
Any registered owner desiring to move any tackle shall make application to
the Mooring Assignment Committee, which shall determine whether such
application shall be approved or rejected.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.46  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All new moorings in the coastal waters and harbor areas of the
town must have the chain, tackle and anchor inspected by the Harbormaster or
his designee prior to setting the mooring.



   (B)   Every permit holder shall be required to maintain their
mooring in a safe condition. Any chain, shackle, swivel or other tackle which
is warped or worn by  its normal diameter shall be replaced. Failure to
maintain a safe mooring shall be cause for revocation of the mooring permit
and shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  The Harbormaster or his
designee may inspect any mooring at any time to determine compliance with
this section.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.47  WINTER MOORING SPARS.



   Winter mooring spars shall be readily visible in a vertical position
above the water at all times and shall be removed no later than June first of
the succeeding year.  Winter spars shall not be set until on or after the
first day of October of each calendar year.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.48  ANCHORING.



   (A)   All anchoring shall be in a mooring area and shall be under
the direction of the Harbormaster.



   (B)   No vessel shall be allowed to anchor in the harbor utilizing
her own ground tackle and be left unattended.  The owner or operator and
party may go ashore but shall not leave the area and shall be available to
tend to the vessel in the event of heavy weather.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



SAFETY REGULATIONS



§ 93.60  THIRD BEACH REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Third Beach is operated as a Town Recreation Area for
swimming, boating and boardsailing.  Uses within the Third Beach harbor area
shall be as specified on the chart attached as an appendix to this chapter.



   (B)   Swimming Areas.



      No. 1 - Main Beach



      No. 2 - Private Beach



   These areas, which are set forth on the chart, are marked by floating
buoys and are restricted for swimmers only. No boating of any kind is allowed
in these areas.



   (C)   Boardsailing and sailboat area. The launching area is the
southeast side of the beach and/or boat ramp. Sailboats and boardsailing are
permitted in all restricted areas on the chart except for areas designated as
"Swimming Areas." No person shall set up, launch, land or ride kite boards
within 1,000 feet of the shoreline at Third Beach.



   (D)   Boat ramp. Power boats may be launched from the boat ramp but
are restricted to the Power Boat Access Channel, which is, unless otherwise
designated by marker buoys, 20 feet on either side of the speed limit sign
floats indicated on the chart.  Speed limit in the Power Boat Access Channel
is five miles per hour until the outer limits of the Third Beach Restricted
Area is reached.



   (E)   Water skiing / jet skiing.  Water skiing and jet skiing or
use of any personal watercraft are prohibited throughout the Third Beach
Restricted Area, provided that jet skis and other personal watercraft may use
the power boat access channel, at a speed of no more than five miles per hour
to access the open water beyond the Restricted Area.



   (F)   Boat holding area.  The boat holding area is to only be used
for temporary anchoring pending use of the boat ramp.



   (G)   Commercial rental.  Commercial rental of boardsailors, jet
skis and any other water craft at Third Beach, either directly or indirectly,
is prohibited unless specifically authorized in writing by the Town Council.



   (H)   Fishing.  All vessels shall use care and courtesy when
passing by boats where people are fishing.



   (I)   Reporting accidents. All accidents in town waters shall be
reported to the Coast Guard and Department of Boating Safety.



   (J)   Littering. The littering ordinance for the town also applies
to the harbor.



   (K)   Vandalism and theft. Vandalism and theft shall be reported to
the Harbormaster.



   (L)   Seaplanes. Water areas and harbors of the town shall be off
limits for the landing and taking off of seaplanes.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 8-19-02; Am.
Ord. passed 5-16-05)  Penalty, see § 93.99



Cross-reference:



   Depositing waste in public places prohibited, see § 50.02



§ 93.60.1  DINGHY/KAYAK RACK RENTAL.



   (A)   Availability. On or before April first of each year, the
Harbormaster shall determine the number of dinghy/kayak rental rack slots
available.



   (B)   Season. The rental season shall commence on May 1st and
terminate on November 1st of each calendar year. Any dinghy or kayak not
removed by November 1st will be considered abandoned and removed at the
discretion of the town without notice. The renter shall be responsible for
all costs and expenses of the removal, storage, if any and possible disposal.
Future rental may be denied at the sole discretion of the town. Any property
not disposed of will be released to owner only upon reimbursement to the town
of all costs and expenses of removal and storage.



   (C)   Waiting list. The Harbormaster shall maintain a waiting list
of all applications for a dinghy/kayak rack rental slot when no rental slot
is available. Available rentals shall be assigned in the following order
based upon the date of receipt of the application:



      (1)   Residents, if there are no resident applications; then



      (2)   Non-resident mooring owners; if there are no
non-resident mooring owners; then



      (3)   Non-residents.



   (D)   Commercial use. Commercial use of the dinghy rack is strictly
prohibited. Dinghy rack rental slots may not be assigned, rented or sublet to
third parties.



   (E)   Transferability. No dinghy slot shall be transferred, with the
exception of a surviving spouse.



   (F)   Rules and regulations. The Mooring Committee shall adopt,
update and publish rules and regulations governing the use of the town dinghy
rack, subject to the approval of the Town Council.



   (G)   Forfeit of dinghy/kayak rack space.



      (1)   Failure to remove boat from dinghy/kayak rack in the
prior season.



      (2)   Failure to re-register for a slot by April first of any
season.



      (3)   Failure to follow the rules and regulations that apply
to Third Beach Harbor or the dinghy/kayak rack.



      (4)   Failure to use a dinghy/kayak rack slot for a season as
determined by the Harbormaster.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 5-7-12)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.61  SECOND BEACH REGULATIONS.



   Second Beach is operated as a Town Recreation Area for swimming.
Surfing is restricted use and is authorized only in designated areas,
pursuant to § 94.33 of the Town Code. Boardsailing and other similar
regattas may be permitted as specifically authorized by the Town Council.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)  Penalty, see § 93.99



ENFORCEMENT AND LIABILITY



§ 93.70  ENFORCEMENT.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, these rules and
regulation shall be enforced by the Harbormaster or any member of the Police
Department. Any violation of these rules and regulations shall be deemed
"traffic violations" or "traffic infractions" pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws §
31-43-1, as amended. A ticket system is in effect.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



§ 93.71  LIABILITY.



   Persons using the coastal waters and harbor areas of the town shall
assume all risk of personal injury and damage or loss to their property. The
town assumes no risk on account of accident, fire, theft, vandalism or acts
of God.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person
violating the provision of these rules and regulations may be subject to a
fine not in excess of $100 or imprisonment not exceeding ten days in some
jail or house of correction for any one offense. All such fines are to be
recovered to the use of the town.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of §§ 93.60 -
93.61 shall be subject to the following penalty:



      (1)   For a first offense within a 12 month period, $50.  The
person charged with a violation of any provision of §§ 93.60 - 93.61 shall,
for a first offense, be given the opportunity to pay the fine assessed by
mail, which shall be indicated on the summons issued by the charging
officer.  Should the alleged violator elect not to pay the fine assessed by
mail, said person shall be entitled to a hearing before the Municipal Court.



      (2)   For any second or subsequent violation of §§ 93.60 -
93.61 within a 12 month period, a hearing before the Municipal Court is
required, and the alleged violators shall be subject to the penalties as
outlined in § 10.99.



      (3)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which there is not otherwise a penalty shall be subject to the penalty of §
10.99.



(Ord. passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. passed 8-21-00)



APPENDIX:  THIRD BEACH HARBOR RECREATIONAL CHART, DATED JULY 1986.







 



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Owners to remove snow, debris from sidewalks



   94.02   Numbering of property



   94.03   Beach regulations



   94.04   Permit required for road, sidewalk construction



   94.05   Permit application



   94.06   Violations of permit requirements



Excavations and Obstructions



   94.15   Excavation permits required; fees; emergency exception



   94.16   Permit application, agreement



   94.17   Surety bond; obligation to backfill, patch



   94.18   Permits required for obstructions; fees; emergency exceptions



   94.19   Surety bond required



   94.20   Duration of permits; revocation



   94.21   Removing protecting devices prohibited



Sachuest Beach and Surrounding Territory



   94.30   Residents defined



   94.31   Removal of sand, gravel and stone restricted



   94.32   Other prohibitions and restrictions



   94.33   Bathing and surfing regulations



   94.34   Damages for violations



   94.35   Kite surfing and windsurfing regulations



Use of Public Places



   94.40   Reservation of use of certain public places



Rights-of-Way to Water



   94.45   Obstructing right-of-way



   94.46   Enforcement



   94.47   Notice; penalty



   94.48   Designated rights-of-way



 



   94.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  OWNERS TO REMOVE SNOW, DEBRIS FROM SIDEWALKS.



   Whenever a sidewalk or portion thereof shall become encumbered with
snow, ice, mud, obstruction or debris, it shall be the duty of the owner,
occupant or person in charge of the property abutting upon such sidewalk to
remove the same during daylight or before 9:00 a.m. after the falling of snow
during darkness.  In complying with the foregoing requirements, no person
shall use any pick, axe or other sharp tool or implement which could cause
damage to the sidewalk.



('73 Code, § 21-1)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.02  NUMBERING OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   Every person owning land abutting on any street, court or way
in the town shall, within 30 days after such real estate has been numbered or
renumbered by the town Fire Department, adopt such number or numbers as may
be established.  The Fire Chief shall notify in writing every such person of
the number or numbers given to such real estate within one week after the
number is established.



   (B)   Duty of property owners to affix assigned numbers on buildings.



      (1)   Every person receiving notice from the Fire Chief of the
number or numbers that have been established for such real estate shall, if
there is a dwelling house or commercial building thereon, within 30 days
after the receipt of such notice, cause to be affixed to such dwelling house
or commercial building, in a conspicuous place near the main entrance to the
premises, the number so established.



      (2)   Numbers and letters shall be a minimum of three inches,
colored to stand out against background color.  Line-of-sight from the road
must not be impeded by plantings or other objects or structures.



      (3)   A dwelling house or commercial building set back from
the road may require, upon determination of the Fire Department, the
placement of the assigned number on the mailbox, a tree, fence, wall or
separate post at or near the street or road line, in addition to displaying
the numerals on the dwelling house or commercial building.



   (C)   Only assigned numbers to be used. No number other than the
number so established by the Fire Department shall be used by the owner for
his land.



(Ord. passed 9-3-91)



§ 94.03  BEACH REGULATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person without proper authority to be
upon, build a fire or picnic upon any beach within the jurisdiction of the
town between the hours of midnight and sunrise of any day, or to conduct
himself in a noisy and boisterous manner upon any such beach at any time.



('73 Code, § 21-2)  (Ord. passed 6-21-45)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ROAD, SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.



   No person, firm or corporation shall construct any street, road or
sidewalk dedicated or to be dedicated to the public except in conformance
with the Specifications For Required Improvements as set forth in the Rules
and Regulations Regarding The Subdivision of Land, Town of Middletown, Rhode
Island, 1980, revised June 20, 1984, or as may hereafter be revised or
amended, and any other applicable specifications prescribed by the Director
of Public Works, without obtaining a permit in writing from the Director of
Public Works, and installing such signs, lights, barricades, and such other
warnings of the construction as may be required by the Chief of Police and/or
the Director of Public Works, and if required by the Chief of Police, or his
designee, arrange for proper traffic control personnel to insure the safety
of pedestrians and traffic in the excavation area.



(Ord. passed 2-21-89)



§ 94.05  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Every person, firm or corporation who files an application for a permit
to construct any street, road or sidewalk dedicated or to be dedicated to the
public, shall, in such application, state the exact location of the proposed
construction and the dimensions thereof, accompanied by plans satisfactory to
the Director of Public Works showing the extent of work to be performed, and
shall also agree to construct the street, road or sidewalk in conformance
with the Specifications For Required Improvements as set forth in the Rules
and Regulations Regarding The Subdivision of Land, Town of Middletown, Rhode
Island, 1980, revised June 20, 1984, or as may hereafter be revised or
amended, and any other applicable specifications prescribed by the Director
of Public Works.  The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to
revoke said permit and issue a stop work order if, in the opinion of the
Director, the construction is not in strict compliance with the aforesaid
specifications.



(Ord. passed 2-21-89)



§ 94.06  VIOLATIONS OF PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The construction of any street, road or sidewalk dedicated or
to be dedicated to the public, contrary to any of the provisions of §§
94.04 and 94.05 is hereby declared to be a violation of §§ 94.04 and 94.05
and unlawful.



   (B)   Violations of §§ 94.03 and 94.04 shall be subject to the
penalty of § 94.99.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of §§ 94.04 and
94.05 shall be liable to the town for any and all actual damages sustained by
the town as a result of any such violation.



   (D)   The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law.



(Ord. passed 2-21-89)



EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS



§ 94.15  EXCAVATION PERMITS REQUIRED; FEES; EMERGENCY EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall connect any land of
premises with any main drain or common sewer, or open any drain or sewer
belonging to the town, or break ground or make any excavation in any of the
sidewalks, streets or public places in the town for the purpose of making a
drain or sewer or laying or placing gas or water pipes, or for any other
purpose whatsoever without first obtaining a permit from the Director of
Public Works, and for such permit the person, firm or corporation obtaining
it shall pay the Director a fee of $50; and upon receipt of such permit the
person, firm or corporation shall install such signs, lights, barricades, and
such other warnings of the excavation as may be required by the Chief of
Police and/or the Director of Public Works, and shall if required by the
Chief of Police, or his designee, arrange for proper traffic control
personnel to insure the safety of pedestrians and traffic in the excavation
area.



   (B)   All permit fees shall be deposited with the Finance Director.



   (C)   Provided that in case of an emergency occurring during any
period when the office of the Director of Public Works is closed and it is
necessary to make an excavation in a street, sidewalk or public place for the
purpose of making repairs to a gas main, water main, cable, electric conduit
or for any purpose, the person, firm or corporation required to make such
excavation shall not be first required to obtain a permit from the Director
of Public Works.  Such person, firm or corporation shall, before making such
excavation, advise the Police and Fire Departments of the location where such
excavation is to be made and shall install such signs, lights, barricades or
such other warnings as may be required by the Chief of Police, and if
required by the Chief of Police, or his designee, arrange for proper traffic
control personnel to insure the safety of pedestrians and traffic in the
excavation area.



('73 Code, § 21-11)  (Ord. passed 8-29-52; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am.
Ord. passed 2-21-89)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.16  PERMIT APPLICATION, AGREEMENT.



   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation filing an application for a
permit to make an excavation in a sidewalk, street or other public place
shall do so on a form supplied by the Director of Public Works, and each such
application shall state the exact location and dimensions of the proposed
excavation, and shall be accompanied by plans satisfactory to the Director of
Public Works showing the extent and type of work to be performed.  Each
applicant must contain a "Dig-Safe" Control Number and any excavation must
comply with the requirements of R.I. Gen. Laws § 39-1.2-1 et seq.



   (B)   Every person, firm or corporation filing an application for a
permit to make an excavation in a sidewalk, street or other public place
shall agree to and shall restore the surface, sidewalk or pavement from one
side to the other over the total width of the surface, sidewalk or pavement
and length of the excavation in accordance with the specifications for road
repairs and any such other specifications prescribed by the Director of
Public Works, and shall further agree that if, in the opinion of the
Director, the work restoration is not in strict accordance with such
specifications, then the town may restore the same and charge to the
applicant the cost thereof.



('73 Code, § 21-12)  (Ord. passed 8-29-52; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am.
Ord. passed 2-21-89) 



§ 94.17  SURETY BOND; OBLIGATION TO BACKFILL, PATCH.



   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation making application as
aforesaid shall also be required to file in the office of the Director of
Public Works a surety bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the
restoration of the surface, sidewalk or pavement from one side to the other
over the total width of the surface, sidewalk or pavement, and length of the
excavation in accordance with and such other specifications prescribed by the
Director of Public Works, or $25,000, whichever is greater, with the
condition in such bond that the applicant shall do the work for which it has
applied in a first-class workmanlike manner and shall restore the surface,
sidewalk or pavement in accordance with the specifications for road repairs
and such other specifications prescribed by the Director, and that if, in the
opinion of the Director, the work or restoration is not in strict accordance
with such specification, then the town may do the work or restore the
surface, sidewalk or pavement and charge to the applicant the cost thereof;
provided, that any excavation so refilled and the surface thereof so restored
shall be kept and maintained in satisfactory condition for a period of two
years at the expense of the person, firm or corporation making such
excavation or opening in the street or highway for the purposes specified in
this subchapter.  And in any case if any such excavation, refilling,
resetting, repairing and maintaining is not made in a manner satisfactory to
the Director of Public Works, the Director shall cause the work to be
properly done, and the expense thereof shall be charged to and by the person
digging up the street or highway or making any excavation therein.



   (B)   Every person, firm or corporation connecting any land or
premises with any main drain or common sewer, or opening any drain or sewer
belonging to the town, or breaking ground or making excavation in any of the
sidewalks, streets or public places in the town for the purpose of making a
drain or sewer or laying or placing gas or water pipes, or for any other
purpose whatsoever, at the end of each working day shall backfill and compact
any trench or properly prepare the trench to permit vehicular traffic, and
install temporary patch or coldpatch over the trench in an adequate amount to
permit vehicular traffic if required by the Director of Public Works.



('73 Code, § 21-12)  (Ord. passed 8-29-52; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am.
Ord. passed 2-21-89)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.18  PERMITS REQUIRED FOR OBSTRUCTIONS; FEES; EMERGENCY EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall barricade or obstruct any
street, sidewalk or public place for the purpose of building, repairing or
demolishing any building or structure or for any other purpose whatsoever,
without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Public Works and for
such permit the person obtaining it shall pay the Director a fee of $50, and
such person shall also install such signs, lights and barricades and other
warnings of the barricade or obstruction as may be required by the Chief of
Police and/or the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   All fees so received shall be deposited with the Finance
Director.



   (C)   Provided, that in case of emergency occurring during any
period when the office of the Director of Public Works is closed and it is
necessary to erect a barricade or otherwise obstruct any street, highway or
public place for any purpose, the person, firm or corporation required so to
do shall not be first required to obtain a permit from the Director of Public
Works.  Such person, however, shall, before taking such action, advise the
Police and Fire Departments of the location where such obstruction is to be
placed, and the Police Department shall prescribe appropriate signs, lights
and warnings, and, if necessary to insure the safety of the public, require
such person, firm or corporation to arrange for proper traffic control
personnel; provided, the person placing the obstruction as aforesaid because
of an emergency, shall, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon of the
next following business day, file a written application as herein provided.



('73 Code, § 21-13)  (Ord. passed 8-29-52; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am.
Ord. passed 2-21-89)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.19  SURETY BOND REQUIRED.



   Before commencing any work covered by this subchapter, the applicant
for a permit shall establish by means of a written statement that he has in
full force and effect an indemnity bond or insurance policy in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 running to the benefit of the town, to indemnify the
town for any liability it may incur as a result of issuing a permit under
this subchapter.



('73 Code, § 21-14)  (Ord. passed 10-5-70; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-89)



§ 94.20  DURATION OF PERMITS; REVOCATION.



   Permits issued under this subchapter shall be valid until the dates of
expiration therein respectively provided except as hereinafter provided; and
all work done pursuant to any permit shall be diligently prosecuted so that
completion shall be accomplished without undue delay.  If in the opinion of
the Director of Public Works, the work covered by this subchapter is not in
strict compliance with the specifications contained herein, the Director of
Public Works is hereby authorized to revoke said permit and issue a stop work
order.



('73 Code, § 21-15)  (Ord. passed 2-21-89) 



§ 94.21  REMOVING PROTECTING DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall remove any barrier or lantern
which may be placed by any permit holder or by the Director of Public Works,
or under his authority and direction, to protect the public from injury while
any street, sidewalk or public place is being made or repaired, or while any
work, repair or improvement therein is being performed by or for the town.



('73 Code, § 21-16)  (Ord. passed 8-29-52; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-89) 
Penalty, see § 94.99



SACHUEST BEACH AND SURROUNDING TERRITORY



§ 94.30  RESIDENTS DEFINED.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the word RESIDENTS shall mean
residents of Middletown and all persons renting or leasing real estate in
Middletown for the summer season, or nonresidents owning real estate in
Middletown.



('73 Code, § 21-3)  (Ord. passed 5-3-48) 



Cross-reference:



   Parking on Sachuest Beach, see § 72.35 et seq.



   Horses on Sachuest Beach, see § 70.04



§ 94.31  REMOVAL OF SAND, GRAVEL AND STONE RESTRICTED.



   No person shall take, remove or carry away any sand, gravel or stone
from that portion of the town's properties known as Sachuest Beach and Third
Beach and the land surrounding both Sachuest Beach and Third Beach that is
either owned, controlled or leased by the town without obtaining a permit
from the town; provided, that permits shall be issued only to residents and
not more than one permit shall be issued in any  calendar month to the same
resident. Application shall be made to the town administrator and the permit
shall be subject to the following conditions, restrictions and regulations:



   (A)   No sand, gravel or stone shall be taken, removed or carried
away from such premises except for the personal use of the applicant within
the limits of the town.



   (B)   No sand, gravel or stone shall be taken, removed or carried
away from such premises for sale to any person.



   (C)   The permit may authorized the taking of not more than one yard
of sand, gravel or stone, or of any combination thereof.



   (D)   No sand, gravel or stone shall be taken or loaded for removal
with a mechanical shovel, digger or loader.



   (E)   No sand, gravel or stone shall be removed from such premises
except in designated areas and locations.  The selection and designation of
the areas and locations that from time to time shall be made available for
the removal of said materials shall be the responsibility of the Director of
Public Works, who shall select those areas and locations where the removal of
such materials will cause the least damage to the use of such premises as a
beach for bathing.



   (F)   The date and time of issuance of the permit shall be stated
thereon and the permit shall be effective for 24 hours after its issuance and
any sand, gravel or stone to be taken by virtue of such permit shall be taken
within said permit.



('73 Code, § 21-4)  (Ord. passed 5-3-48; Am. Ord. 2-17-64, Am. Ord. passed
9-21-70; Am. Ord. passed 5-17-93)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.32  OTHER PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.



   The following prohibitions and restrictions shall be complied with by
all persons on that portion of the town's properties known as Sachuest Beach
and Third Beach and the areas surrounding both Sachuest Beach and Third Beach
that is either owned, controlled or leased by the town:



   (A)   Dogs.



      (1)   From May 1 through September 30, dogs shall be permitted
on town beaches only between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:45 a.m. provided
they are on a leash.



      (2)   From October 1 through April 30, dogs shall be allowed
on town beaches provided they are leashed.



      (3)   Any person in control of a dog which defecates on the
beach or public property must immediately remove the waste. Penalty, see §
94.99(D)



   (B)   No bathing shall be permitted when danger signs or danger
flags are up.



   (C)   The use of inner tubes or rubber flotation mattresses in the
water and the use of golf clubs on the beach is prohibited.



   (D)   Ball-playing of any kind, unless the life guards or beach
management permit, is prohibited on the beach. The lifeguards or beach
management shall have the discretion to withdraw their permission at any time.



   (E)   Tents or shelters shall give unobstructed view from the
outside, and shall be located or removed subject to beach official's
directions.



   (F)   No person shall throw or deposit upon Sachuest Beach or Third
Beach, on or about the buildings or walks thereon, any paper, glass, rubbish
or other substances, except refuse in containers provided therefor.



   (G)   The driving of motor vehicles, including but not limited to,
dune buggies, motorcycles, all terrain vehicles and dirt bikes on Sachuest
Beach and Third Beach is specifically prohibited, except motor vehicles owned
by the town or authorized by town officials.



   (H)   The parking, storage or failure to attend any boat or vessel,
sail or motor, including rowboats and jet-skis, so-called, on Second Beach or
Third Beach during the hours from 8:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. is specifically
prohibited. The owner or operator of any boat or vessel, sail or motor
including rowboats and jet-skis, so-called, who violates this division shall
be issued a violation and citation and the boat or vessel shall be subject to
removal at the owner's expense.



   (I)   (1)   From May 1 through September 30, no person shall ride
any horse upon Sachuest and Third Beaches.



      (2)   No person shall ride any horse in areas located at
Sachuest or Third Beaches designated as sand dunes or upon paths or walkways
providing pedestrian access to the beaches, or upon any portion of any
building or structure located at Sachuest or Third Beaches.



      (3)   No person shall ride any horse upon Sachuest or Third
Beaches except upon that part of the shore between high and low water marks
adjacent thereto.



      (4)   No person riding any horse shall enter or leave Sachuest
Beach except from the ramp area located to the west end of the west parking
area at "Rock," so-called.



      (5)   No person riding any horse shall enter or leave Third
Beach except from the boat ramp, so-called, or from the right-of-way abutting
Peabody's Beach, so-called.



      (6)   No person shall ride a horse upon Sachuest or Third
Beaches upon that part of the shore between high and low water marks adjacent
thereto in such manner as may create a hazard to himself/herself or as may
endanger the lives or safety of any member of the public or their property. 
Any person in control of horse which defecates on the beach or public
property must remove the waste as soon as circumstances allow, having due
regard for the safety of horse, rider and general public.  Penalty, see
94.99(D)



(‘73 Code, § 21-5)  (Ord. passed 9-21-70; Am. Ord. passed 8-7-89; Am.
Ord. passed 5-17-93; Am. Ord. passed 6-15-98; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-99; Am.
Ord. passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-06; Am. Ord.
2018-5, passed 3-19-18)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.33  BATHING AND SURFING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The word SURFER as used in this section shall mean a person
who engages in the sport of riding the waters of the ocean on surf-boards,
so-called.



   (B)   During the summer season an area at the westerly end of
Sachuest Beach or Second Beach, so-called, and extending from the westerly
extremity of the beach for a distance of 350 yards to the east, is hereby
designated for the use of surfers.  The use during such summer season of any
other part or of any other beach in the town by surfers, or for such sport,
is prohibited.



   (C)   The use of any part of Sachuest Beach by surfers shall be
prohibited whenever the beach superintendent, in the exercise of his
discretion, decides that the condition of the sea makes it unsafe for surfing.



   (D)   Bathing is hereby prohibited within an area extending from the
westerly end of Sachuest Beach for a distance of 400 yards that includes the
area reserved for surfers, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
every day that the use of the area by surfers is permitted as hereinabove set
forth. Provided however, that after consideration of beach conditions,
population of surfers and swimmers and such other factors as the beach
management deems appropriate, the beach management may allow limited swimming
in a restricted portion of the above described area.  Such decision shall be
in the sole discretion of the beach management.



('73 Code, § 21-6)  (Ord. passed 6-20-66; Am. Ord. passed 9-3-02; Am. Ord.
passed 5-3-04)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.34  DAMAGES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   Any person violating any provisions of this subchapter shall be liable
for all damages caused to the town to any person by such violation, in
addition to any other penalty which may be imposed.



('73 Code, § 21-7)  (Ord. passed 9-21-70)



§ 94.35  KITE SURFING AND WINDSURFING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Kiteboarding, windsurfing and/or sailboarding is prohibited in
the designated swim area at Sachuest Beach during the period from May 15 to
October 1, of any year.



   (B)   Kiteboarding, windsurfing and/or sailboarding is allowed
outside of the designated swim area at Sachuest Beach at all times during the
year.



   (C)   The launching or landing of kiteboards, windsurfers and/or
sailboards shall only be permitted in areas designated for that purpose from
May 15 to October 1. Kiteboards cannot launch from the designated beach area
until after 6 p.m. from May 15 to October 1.



   (D)   At all times, the Town Administrator, or his designee, in
his/her sole judgment and discretion, in the interest of public health,
safety or welfare, taking into consideration weather conditions, sea
conditions, population of the beach or swim area, other activities taking
place at the beach or any other conditions or factors as he/she may deem
appropriate may prohibit the launching, landing or riding of kiteboards,
windboards, sailboards and the like.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful at any time:



      (1)   For any person to ride a kiteboard, windsurfer,
sailboard or the like within 100 feet of any person, swimmer, wader, surfer,
boat or other watercraft;



      (2)   For any person to launch or ride a kiteboard,
windsurfer, sailboard or the like within 50 feet of any designated swim area;



      (3)   For any person to launch or ride a kiteboard,
windsurfer, sailboard or the like in a reckless manner so as to endanger the
health and safety of person or property;



      (4)   To leave any kiteboard, windsurfer or sailboard control
line, kite or sail lying unsecured on the beach when the kite or sail is not
in use. Control lines, kites sails and boards shall be secured in such a
manner so as to not create an obstruction, hindrance or hazard for town
equipment or vehicles or users of the beach. All equipment shall be stored
not less than 25 feet from the water's edge; or



      (5)   For any person to leave kitesurfing, windsurfing or
boardsailing equipment on the dunes.



   (F)   For the purposes of this section, the term DESIGNATED SWIM
AREA shall be that area bounded off shore by an imaginary line running
parallel to the shore and passing through the buoys placed off shore for the
purpose of marking the designated swim area; bounded on the east by an
imaginary line extending perpendicular to the first mentioned line through
the eastern most buoy to the shore and arriving at a point on the shore no
closer than 100 feet from the nearest lifeguard stand; and bounded westerly
by the natural rock formation at the western end of Sachuest Beach.



(Ord. passed 5-16-05; Am. Ord. 09-04, passed 4-20-09)



USE OF PUBLIC PLACES



§ 94.40  RESERVATION OF USE OF CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES.



   Upon proper application therefore and pursuant to regulations adopted
by the Department of Parks and Recreation, portions of certain parks and
beaches not within the jurisdiction of School Committee may be reserved for
limited private use, provided such reservation does not unduly interfere with
the use of the facility by the general public. No such application shall be
approved until compliance with aforesaid regulations has been satisfied and
the applicant has paid any deposit required thereby and the fee set forth in
Chapter 36 hereof.



(Ord. passed 9-19-05)



RIGHTS-OF-WAY TO WATER



§ 94.45  OBSTRUCTING RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct or in
any way impede the public use of or access to designated public rights-of-way
to the water as defined by the Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management
Council or the Town of Middletown.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store a vessel
or vehicle or erect a structure on a designated public right-of-way to the
water as designated by the Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Council
of the Town of Middletown.



(Ord. passed 1-20-04)   Penalty, see § 94.47



§ 94.46  ENFORCEMENT.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided herein these rules and
regulations shall be enforced by the Harbormaster or any member of the
Middletown Police Department.



(Ord. passed 1-20-04)



§ 94.47  NOTICE; PENALTY.



   (A)   After due notice the town may clear the right-of-way of any
unlawful obstruction at the expense of the owner thereof.



   (B)   Any person found in violation of this subchapter after due
notice thereof shall be subject to a fine in accordance with § 93.99 hereof
except that violations of § 94.45 shall be punishable by fines not to exceed
$500.



(Ord. passed 1-20-04)



§ 94.48  DESIGNATED RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   Designated rights-of-way to the shore in the town include but are not
limited to the following:



   (A)   Western end of Purgatory Road (Second Beach Ave.) located on
Tax Assessors Plate 116NW, lot 45, 40-foot right-of-way to the ocean between
Lots 44 and 46 next to Atlantic Beach, (CRMC Y-9).



   (B)   Intersection of the southeastern end of Esplanade/Shore Road;
located on Tax Assessor's Plate 116NE.  Fifteen-foot right-of-way described
as Lot 83, (CRMC Y-5).



   (C)   Shore Road, located on Tax Assessor's Plate 116SE.  Ten-foot
wide right-of-way to ocean identified as Lot 4.



   (D)   Indian Avenue, located on Tax Assessor's Plate 129, between
lots 75 and 176 opposite lot 65 and commonly known as Taggart's Ferry, (CRMC
Y-6).



   (E)   Third Beach Road, located on Tax Assessor's Plate 131. 
Right-of-way to Sakonnet River between Lots 5 and 6 running over 140 feet to
the river, (CRMC Y-4).



   (F)   Peckham Avenue, located on Tax Assessor's Plate 133. 
Extension of Peckham Avenue right-of-way/road running over 600 feet to
Sakonnet River bounded northerly and southerly by Lots 4 and 5 respectively,
(CRMC Y-7).



(Ord. passed 1-20-04)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of §§ 94.04 and
94.05 shall be fined not exceeding $100 or imprisoned for a term not
exceeding 30 days for each offense.  Each day of the existence of any
violation shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. passed 2-21-89)



   (B)   (1)   The construction of any street, road or sidewalk
dedicated or to be dedicated to the public, contrary to any of the provisions
of §§ 94.15 through 94.21 is hereby declared to be a violation and unlawful.



      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal,
agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of §§
94.15 through 94.21 shall be fined not exceeding $100 or imprisoned for a
term of not exceeding 30 days for each offense.  Each day of this existence
of any violation shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (3)   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal,
agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of §§
94.15 through 94.21 shall be liable to the town for any and all actual
damages sustained by the town as a result of any such violation.



      (4)   The remedies provided for herein for violation of §§
94.15 through 94.21 shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law.



(Ord. passed 2-21-89)



      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person
convicted of violating the provisions of § 94.32(A)(1) - (3) shall be
punished as follows:



            1.   A fine not exceeding $100 for the first
offense within a calendar year;



            2.   A fine not exceeding $150 for the second
offense within a calendar year;



            3.   A fine not exceeding $200 for the third and
each subsequent offense within a calendar year.



         (b)   The person charged with a violation of any
provision of § 94.32(A)(1) - (3) shall, for a first offense within a 12
month period, be given the opportunity to pay the fine assessed by mail which
shall be indicated on the summons issued by the charging officer.  Should
the alleged violator elect not to pay the fine assessed by mail, said person
shall be entitled to a hearing before the Municipal Court.



      (6)   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal,
agent, employee or otherwise who violates any of the provisions of §
94.32(I)(1) - (6) shall be subject to the following penalty:



         (a)   For a first offense within a 12 month period,
$75.  The person charged with a violation of any provision of § 94.32(I)(1)
- (6) shall, for a first offense, be given the opportunity to pay the fine
assessed by mail which shall be indicated on the summons issued by the
charging officer.  Should the alleged violator elect not to pay the fine
assessed by mail, said person shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Municipal Court.



         (b)   For any second or subsequent offense within a 12
month period, a hearing before the Municipal Court is required with a penalty
to be imposed pursuant to § 10.99.



      (7)   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal,
agent, employee or otherwise, who violates § 94.32(G), shall be subject to
the following penalty:



         (a)   For a first offense within a 12 month period,
$100.  The person charged with a violation of § 94.32(G) shall, for a first
offense, be given the opportunity to pay the fine assessed by mail which
shall be indicated on the summons issued by the charging officer.  Should
the alleged violator elect not to pay the fine assessed by mail, said person
shall be entitled to a hearing before the Municipal Court.



         (b)   For any second or subsequent offense within a 12
month period, a hearing before the Municipal Court is required with a penalty
to be imposed pursuant to § 10.99.



(Ord. passed 8-21-00; Am. Ord. 2011-7, passed 9-6-11)



   (C)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter which is not
otherwise penalized shall be subject to the penalty in § 10.99.



   (D)   Any person or persons found in violation of these provisions
shall be subject to fines as prescribed in R.I. Gen. Laws § 4-13-1 of $20
for the first violation, $30 for the second violation and $50 for the third
violation.



(Ord. passed 6-15-98)



CHAPTER 95:  TOW TRUCKS AND PARKING LOTS



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Licensing, compliance with regulations required



   95.02   Procedure for picking up towed vehicle



   95.03   Car information supplied by tow company



   95.04   Issuance of citation prior to towing



   95.05   Effect of owner's appearance prior to towing



   95.06   Cars towed from private property



   95.07   Storage of towed cars



   95.08   Rotation system for towing companies



   95.09   Insurance required of towing companies



   95.10   On-duty employee required



   95.11   Payment of taxes recorded



Parking Lots



   95.25   Parking lot defined



   95.26   Prohibited conduct



   95.27   Required insurance for parking lots



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  LICENSING, COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS REQUIRED.



   All persons who operate tow trucks in the town, or whose business is
located in the town, must be properly licensed by the state; and if such
persons or companies conduct any towing business for any department of the
town, they must comply with the regulations of this chapter.



(‘73 Code, § 25A-1)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.02  PROCEDURE FOR PICKING UP TOWED VEHICLE.



   (A)   Vehicles ordered towed by the Police Department for violation
of the motor vehicle code must be picked up in the presence of the officer,
and the tow truck operator must give a receipt to the officer. Any visible
damage to a vehicle should be noted on the receipt.



   (B)   All tow companies must respond to a call within a reasonable
period of time, as determined by the Chief of Police.



(‘73 Code, § 25A-3)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



§ 95.03  CAR INFORMATION SUPPLIED BY TOW COMPANY.



   All tow companies performing towing services for the town must notify
the Police Department, within 60 minutes after the pickup of a car, of the
following:



      (1)   Registration number, make, model and color of car;



      (2)   From where the vehicle was towed;



      (3)   The location where the vehicle is being held.



(‘73 Code, § 25A-10)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



§ 95.04  ISSUANCE OF CITATION PRIOR TO TOWING.



   All motor vehicles found in violation of parking laws or ordinances
necessitating towing of such vehicles shall first be issued a violation
citation, prior to towing, payable to the Police Department.



(‘73 Code, § 25A-4)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



§ 95.05  EFFECT OF OWNER'S APPEARANCE PRIOR TO TOWING.



   No vehicle requested towed by the town shall be towed if the owner
thereof appears before the vehicle is actually towed. Once a vehicle is
hooked to a tow truck, the owner thereof may reclaim the same before it
reaches the impounding area by paying a fair percentage of a complete tow job
(the suggested percentage is 50%).



(‘73 Code, § 25A-7)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



§ 95.06  CARS TOWED FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Cars shall be towed from private property where the town has
no jurisdiction only at the request of the property owner; such private tows
do not fall within these regulations except for violation of clearly marked
fire lanes.



   (B)   Tow companies shall notify the Police Department of all
private tows so as to prevent unnecessary reports of stolen cars, and so that
the owner can be informed as to the location of his car.



(‘73 Code, § 25A-6)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



§ 95.07  STORAGE OF TOWED CARS.



   Subject to the provisions of § 95.08 of this chapter, all cars towed
must be stored within eight miles of town limits, in an area which is fenced
or otherwise enclosed so as to be inaccessible by the general public, or
within a building.



(‘73 Code, § 25A-2)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



§ 95.08  ROTATION SYSTEM FOR TOWING COMPANIES.



   The Police Department shall establish a rotational system whereby all
eligible towing companies shall be called upon for service on an equitable
basis; provided however, that the Police Department shall exercise reasonable
efforts to utilize towing companies with storage facilities on Aquidneck
Island. If no such towing company is available to respond within a reasonable
period of time, the Police Department may utilize any eligible towing company
with a storage facility located within eight miles of town limits. All
eligible tow companies located within eight miles of the town limits who wish
their services to be utilized by the town shall register with the Police
Department and shall file a copy of their approved list of charges.



(‘73 Code, § 25A-8)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



§ 95.09  INSURANCE REQUIRED OF TOWING COMPANIES.



   All companies towing cars at the town's request must be fully insured
and accept complete responsibility for damage to a towed vehicle or to the
contents thereof while it is in their possession. No towing company or
employee thereof shall offer to pay any gratuity or thing of value to any
town employee.



(‘73 Code, § 25A-5)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



§ 95.10  ON-DUTY EMPLOYEE REQUIRED.



   All tow companies shall have an employee on duty on a 24-hour basis so
as to be able to return towed vehicles to the owner.



(‘73 Code, § 25A-11)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



§ 95.11  PAYMENT OF TAXES RECORDED.



   No licensed person or firm shall be eligible for town business unless
they are current in payment of all town taxes.



(‘73 Code, § 25A-9)  (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



PARKING LOTS



§ 95.25  PARKING LOT DEFINED.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the term PARKING-LOT is used to
designate any uncovered lot, parcel or tract of land within the town where
motor vehicles of any description are parked, stored or kept, on the payment
of a fee by the owner or operator of any such vehicle for such privilege.



(‘73 Code, § 15-23(a))  (Ord. passed 9-4-62; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



§ 95.26  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person in any parking lot shall engage in loud, boisterous,
threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or indecent language, or engage in
any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.



   (B)   No person shall dress or undress in any parking lot or in any
vehicle which is in any parking lot.



   (C)   No person shall sound the horn in any motor vehicle on a
parking lot, race the motor of any such vehicle, otherwise operate the same
so as to cause unnecessary noise and disturbance of the public peace.



(‘73 Code, § 15-23(b)-(d))  (Ord. passed 9-4-62; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Consumption of alcohol prohibited, see § 130.03



§ 95.27  REQUIRED INSURANCE FOR PARKING LOTS.



   (A)   Every person engage in the business of parking motor vehicles
on an outdoor parking lot shall take out, and maintain in effect at all
times, a blanket insurance policy, written by an insurance company authorized
to do business in this state, by the terms of which any motor vehicle owner,
whose motor vehicle has been left in any such outdoor parking lot, in the
event of theft of or damage to such vehicle, may be recompensed from such
insurance for such theft or damage.



   (B)   The minimum amount of any such blanket insurance policy shall
be $5,000.



   (C)   As prima facie evidence of compliance with the foregoing
provisions of this section, each person engaged in the business of parking
motor vehicles on an outdoor parking lot shall provide to the Town Clerk a
certificate of insurance and, within ten days of each anniversary date
thereof, a new certificate of insurance showing that the policy is currently
in effect.



(‘73 Code, § 15-24)  (Ord. passed 9-4-62; Am. Ord. 2015-14, passed
11-2-15)



CHAPTER 96:  TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION



Section



   96.01   Short title



   96.02   Purpose of chapter



   96.03   Public shade trees



   96.04   Tree Commission



   96.05   General provisions



   96.06   Public shade tree priority



   96.07   Canopy effect



   96.08   Location



   96.09   Planting



   96.10   Utilities



   96.11   Liability for unauthorized cutting of trees or wood



   96.12   Clearance of public rights-of-way



   96.13   Planting of trees on or near sewer and water lines



   96.14   Stump removal



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Tree Preservation
Ordinance.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.02  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Middletown, and to enhance the
aesthetic qualities of the environment by regulating the protection,
maintenance, removal and planting of trees in the public right-of-way, parks,
and all public property within the town, and by providing for the maintenance
or removal of trees on private property when the public safety is endangered.



   (B)   The protection of these valuable material resources will serve
to enhance the community in the following ways:



      (1)   Aid in the prevention of air, noise and visual pollution;



      (2)   Aid in the stabilization of soil;



      (3)   Enhance property values;



      (4)   Provide glare and heat protection;



      (5)   Enhance the aesthetics and general quality of life in
the town.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.03  PUBLIC SHADE TREES.



   For purposes of this chapter all trees within or on the boundaries of a
public way are public shade trees. When the ownership of a tree is in doubt,
it is deemed to be a public shade tree until proven otherwise.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.04  TREE COMMISSION.



   (A)   There shall be created by this chapter a Tree Commission,
which Commission shall be responsible for the management of the Tree
Preservation Ordinance. The Commission shall be composed of at least nine
members who shall be appointed for three-year staggered terms, commencing in
January of each year by the Town Council.



   (B)   The Commission shall, to the extent practicable, include:



      (1)   Five voting members:



         (a)   Planning Board Representative



         (b)   Conservation Commission Representative



         (c)   Open Space Commission Representative



         (d)   Two lay citizens, resident of the town.



      (2)   Ex officio members:



         (a)   Town Planner



         (b)   Tree Warden



         (c)   Public Works Representative.



   (C)   All members of the Commission shall serve without pay or
compensation.  Within two months of the annual appointment of new full-term
members, the Commission shall select from its members a Chairperson and a
Vice Chairperson who shall serve annual terms.



   (D)   The Tree Commission shall:



      (1)   Meet on a monthly basis.



      (2)   Promote the conservation, planting, health and growth of
trees in the town.



      (3)   Recommend to the Town Council any legislation, plans,
policies and programs complementary to the intent and purpose of this chapter.



      (4)   Coordinate efforts with town departments, the Planning
and Zoning Boards, state agencies and private individuals to promote the
planting of new trees and to protect and preserve the existing trees.



      (5)   Coordinate efforts by individual citizens, businesses,
neighborhood or charitable organizations and other groups wishing to donate
monies, volunteer work, or information to protect, preserve and enhance town
trees.



      (6)   The Tree Commission shall adopt, subject to approval by
the Town Council, such rules, regulations and permitting procedures as are
deemed necessary to carry out the intent and enforcement of this chapter.
Said rules, regulations, and permits shall include, but not be limited to,
the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning, or any act which
will, in any other way, affect public or protected trees and shall be adhered
to by any and all persons.



      (7)   Develop a five-year planting program which shall be
revised annually and submitted to the Town Administrator for incorporation
into the annual town budget for funding.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.05  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Signs and markings.  No signs, symbols, or reflectors may be
attached to public trees, nor may public trees be carved, nailed, defaced,
painted or marked.



   (B)   Highway and utilities.



      (1)   No new electric, cable or telephone wires may be
attached to public shade trees by any person or agency without the written
consent of the Tree Commission.



      (2)   When highway or utility projects require the removal of
public shade trees, the cost of tree replacement shall be included in the
cost of the project.



   (C)   Activity affecting public shade trees.



      (1)   Pruning of roots and branches or removal of living
public shade trees shall require a permit from the Tree Commission. Permits
shall be kept on site during work and shown upon request to the Public Works
Director, or his designee, and to town police officers.



      (2)   All public shade trees shall be protected from
construction damage under the guidelines set forth in the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan Handbook, Section E (Tree Protection).



   (D)   Replacement of public shade trees.



      (1)   Any person, firm, corporation, or agency that in the
course of a site plan review, construction, or subdivision development wishes
to remove any living public shade tree with caliper 2½" or greater in
diameter measured at six inches above grade level shall obtain a permit from
the Tree Commission; and, if removal is permitted, shall at no cost to the
town, within the spring or fall months immediately following completion of
construction, replace in locations specified by the Tree Commission a number
of smaller replacement trees determined to be equivalent on the following
basis: The total caliper of all replacement trees shall be at the discretion
of the Tree Commission up to the original caliper. Replacement trees shall be
balled and burlapped and of caliper not less than 2½" in diameter measured
at six inches above grade level. Species, caliper and location shall be
identified at time of issuance of the permit.



      (2)   The Tree Commission may require a bond, escrow account,
irrevocable letter of credit, or other surety to ensure public shade tree
replacement. Such surety may be held for one year from the date of planting
to ensure survival of the replacement trees. At the option of the applicant,
the town may, upon payment of an agreed-upon sum, replace said trees
according to the standards herein set forth.



   (E)   Disposal of wood.  When a public shade tree is pruned or
removed, wood larger than three inches in diameter shall be cut into
approximately four-foot lengths and left near the tree for taking by
residents whenever possible. Wood larger than eight inches in diameter shall
be split or cut into shorter lengths to facilitate removal.



   (F)   Enforcement.  The Town Planner is charged with enforcement of
this chapter and state laws protecting public shade trees and will seek
complaints in court for violations of this chapter and such laws.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.06  PUBLIC SHADE TREE PRIORITY.



   After a public shade tree is removed from a location where a void will
be created, a replacement tree shall be planted unless removed for safety
reasons. To the extent that the town’s budget permits, at least one public
shade tree shall be planted for each public shade tree that is removed or
dies. It is desirable to plant more public shade trees than are removed
because of tree losses and the length of time to maturity. The Planning Board
as part of their review may submit to the Tree Commission site plans for
advice and recommendations.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.07  CANOPY EFFECT.



   Maintenance and perpetuation of a canopy effect where possible is a
major goal of public shade tree planting.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.08  LOCATION.



   Whenever possible, public shade trees shall be planted within the
public way.  In within the public ways.  In accordance with R.I. Gen. Laws
§ 45-2-43, as amended, under the direction of the Tree Warden, shade trees
may be planted upon land adjoining the public right of ways, at a distance
not exceeding twenty (20) feet from the public ways, that will function as
public trees by improving, protecting, shading or beautifying the right of
way; provided, that the written consent of the owner of the adjoining land is
first obtained.  In accordance with R.I. Gen. Laws § 2-14-10, as amended,
the Town Council may appropriate annually sums of money to be expended by the
Tree Warden for the planting, trimming, spraying, care, and preservation of
shrubs or ornamental or shade trees within the limits of any public way or
grounds under his or her control and, at the direction of the Tree Warden
with the written consent of the owner, upon land adjoining any public way or
grounds, if not more than twenty (20) feet from the way or grounds, and for
the purpose of shading or ornamenting the way or grounds.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 2013-6, passed 6-17-13)



§ 96.09  PLANTING.



   (A)   Planting voids on major streets and in commercial areas shall
be identified and proposed for planting by the Tree Commission.



   (B)   The following factors shall be given thorough consideration in
selecting tree species for planting:



      (1)   Initiation of perpetuation of a canopy effect;



      (2)   Pest resistance;



      (3)   Diversification of species to provide disease resistance
within the tree population;



      (4)   Low maintenance (spraying, pruning, sweeping);



      (5)   Tolerance of urban conditions (salt, compaction, root
space, fumes);



      (6)   Seasonal color criteria;



      (7)   Size of the species for its location must not interfere
with the visual right-of-way;



      (8)   All trees should be cold hardy to this region and of
appropriate size for the recommended planting area(s);



      (9)   Location of utility lines, planting under or near such
lines should be avoided whenever possible.



   (C)   In residential areas canopy trees shall be given preference
over other species. Tax-deductible gifts of trees are welcomed. Arrangements
for planting gift trees may be made with the Tree Commission. If as a result
of road construction, some large trees are displaced, the Tree Commissioner
may request replacement trees be located on private property with the owner's
consent. The trees will then be planted by the town and ownership transferred
to the private property owner.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.10  UTILITIES.



   Any public or private utility companies maintaining any overhead wires
or underground pipes shall comply with this chapter. Utility companies shall
not cut down, injure, deface or prune any tree unless and until their plans
and procedures have been approved by the Tree Commission except in cases of
bona fide emergency. It is the intent of this chapter to ensure that all
utility easements are written to support the goals of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.11  LIABILITY FOR UNAUTHORIZED CUTTING OF TREES OR WOOD.



   Every person who shall cut, destroy, or carry away any tree, timber,
wood or underwood whatsoever, lying or growing on public land, without a
written permit from the Tree Commission, shall, for every such trespass, pay
the party injured twice the value of any tree so cut, destroyed, or carried
away; and for the wood or underwood, thrice the value thereof; to be
recovered by civil action. Tree value will be determined by the Tree
Commission acting under guidelines contained in the manual for "Valuation of
Landscape Trees, Shrubs, and Other Plants" issued by the International
Society of Arboriculture.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.12  CLEARANCE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation who is the owner of land
abutting a public sidewalk or road shall keep such areas clear. The owner
shall also be required to see that the branches of any tree under his control
which overhang a public sidewalk are at least seven feet above the sidewalk.



   (B)   Planting of trees along highways will take into consideration
General Tree Planting Rules and Guidelines and Rules and Regulations for
subdivisions of Land, Town of Middletown, R.I.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.13  PLANTING OF TREES ON OR NEAR SEWER AND WATER LINES.



   Planting of trees on or near sewer and water lines shall be subject to
review by the Public Works Department.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.14  STUMP REMOVAL.



   Any stump removal will be at the discretion of the Tree Commission.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who removes a public shade tree without a permit or
hearing as required by this chapter may be subject to cumulative fines as
follows:



      (1)   Up to $500 as provided by state law;



      (2)   The value of the wood;



      (3)   Triple damages under state law.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
96.12 shall upon adjudication be subject to a civil penalty of not more than
$500.



(Ord. passed 4-3-95)



CHAPTER 97:  STONE WALLS



Section



   97.01   Purpose



   97.02   Definition



   97.03   General provisions



§ 97.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter to protect one of the town's
many important cultural resources - historic stone walls - saving one of the
beautiful features of the town for the people of tomorrow and preserving the
rural character of the town in furtherance of the purpose of the town's
"scenic byways" legislation and implementation of the town's comprehensive
plan.  It is not the intent of this chapter to deprive a citizen use of
their property, detract from that property's value or cause financial
hardship.



   (B)   Provisions of this chapter will apply to stone walls flanking
or abutting town and state roads within the town and provide a working
process to identify and provide for the protection and preservation of the
town's stone walls of historic, aesthetic and cultural merit.



(Ord. passed 6-1-98)



§ 97.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HISTORIC STONE WALL.  A vertical structure of aligned natural stone,
originally constructed in the 17th, 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, to
designate a property boundary between farmsteads or to segregate agricultural
activities within a single farmstead.



(Ord. passed 6-1-98)



§ 97.03  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Alteration or removal of stone walls flanking or abutting town
and state roads within the town shall require prior approval of the Building
Inspector.



   (B)   Alteration or demolition of a stone wall as part of any
construction or subdivision project must have approval of the Planning
Board.  Such approval shall be a condition of any subdivision approval.



   (C)   Stone walls in disrepair or neglected condition shall not be
removed from their present location but must be repaired or left as is.



   (D)   When relocation of a stone wall is necessary, any
reconstruction shall match that of the original wall - for example, drywall
or hidden cement construction.



   (E)   New stone walls should closely approximate the appearance of
the adjoining stone walls with respect to coursing, stone type, joint width,
construction and distribution of stones by size.  The Building Inspector
shall be responsible for any such determination.



   (F)   New stone walls shall be built to a minimum of 20 inches in
height and a minimum width of 20 inches.



   (G)   If any cuts are made in stone walls for driveways or roads,
the ends of the walls must be restored.



   (H)   Any variance of these standards shall be heard by the Zoning
Board of Review based upon the standards of proof set forth in Section 904 of
the Middletown Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. passed 6-1-98)



CHAPTER 98:  SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL LEASES



Section



   98.01   Legislative findings and intent



   98.02   Definitions



   98.03   Applicability



   98.04   Registration and inspection required



   98.05   Registration form



   98.06   Registration term



   98.07   Filing requirement



   98.08   Fee



   98.09   Occupancy limits and parking requirements



   98.10   Owner's obligations



   98.11   Tenant’s obligations



   98.12   Local representative



 



   98.99   Enforcement; penalty for violations



§ 98.01  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND INTENT.



   The Town Council of the Town of Middletown, Rhode Island, finds:



   (A)   The Constitution of the State of Rhode Island, Article XIII,
Section 2, grants to the Town of Middletown the power to “enact and amend
local laws relating to its property, affairs and government” as long as
such local laws are consistent with the Constitution and laws enacted by the
General Assembly. This delegation of power includes the police power to enact
reasonable legislation to regulate and supervise rental dwellings in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare;



   (B)   Short-term residential rentals in Middletown have been the
source of noise, congestion, pollution, and rowdy and disorderly behavior
involving tenants and other persons on and near the premises, particularly
between the hours of 10:00  p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Activities on and near the
premises of short-term residential rentals have also been associated with a
disproportionate number of  violations of Town ordinances, including the
Noise Abatement Chapter, §§ 130.75 through 130.91, the Zoning Code, Chapter
152, and the Parking Regulations, Chapter 72, as well as violations of
various Rhode Island statutes.



   (C)   These conditions have disturbed the peace of the neighborhoods
in which they have occurred; they have violated the repose, comfort and quiet
enjoyment of persons in their homes; they have produced unreasonable
disturbances of the peace, and they are inconsistent with the public health
and safety and the general welfare of the people.



   (D)   The intent of this chapter is to eliminate, so far as is
reasonably possible, the adverse conditions described above in order to
protect residents of the Town, while preserving the right of residential
property owners to rent their property, for either short or long term,
without undue restrictions.



(Ord. passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 2017-3, passed 1-17-17)



§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context:



   BEDROOM. The definition for bedroom is "sleeping room" as set forth in
the current version of the Rhode Island Building Code SBC-1. Only a room
meeting the definition of "sleeping room" in said code and complying with all
provisions therein related to square footage, private accessibility, window
specifications, and ventilation shall be considered a BEDROOM for the
purposes of this chapter.



   DWELLING UNIT.   A structure or portion thereof providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, and
containing a separate means of ingress and egress.



   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A person designated on a registration form filed
under this chapter as the person authorized to receive any process, notice or
demand required or permitted to be served upon the owner of the premises. A
local representative may, but need not, also serve as property manager.



   REGISTRAR.   The Middletown Town Clerk.



   SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL LEASE. A lease or other contractual arrangement
for the occupation of a dwelling unit for a term of six months or less;
provided, however, that this term does not include an extension, including a
month-to-month extension, granted without an intervening period of non-
occupancy to tenants currently occupying the premises under a written lease
for a term of more than six months.



   (B)   Unless otherwise defined in this section, words and phrases
shall have the meaning stated in Article 4 of the Zoning Code if defined
therein.



   (C)   All words and phrases in this chapter, whether or not defined
in this section or the Zoning Code, shall be interpreted so as to carry out
the Council’s intent as stated in § 98.01.



(Ord. passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 2017-3, passed 1-17-17)



§ 98.03  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all residential property
except (1) hotels and motels; (2) boarding and rooming houses; (3) group
homes, community residences, family day care homes, and congregate housing;
and (4) premises on which the owner maintains his or her principal residence.



(Ord. passed 11-16-99)



§ 98.04  REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   All dwelling units which are let, leased, rented or otherwise
occupied, in whole or in part, by a tenant for residential and/or dwelling
purposes for a period of six months or less under a short-term residential
lease shall be registered by the record property owner with the registrar
before any tenant occupies the premises.



   (B)   At the time of registration, the dwelling unit shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Official or his designee. The purpose
of the inspection is to determine the occupancy limit of the unit pursuant to
§ 98.09 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 2017-3, passed 1-17-17)



§ 98.05  REGISTRATION FORM.



   The rental registration form shall indicate the tax assessor’s plat
and lot number, address of the rental dwelling unit, the number of rental
dwelling units therein, the name and permanent mailing address of the record
owner and of his or her local representative, if any, and the usual period of
occupancy by tenants (summer, monthly, weekly or other).



(Ord. passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 2017-3, passed 1-17-17)



§ 98.06  REGISTRATION TERM.



   A short-term residential registration shall be valid from May 1 to the
following April 30, except that an initial registration filed after May 1
shall be valid from the date of registration until the following April 30.



(Ord. passed 11-16-99)



§ 98.07  FILING REQUIREMENT.



   On or before May 1 of each year, the record owner of a dwelling unit
subject to this chapter shall file a rental registration form with the
registrar and pay the registration fee.



(Ord. passed 11-16-99)



§ 98.08  FEE.



   The fee for registering dwelling units under this chapter shalt be
$10.00 for each bedroom in the unit.



(Ord. passed 11-16-99)



§ 98.09  OCCUPANCY LIMITS AND PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The maximum occupancy for the dwelling unit shall be two
persons per bedroom. The maximum occupancy may be further limited by the
requirements of division (B) below. For the purpose of establishing
occupancy, a person is defined as an individual at least 12 years of age;
provided however, that in no event shall the occupancy of a dwelling exceed
the occupancy load as defined in the current version of the Rhode Island
Building Code SBC-1, which requires a floor area of 200 gross square feet per
occupant; fractions shall be rounded down to the next lower whole number; and
provided further, that in no event shall the occupancy of a dwelling exceed
the design load of the property's septic system, if applicable.



   (B)   One off-street parking space shall be provided on the same lot
on which the short term rental is located for each two persons of dwelling
occupancy, as determined by division (A) above; fractions shall be rounded to
the next highest whole number. Where the number of parking spaces required by
this section cannot be provided on-site, the permitted occupancy of the
dwelling shall be reduced to conform to the available amount of off-street
parking.



(Ord. passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 2017-3, passed 1-17-17)



§ 98.10  OWNER’S OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Required lease terms. All short-term residential leases shall
have as an attachment a copy of the applicable Short Term Rental Permit for
the premises, and contain the following provisions, either as worded below or
in substantially similar language:



      The following provisions are required by law to be a part of this
lease. In these provisions, “you” and “your” mean each tenant under
this lease.



      (1)   The legal occupancy of this dwelling unit is limited by
town ordinance and may not exceed the number of persons aged at least 12
years of age set forth on the Short Term Rental Permit attached hereto.
Exceeding said occupancy limit is a violation of this chapter and is subject
to a fine of up $100 per day.



      (2)   If you sublet any portion of the premises, you become
subject to the requirements of the Short-Term Residential Leases ordinance,
including the requirement to register the subleasing at the Town Hall.
Allowing a person who is not a tenant to stay one or more nights on the
premises in exchange for money or anything else of value constitutes a
sublease.



      (3)   As the tenant under a short-term residential lease, you
may be held legally responsible for any violations of law committed by you or
by your guests while at the premises, including violations of the ordinances
pertaining to noise, keeping dogs on a leash, parking, trash maintenance and
disposal, and dwelling occupancy limits. In addition, if you are charged with
a violation pertaining to legal occupancy, excessive noise, or other
disturbance of the peace, you may be subject to immediate eviction under R.I.
Gen. Laws § 34-18-36(f).



      (4)   You are required to furnish the landlord with accurate
and up-to-date information about all motor vehicles registered to or used by
tenants, including the model, year, color, and vehicle registration of each
vehicle. This information will be made available to enforcement authorities
if you are reasonably suspected of violating any of these required terms in
the lease.



   (B)   In addition to the foregoing mandatory provisions, the record
owner may include in the lease a provision restricting or prohibiting any
subleasing of the premises.



   (C)   Posting ordinances. The record owner shall post, in plain view
and in a conspicuous place within the rental dwelling unit, a notice
containing:



      (1)   The full text of ordinances pertaining to noise, keeping
dogs on a leash, parking, trash maintenance and disposal, and dwelling
occupancy limits, and any other ordinance which the Council may deem
appropriate from time to time. Printed form notices shall be available at the
office of the registrar;



      (2)   The maximum number of occupants permitted to stay in the
dwelling, and notice that failure to conform to the occupancy limit is a
violation of this Code  and is subject to a fine of up $100 per day;



      (3)   The name and telephone number where the record owner can
be reached;



      (4)   Where applicable, the name of the record owner's local
representative and a telephone number where the local representative may be
reached;



      (5)   The number and location of onsite parking spaces; and



      (6)   The telephone number and website address for the
Middletown Police Department.



      (7)   Trash pickup requirements, including the location of
trash cans.



   (D)   Vehicle and tenant information. Record owners who rent a
dwelling unit under a short-term residential lease shall:



      (1)   At the beginning of the lease term obtain from each
tenant accurate and up-to- date information, including the names, home
addresses and phone numbers of the tenants, the date of the rental period and
the model, year, color and vehicle registration of all motor vehicles
registered to or used by such tenants;



      (2)   Maintain this information throughout the term of the
lease and for 90 days thereafter; and



      (3)   Make this information available to Town Officials who
are lawfully investigating or prosecuting any offense reasonably believed to
involve one or more of the tenants. Failure of the record owner to maintain
or provide this required information shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 2017-3, passed 1-17-17)



§ 98.11  TENANT’S OBLIGATIONS.



   In addition to obeying the law generally, including the ordinances
pertaining to noise, keeping dogs on a leash, parking, and trash maintenance
and disposal, tenants under short- term residential leases are specifically
required to adhere to the following requirements imposed by this chapter:



   (A)   The occupancy limits imposed by § 98.09.



   (B)   The duty to furnish accurate and up-to-date vehicle
information to the record owner at the beginning of the lease term, and to
notify the record owner of any changes to this information occurring during
the lease term, as required by § 98.10(C).



(Ord. passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 2017-3, passed 1-17-17)



§ 98.12  LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE.



   (A)   The record owner shall designate on the Registration Form an
individual who permanently resides in Newport County, or a property manager
with a physically staffed office within ten vehicular miles of Newport
County, as the record owner's local representative, who shall be authorized
to receive any process, notice or demand required or permitted to be served
upon the owner of the premises. The record owner may be designated as the
local representative, if he or she resides in Newport County.



   (B)   The local representatives must be authorized by the record
owner to respond to tenant and neighborhood questions or concerns. The local
representative shall serve as the initial contact person if there are
questions or complaints regarding the use of the dwelling for short term
rentals. The local representative shall respond to those complaints in a
timely manner to ensure that the use of the dwelling complies with the
requirements of this chapter, as well as all other applicable town ordinances
pertaining to parking, noise, disturbances, or nuisances, as well as state
law pertaining to the consumption of alcohol and/or the use of illegal drugs.



   (D)   The failure of the local representative to respond to
Middletown Police Department inquiries in a timely manner more than twice
during the term of the annual permit, shall be considered a violation of this
chapter.



   (E)   The record owner may change the designation of the local
representative from time to time by filing an amended permit application
including the name, address and telephone number the new local
representative. Failure to notify the town of any change in the local
representative shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-3, passed 1-17-17)



§ 98.99  ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Violations of this chapter shall be enforceable through
issuance of citations by either the Police Department or the Zoning Officer.
Violations shall be dealt with at the next municipal court session following
the violation. Pre-trial pleas may be accepted and action taken at the
initial hearing unless the person cited seeks a trial before the judge.



   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $100 per day for each day the violation
continues.



(Ord. passed 11-16-99)



CHAPTER 99:  PRIVATE ALARM USERS



Section



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Permit required



   99.03   Confidentiality of information



   99.04   Programming dialing devices



   99.05   Operational requirements



   99.06   Restriction on indicator panels



   99.07   Control of audio/visual alarms



   99.08   Testing systems



   99.09   Smoke and fire alert detectors



   99.10   Automatic shutoff



   99.11   Responsibility of alarm user



 



   99.99   Penalty



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM OR DEVICE or SYSTEM. Any equipment or assembly of
equipment, of whatever nature, designed to detect and signal an unauthorized
intrusion into or upon premises or to signal an attempted burglary or robbery
at premises, with respect to which signal police are expected to respond.



   ALARM USER or USER.  Any person, group of persons, association, firm,
partnership, corporation or organization, of any kind, in ownership,
possession or control of any building, structure or facility, including
vehicles, vessels, campers or trailers, wherein or whereupon a system is
maintained or installed for activation in the event of any unauthorized
intrusion, burglary or robbery upon or at such building structure or facility.



   AUDIBLE-VISUAL ALARM.  Any device designed for the protection against
unauthorized entry on premises which device generates an external, audible
sound or flashing light or both when activated.



   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE.  A device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number
and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating
a need for emergency response.



   FALSE ALARM.  The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees, agents or invitees.
Such terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by hurricanes,
storms or other violent conditions which are clearly beyond the control of
the alarm user.



   INTERCONNECT.  To connect any alarm system, including an automatic
dialing device, to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical
device, that utilizes a telephone for the purpose of using a telephone line
to transmit a message upon the activation of the system.



   PRIMARY TRUNK LINE.  A telephone line servicing the Police Department
designed to receive emergency calls.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)



§ 99.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, every alarm user utilizing an
automatic dialing system shall obtain a user's permit for each system
installed, or to be installed, from the Office of the Chief of Police upon
the effective date of this chapter or prior to use of the system. Each permit
when issued shall be physically located upon the premises using the system
and available for inspection by the chief or his designee. Permits so issued
are not transferable.



   (B)   The application shall be completed and signed by the
individual who owns, leases or otherwise uses the alarm system and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:



      (1)   The name of the protected premises if it is a commercial
establishment;



      (2)   The address of the protected premises including any
apartment or unit number or other customary identifier for multiple
occupancies at an address;



      (3)   The name and home address of the individual who applies
for the permit;



      (4)   The home, business and cellular telephone numbers of the
permittee;



      (5)   The type of system installed including:



         (a)   The type of emergency the system is designed to
protect and report; and



         (b)   The method or methods used to annunciate the alarm
device or devices;



      (6)   The name, address and business telephone number,
including an after hours emergency number, if any, of the monitoring service;



      (7)   A statement as to whether or not the system is equipped
to automatically rearm itself and if so, after what period of time;



      (8)   The cut off time for audible signals;



      (9)   The name, address and telephone number, including any
after hours emergency number of the installing company or individual; and



      (10)   The name, address and telephone number including any
after hours emergency number, of the servicing company, if different from the
installing company.



   (C)   The alarm user shall be responsible for notifying the Chief of
Police, in writing, of any changes in the permit application information at
least ten days prior to the effective date of such change. Whoever desires to
install, have installed or reactivate an alarm system after the effective
date of this chapter shall obtain an alarm use permit prior to installation
or reactivation.



   (D)   The Chief of Police may deny or revoke an alarm user permit
for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false
statement made in the application for an alarm use permit or in the operation
of the licensed system;



      (2)   Deliberate activation of a false alarm;



      (3)   Use of an alarm system to summon public safety personnel
for a condition other than what the system was designed to detect and report
as authorized in the permit;



      (4)   Failure to correct and deficiencies in equipment,
procedure or operation, and



      (5)   Failure to allow inspection of equipment after a false
alarm.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.03  CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION.



   All statements and information relating to the installation and
location of a system given to the Police Chief or the Fire Chief, or their
respective designees, shall be maintained in strict confidence and may be
made public only when required in a prosecutive action resulting from the
violation of any provision of this chapter or by order of a court of
appropriate jurisdiction.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)



§ 99.04  PROGRAMMING DIALING DEVICES.



   (A)   No person shall program an automatic dialing device to select
a primary trunk line as identified by the Police Chief without specific
approval from the Police Chief.



   (B)   No alarm user shall fail to disconnect or reprogram an
automatic dialing device which is designed to connect a primary trunk line
within 12 hours of receipt of written notice that it is so programmed which
notice shall be delivered by hand or by certified mail, postage prepaid from
the Chief of Police. If such notice is by mail, as aforesaid, it shall be
presumed that delivery of same was made within 48 hours of the posting
thereof.



   (C)   Within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter, all
existing automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line
shall be reprogrammed upon application to the Chief of Police or
disconnected. Upon approval of reprogramming of such a system the user shall,
before utilizing the reprogrammed system or device, first obtain a permit as
provided in this chapter.



   (D)   Any alarm user who has a false alarm as a result of a
malfunction or defect in such system shall undertake measures to have the
system corrected or repaired within 24 hours of such false alarm and such
correction or repair shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Chief
of Police or his designee. Until such corrective action has been completed
the system shall be disconnected by such user.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.05  OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   Interconnection of automatic devices installed on premises of any kind
in the town and keyed to special or operational primary trunk lines of the
Police Department shall meet operational requirements as follows:



   (A)   The contents of any recorded message to be transmitted by such
device must be intelligible and in a format approved by the Chief of Police
as appropriate for the nature of the alarm;



   (B)   No recorded message shall be delivered to the Police
Department more than twice as the result of a single stimulation or
activation of the sensory mechanism;



   (C)   The length of time for recording the transmitted message shall
not exceed three minutes;



   (D)   The time lapse for the delivery of the second recorded message
shall be in a range from ten to 12 seconds.



   (E)   Each such device installed on nonresidential premises must be
capable of transmitting an alarm message to two or more recipients located
within the area of Newport County, in addition to the Middletown Police
Department, authorized to gain access to the premises and who will be
available to respond and who shall respond within not less than one hour to
the message, on a 24 hour basis to assist in the deactivation of such device.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.06  RESTRICTION ON INDICATOR PANELS.



   After the effective date of this chapter, only financial institutions
or other institutions required by federal or state statutes, laws, rules or
regulations, or by federal or state agencies to have appropriate security
devices installed for their protection shall be permitted to have equipment
and indicators installed in the communication center of the Police
Department. However, any equipment indicators already installed therein may
remain in the communication center.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)



§ 99.07  CONTROL OF AUDIO/VISUAL ALARMS.



   A user utilizing an audible alarm or flashing light, or a combination
of the two on the premises only, and not connected to the Police Department,
shall obtain a permit therefore. The user of such alarm shall file at the
Police Department the names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two
persons who shall respond upon request of the Police Department with means to
deactivate the alarm.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.08  TESTING SYSTEMS.



   No person holding a users permit shall test any automatic dialing
system without notice to the Chief of Police.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.09  SMOKE AND FIRE ALERT DETECTORS.



   Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit the installation
of and use of so called smoke or fire alert detectors designed for internal
use for the protection, safety and well being of the occupants of any
building, structure or facility, and no permit is required far the
installation of same.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)



§ 99.10  AUTOMATIC SHUTOFF.



   Every alarm system equipped with an externally audible local signaling
device or visual device shall be provided with an automatic cutoff to silence
the audible external signal and terminate any visual external signal within
30 minutes from the time the signaling device is activated. Systems already
installed on the effective date of this chapter shall comply with this
section within one year from such effective date.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.11  RESPONSIBILITY OF ALARM USER.



   Alarm users of any alarm system are responsible at all times for the
proper maintenance and use of their systems.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A system installed in a single family residence may suffer
three false alarms in a six month period without penalty. The fourth false
alarm within the six month period shall subject the user to a fine of $50.
The fifth false alarm within a six month period shall subject the user to a
fine of $75. Each subsequent false alarm within a six month period shall
subject the user to a fine of $100.



   (B)   A violation of any other provisions of this chapter occurring
within and/or in relation to a single family residence shall subject the user
to a fine of $50, plus costs of prosecution for the first offense; a fine of
$75, plus costs of prosecution for the second offense, and a fine of $100,
plus costs of prosecution for the third and each subsequent offense.



   (C)   A system installed in buildings other than single family
residences may suffer three false alarms in a six month period without
penalty. The fourth false alarm within the six month period shall subject the
user to a fine of $100. The fifth false alarm within a six month period shall
subject the user to a fine of $200. Each subsequent false alarm within a six
month period shall subject the user to a fine of $500.



   (D)   A violation of any other provisions of this chapter occurring
within and/or in relation to a building other than a single family residence
shall subject the user to a fine of $100, plus costs of prosecution for the
first offense; a fine of $200, plus costs of prosecution for the second
offense, and a fine of $500, plus costs of prosecution for the third and each
subsequent offense.



(Ord. passed 8-15-05)



CHAPTER 100:  SPECIAL EVENTS



Section



   100.01   Generally



   100.02   Definition and examples



   100.03   Requirements



   100.04   Procedure



   100.05   Denial of permit



   100.06   Enforcement



§ 100.01  GENERALLY.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare by establishing standards for special events, as that term is
defined in § 100.02.



(Ord. passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 09-08, passed 5-4-09)



§ 100.02  DEFINITION AND EXAMPLES.



   (A)   Definition. A SPECIAL EVENT within the meaning of this chapter
is any event that requires the partial or full closure of a road or street or
other public property, such as a section of a beach or park or public parking
lot, or that the applicant or sponsor knows or should know by promotion,
public announcements, or past experience:



      (1)   Is likely to attract more than 250 persons or 50 motor
vehicles to property in a commercial zone (except that properly licensed
commercial facilities designed to hold and accommodate events with
attractions of more than 250 persons or 50 motor vehicles shall be exempt); or



      (2)   Is likely to attract more than 100 persons or 50 motor
vehicles to town-owned property; or



      (3)   Will require services from the town beyond those that
are ordinarily provided for events, such as additional police services,
traffic control, fire and emergency and medical planning or services, street
closures or trash clean up.



   (B)   Examples. The following non-exclusive list of examples
illustrates the types of events that may require a special event permit:
Parades, dances, concerts, fairs, parties, traveling shows or exhibits, road
races, fireworks display, triathlons, biathlons, decathlons, bicycle races,
sailing/water events and other beach-related activities, events with
amplified music, performances and movie or television filming.



   (C)   Private property owners and/or tenants in a residential zone
are not required to obtain a special event permit for a party or affair or
social event at their residence. The property owner and/or tenant is,
however, required to comply with the Town of Middletown Code of Ordinances
Chapter 72 Parking Regulations, and to inform the Middletown Police
Department in writing before hosting any party or affair or social event at
their residence where there will be 100 or more guests attending.



(Ord. passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 09-08, passed 5-4-09)



§ 100.03  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No person or organization shall sponsor, promote, engage in,
or hold a special event within the town without obtaining a special event
permit from the Town Council at least 30 days before the event commences;
provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to events sponsored by
the town or by the Middletown School Committee, or other Town of
Middletown/Middletown School Committee sanctioned organizations, or to
religious events sponsored by a religious organization, or to funerals and
funeral processions.



   (B)   For special events on private property, only the property
owner or an authorized agent of the owner may obtain the required permit.



   (C)   Special event permit holders must agree to provide or make
arrangements for:



      (1)   Medical and emergency assistance;



      (2)   Protection of neighboring property;



      (3)   Litter control and cleanup, including septic waste
disposal; and



      (4)   Parking and traffic control.



   (D)   Special event permit holders must ensure that all persons and
activities involved in the event fully comply with all town ordinances,
including the tent ordinance and the noise ordinance, and all state laws,
including those regulating liquor sales and fire protection.



   (E)   Fee. The Town Council is authorized to establish a single fee
for all special event permits, or a schedule of fees for various kinds or
sizes of special events.  The Town Council establishes the following fees
for a special event permit:



      (1)   For a special event that is likely to attract more than
250 persons or 50 motor vehicles to a property in a commercial zone, there
shall be a special event fee of $250.



      (2)   For all other special events, as defined in § 100.02,
there shall be a special event fee of $100.



   (F)   Limitations.



      (1)   No more than 20 special events per calendar year may be
held on property in a commercial zone, of which not more than four may be
open to the public.



      (2)   The Town Council may limit the size or duration of
events based on past history.



(Ord. passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 09-08, passed 5-4-09)



§ 100.04  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   An applicant shall file with the Town Clerk a form requiring
the following information: name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant; a description of the proposed event, including dates and times; an
estimate of the expected attendance and the expected number of motor
vehicles. If the applicant will not be available as the contact person
throughout the event, the name, address, and telephone number of an agent who
will be available; and such other  relevant information as the department
may require. In addition, for events held on private property, the assessor's
plat and lot number must be given.



   (B)   The Town Clerk shall forward all permit applications for
review and recommendation to the Town Administrator and may also, depending
on the nature and scope of the proposed special event, forward permit
applications for review, comment, and estimate of all costs to be reimbursed
by the applicant by any or all of the following: Police Department, Fire
Department, Parks and Recreation Department, Building Official, Harbormaster,
and/or Department of Public Works.



   (C)   Each reviewing authority shall expeditiously review the permit
application and return it, with comments, to the Town Clerk, within 30 days
of the filing of the application. The Town Clerk shall then place the
application, together with comments and other relevant information, on the
agenda for final decision by the Town Council. The application shall be acted
upon by the Town Council within 60 days of it being filed.



   (D)   The applicant shall prepay the town, as estimated, for all
related public safety and works special details prior to the issuance of said
license or special event permit.  In special cases the Council may reduce
the amount to be prepaid, but shall not in any case waive said charges,
except in the case of a special event permit issued to a nonprofit
organization.



   (E)   A copy of the application, as approved, shall be available on
site during the special event.



(Ord. passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 09-08, passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed
1-17-17; Am. Ord. 2017-6, passed 4-17-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.05  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   An application may be denied if the Council reasonably determines that
the proposed event will present an actual danger to public health, safety or
welfare; will unreasonably disrupt traffic or burden Middletown residents;
or, in the case of multiple permits issued on the same day, will create an
extraordinary burden on town services.



(Ord. passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 09-08, passed 5-4-09)



§ 100.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable under the
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   In addition to or in lieu of punishment under division (A),
the Town Council, if it determines that a permit holder has violated town
ordinances or the terms of the permit, may revoke or suspend the permit; may
conditionally re-issue the permit or remove the suspension; and/or may deny
future applications by the same applicant; provided that proper notice has
been given to the applicant and a duly advertised show cause hearing has been
convened by the Town Council acting as the Board of License Commissioners.



(Ord. passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 09-08, passed 5-4-09)



CHAPTER 101: TENTS



Section



   101.01   Generally



   101.02   Definition



   101.03   Procedure



   101.04   Enforcement



§ 101.01  GENERALLY.



   (A)   As required by state law, no tent exceeding 120 square feet in
area shall be erected, maintained, operated, or used in the town of
Middletown except under a license from the building official. A tent license
shall not be issued for a period exceeding 30 days and shall be revocable for
cause.



   (B)   A licensed tent not greater than 800 square feet in size may
be maintained in the same location for up to nine months by submitting
successive applications for a renewal license satisfying the minimum
requirements of this chapter every 30 days or less until the tent is removed.
A licensed tent greater than 800 square feet in size may be maintained in the
same location for up to nine months by obtaining a special-use permit from
the Zoning Board of Review, unless the special-use permit requirement is
excused under division (C), followed by successive applications to the
building official for a renewal license satisfying the minimum requirements
of this chapter every 30 days or less until the tent is removed. For purposes
of this division, MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS means approval of the Police
Department and Fire Department under § 101.03(B) and a statement of any
changes in the information required under § 101.03(A) and provided by the
licensee in the original tent license application.



   (C)   A tent otherwise required to be authorized by a special-use
permit under this chapter shall be excused from the special-use permit
requirement, but not from any other requirements, if the same tent had been
lawfully erected and maintained in the same location for more than 30 days
during each of the years 2007 and 2008. A different tent may be substituted
for a tent that had been lawfully erected and maintained in the same location
for more than 30 days during each of the years 2007 and 2008 provided it is
not larger in size or height, and occupies the same footprint in
substantially the same location, as the tent previously used.



   (D)   In addition to complying with this chapter, anyone in the Town
of Middletown erecting or using a tent as defined in § 101.02 must comply
with all relevant state requirements for tents in R.I. Gen. Laws Ch. 23-28.19.



(Ord. 09-18, passed 11-2-09)



§ 101.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TENT. Any structure or enclosure of canvas, strong cloth, or synthetic
material stretched and sustained by poles, designed and used for temporary
human occupancy.



(Ord. 09-18, passed 11-2-09)



§ 101.03  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   An applicant for a tent license shall file with the building
department a form requiring the following information: name, address, and
telephone number of the applicant; dates, location, and use of the tent; and,
for tents to be used for 200 or more persons or when otherwise required by
the fire marshal for good reason, the application shall be accompanied by a
plan drawn to scale, showing exits, aisles, and seating arrangements and
details of the structural support of tent, seats, platforms, and the like.



   (B)   No tent license shall be issued until approval has been
obtained from the Police Department, the Fire Department, and, when tents are
to be used for 200 or more persons, from each and every department having
jurisdiction over places of assembly.



   (C)   Each reviewing authority shall expeditiously review the
license application and return it, with comments, to the building official,
who shall then, after reviewing the comments and recommendations of the
reviewing authorities, make the decision whether to issue the license.



   (D)   Upon the granting of a tent license by the building official,
the applicant shall pay a fee in an amount determined under Chapter 36 of the
Town Code.



(Ord. 09-18, passed 11-2-09)



§ 101.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable under the provisions of
§ 10.99.



(Ord. 09-18, passed 11-2-09)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





         112.   AMUSEMENTS, JUKE BOXES





         113.   FOOD SERVICE





         114.   FORTUNETELLERS, TATTOOS





         115.   PEDDLERS, VENDORS, SOLICITORS, JUNKSTORES





         116.   BODY WORKS SERVICES





         117.   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES





         118.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS




CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Issuance and renewal of town licenses and permits



§ 110.01  ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF TOWN LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   (A)   No license or permit which the Town Council is empowered to
grant shall be issued or renewed to any person who is currently in arrears in
any tax or assessment levied by the town or is operating a business that
violates local, state or federal law.



   (B)   Each person seeking the issuance or renewal of any such
license or permit shall file with his application therefor a verification
from the proper tax or collection agency of the town that all taxes and
assessments are paid to date, such verification to be submitted with such
application.



   (C)   No victualling or alcoholic beverage license, which the town
is empowered to grant, or renew, shall be issued to any person or entity not
in compliance with the requirements of state or town law, rule or regulations
relative to Building and/or Fire Safety or Stormwater and Wastewater
Control.  Each person or entity seeking issuance of such license shall
submit the following:  certificate from the R.I. Department of Health that
the premises complies with all rules and regulations; certificate from the
Building Official that the premises conform to all applicable building and
occupancy codes; certificate from the Fire Department that the premises
conforms to all applicable fire safety codes, and a certificate from the
Director of Public Works that the establishment is in compliance with all
design requirements of Stormwater and Wastewater Control ordinances and is
current and compliant with all inspection and reporting requirements and a
certificate from the Fire Department that the premises conforms to all
applicable fire safety codes.



   (D)   No victualling or alcoholic beverage license (other than Class
A), which the town is empowered to grant shall be renewed to any person or
entity not in compliance with the requirements of town stormwater and
wastewater control ordinances.  Each person or entity seeking renewal of
such license shall receive a certificate from the Director of Public Works
that the establishment is in compliance with all design requirements of
stormwater and wastewater control ordinances and is current and compliant
with all inspection and reporting requirements.



   (E)   The fee for any license or permit granted by the Town Council
shall be paid within 30 days of its granting and the license or permit shall
be issued at time of payment, provided that all conditions and requirements
for issuance have been met. An applicant who does not pay for a license or
permit and does not request the issuance of the license within 30 days and
upon payment of all taxes and assessments and upon completion of all
requirements, shall be called before the Town Council to show cause why the
license or permit should not be revoked.



(Ord. passed 9-16-91; Am. Ord. passed 9-7-04; Am. Ord. 2010-25, passed
8-16-10; Am. Ord. 2016-7, passed 8-15-16)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Authority



   111.02   Statutes, rules and regulations incorporated



   111.03   Class A license rules



   111.04   Class B and Class C license rules



   111.05   License issued conditionally



   111.06   Delivery of license and regulations to licensee



   111.07   Notice to licensees of regulation amendments



   111.08   Service to underage prohibited



   111.09   Adult entertainment in establishments serving alcoholic
beverages



   111.10   Alcohol training certification



Enforcement



   111.97   Violations: revocation, suspension or fine



   111.98   Burden of proof of violation



   111.99   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Alcohol related offenses, see § 130.01 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  AUTHORITY.



   These regulations are issued pursuant to the authority contained in
R.I. Gen. Laws § 3-5-20 and § 3-5-21 and pursuant to the provisions of R.I.
Gen. Laws § 3-5-15 which provides that "the right, power, and jurisdiction
to issue...licenses...shall be in the mayors and city councils of the several
cities."



(Ord. passed 5-26-86)



§ 110.02  STATUTES, RULES AND REGULATIONS INCORPORATED.



   (A)   State liquor laws.  These regulations incorporate and adopt
by reference all existing Rhode Island statutes pertaining to the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages (intoxicating liquor) as well as any
related laws and those laws which may in the future be adopted.  Any
violation of an applicable statute will be deemed a violation of these
regulations and may be enforced accordingly (pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws §§
3-5-20, 3-5-21, and 3-5-15).



   (B)   State liquor regulations.  These regulations incorporate and
adopt by reference all Rules and Regulations of the Rhode Island Liquor
Control Administration, as may be amended from time to time.  Any violation
of the Rules and Regulations of the Rhode Island Liquor Control
Administration shall be deemed a violation of the regulations of the BLC.



   (C)   Fire, health, other codes.  These regulations incorporate and
adopt by reference all statutes relating to state fire, health, and building
codes, including the rules and regulations of the departments, agencies, or
organizations responsible for enforcement of these codes.  Any violation of
these codes or a related statute will be deemed a violation of these
regulations.



   (D)   Definitions.  The words and phrases in this section shall be
given the same definitions and construction  given  to  them  in  R.I.
Gen. Laws § 3-1-1.



(Ord. passed 5-26-86)



§ 111.03  CLASS A LICENSE RULES.



   The following regulations shall apply to Class A license holders:



   (A)   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises is
prohibited.  The term PREMISES shall encompass the actual building where the
licensee is doing business and the sidewalk, the parking lot, or other
abutting areas provided the genesis of the consumption was within the
licensed premises.



   (B)   No beverage may be sold after the legal closing hour
prescribed by statute.  At this time, the licensee must extinguish all
exterior lights and both exterior and interior electronic or illuminating
advertisements.  The management must vacate the premises within one half
hour or 30 minutes after the legal closing hour.



   (C)   Minors are prohibited from loitering in or near the
premises.  Any attempt to utilize a false identification shall be reported
to the police.



   (D)   A minor who purchases any beverage or goods must sign the
minor registration books.     



   (E)   Management is prohibited from selling any alcoholic beverage
without positive proof of majority age presented by the purchaser.



   (F)   At all times while the premises are occupied, police and other
enforcement officials while on duty must be admitted and granted access to
the entire licensed premises including the parking lot and other areas
surrounding the building.



   (G)   No licensee or any agent, servant, employee or representative
thereof shall in any way interfere with the official duties or activities of
any such police or enforcement official.



   (H)   No licensee or any agent, servant, employee or representative
thereof shall harass, either verbally or physically, any police or other
enforcement official while performing his official duties on or within the
licensed premises or adjacent parking lot and other areas surrounding the
building.



(Ord. passed 5-26-86)



§ 111.04  CLASS B AND CLASS C LICENSE RULES.



   The following regulations shall apply to Class B and Class C license
holders:



   (A)   A license must be posted in plain view and shown to any
authorized person upon demand.



   (B)   No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or dispensed
after the legal closing hour.



   (C)   All cash registers or reciprocals must be locked or secured at
the legal closing hour, and management is prohibited from withdrawing or
distributing cash until all patrons have exited the premises described in the
license.  Evidence that a cash register is not locked or secured will create
a presumption (and shall be prima facie evidence) that alcoholic beverages
are being sold after the legal closing hour.



   (D)   All patrons shall leave the licensed premises within 30
minutes after the legal closing hour.



   (E)   Any patrons found consuming alcoholic beverages on the
licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the legal closing hour will be
presumed to have purchased, (and shall be considered prima facie evidence)
that said alcoholic beverages after the legal closing hour.



   (F)   No persons shall be admitted to the premises after the legal
closing hour.



   (G)   Management and bona fide employees may remain on the premises
for a period of no longer than one hour after the legal closing hour. 
Management and bona fide employees may not consume or have in their
possession alcoholic beverages on the premises after patrons have left the
premises.



   (H)   At all times while the premises are occupied, police and other
enforcement officials while on duty shall be admitted and granted access to
the entire licensed premises including the parking lot and other areas
surrounding the building.



   (I)   No licensee or any agent, servant, employee or representative
thereof shall in any way interfere with the official duties or activities of
any such police or other enforcement official.



   (J)   No licensee or any agent, servant, employee or representative
thereof shall harass, either verbally or physically, any police or other
enforcement official while performing his official duties on or within the
licensed premises or adjacent parking lot and other areas surrounding the
building.



   (K)   All fights, disturbances, violence, or any other violations of
the law shall be reported to the Police Department immediately by management
or employees.



   (L)   No alcoholic beverage shall be permitted to be removed from
the licensed premises of a Class B or Class C establishment by any patron.



   (M)   No container for alcoholic beverages offered by the licensee
to its patrons shall be permitted to be removed by any patron from the
interior of a Class B or Class C licensed establishment whether or not such
container is purchased from the licensee.



   (N)   No dancing or live entertainment shall be permitted unless an
entertainment license is issued by the Council.



   (O)   All licensees shall maintain efficient and affirmative
supervision over the conduct of their patrons on the licensed premises, the
sidewalks contiguous to the licensed premises, real property owned by the
licensee on which the licensed premises are located and in parking areas
owned or leased by the licensee for use by patrons of the licensed premises.



   (P)   Occupancy limitations of licensed premises are determined by
dividing the net floor area of space assigned to that use of the patrons of
the licensee by the square feet per occupant as follows:



      (1)   An assembly area of less concentrated use such as
conference rooms, dining room, drinking establishments, exhibit room, or
lounge, 15 square feet per person.



      (2)   Standing room or waiting space, five square feet per
person provided that aisle area, except rear cross aisles, shall not be
considered in determining the number of standing patrons allowed.



   (Q)   Any arrest which results from an incident commencing on the
licensed premises shall be prima facie evidence that the licensee did not
maintain efficient and affirmative supervision over the conduct of its
patrons.



(Ord. passed 5-26-86)



§ 111.05  LICENSE ISSUED CONDITIONALLY.



   All licenses issued by the BLC are issued conditioned upon continuing
adherence to and no violation of these rules and regulations.



(Ord. passed 5-26-86)



§ 111.06  DELIVERY OF LICENSE AND REGULATIONS TO LICENSEE.



   The BLC, upon issuance of any liquor license under the authority
contained in R.I. Gen. Laws, Title 3, shall cause a true copy of these
regulations to be delivered to the licensee at the time of its issuance. 
The Town Clerk shall cause the licensee, if an individual, to sign personally
for and to acknowledge receipt of the license and these regulations.  If the
licensee is a corporation, the recipient of the liquor license and the
accompanying rules and regulations shall be acknowledged and receipted by an
attorney-at-law acting on behalf of the corporation or by an officer in said
corporation.  If the licensee is a partnership, the license and regulations
shall be delivered only to a general partner.  The business manager of any
establishment may also sign for said regulations with approval of the
licensee.



(Ord. passed 5-26-86)



§ 111.07  NOTICE TO LICENSEES OF REGULATION AMENDMENTS.



   Amendments to these regulations as enacted by the BLC shall be mailed
to the licensees by regular mail, postage prepaid.  Such changes shall be
effective and all licenses shall be deemed to have notice of all amendments
upon passage.



(Ord. passed 5-26-86)



§ 111.08  SERVICE TO UNDERAGE PROHIBITED.



   No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or served to any underage person
by a licensee.



(Ord. passed 5-26-86)



§ 111.09  ADULT ENTERTAINMENT IN ESTABLISHMENTS SERVING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   Legislative Findings and Intent.



      (1)   The Town Council has the authority and responsibility to
regulate conduct in places accessible to the public and to legislate on
matters of local concern for the protection of the public health, safety,
morals and welfare;



      (2)   Business establishments which serve alcoholic or cereal
malt beverages for consumption on the premises are subject to intensive
regulation due to the effects of consumption of intoxicating beverages.  The
conduct of all persons in such establishments merits appropriate regulation
to prevent health risks, to preserve safety and welfare, and to minimize
criminal activities.



      (3)   Establishments which promote adult, sexually oriented
entertainment of certain types, including nudity and sexual performances,
have been known to have direct and indirect adverse consequences which
negatively affect the public health, safety and welfare of the surrounding
community.  Numerous studies have shown a direct relationship between the
operation of adult entertainment businesses in a particular community and
crime and deteriorating property values in that community.



      (4)   Nudity and sexual performances may be lawful in certain
situations and non-public venues.  It  is  not  the  intent  of 
this  section  to inhibit free expression of any art or speech nor to
suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution or Art. 1, Section 21, of the Rhode Island Constitution.



      (5)   The intent of this section is to regulate adult
entertainment in establishments serving alcoholic beverages so as to promote
sanitary conditions, prevent the spread of disease, reduce opportunities for
criminal activity. preserve property values, and protect the public health,
safety, morals and welfare.



   (B)   Applicability.  This section shall apply to all business
establishments in the town which serve alcoholic beverages or cereal malt
beverages for consumption on the premises, whether licensed or not, or which
allow alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages to be consumed on the
premises on a so-called "bring-your-own" basis; to all operators, employees
and entertainers of such establishments; and to all persons while patrons of
such establishments.



   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  All alcoholic, distilled spirits, wine or
fortified wine, and beer and malt beverages, whether or not diluted or mixed
with any other liquid, which contain 0.5% or more alcohol by weight and are
served or made available for human consumption.



      EMPLOYEE.  Any person providing services of any kind on licensed
premises for wages, gratuities, or any other kind of compensation.  Examples
of such employees include guides, ushers, escorts, waiters, waitresses,
servers, hosts, hostesses, and bartenders.



      ENTERTAINER.  Any person who performs or presents entertainment
on licensed premises for wages, gratuities, or any other kind of
compensation, whether as an employee, contractor or guest of the
establishment.



      LICENSED PREMISES.  Any premises upon which alcoholic beverages
are sold or served for consumption on the premises pursuant to a license or
permit issued by the town, or otherwise, and any premises which allow for the
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises on a "bring-your-own"
basis.



      OPERATOR.  The property owner, owner of the business, license
holder, manager, person in charge, or any person operating a licensed
premises.



      PATRON.  Any person who is a guest, member, customer or invitee
in or on a licensed premises.



      PERSON.  Any natural person, corporation, partnership,
association or any other legally recognized entity.



      PROSCRIBED SEXUAL ACTIVITY.



         (a)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts prohibited by
law; and



         (b)   The display of post-pubertal human genitals,
buttocks or pubic area, or the female breast below the top of the nipple.



   (D)   Prohibited Conduct.



      (1)   No person on a licensed premises shall:



         (a)   Perform or simulate any proscribed sexual activity.



         (b)   Use any artificial device or inanimate object to
perform, simulate or depict any proscribed sexual activity.



         (c)   Show, display or exhibit any film, video, picture,
electronic reproduction or any other visual reproduction or image of any
proscribed sexual activity.



         (d)   Expose to public view his or her bare or uncovered
buttocks, anus, anal cleavage, anal cleft, genitals or pubic hair, and no
person shall expose to public view breast or breasts below the top of the
nipple.  For the purposes of this subsection, exposure to public view occurs
whether or not these body areas or parts are covered or screened with a
transparent or semi-transparent material.



         (e)   Engage in or allow the touching, fondling or
caressing of breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.



      (2)   Every operator and employee of a licensed premises shall
not allow and has an affirmative duty to prevent any violation of subsection
(D)(1) above.



(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-2-98)  Penalty, see § 111.99(B)



§ 111.10  ALCOHOL TRAINING CERTIFICATION.



   (A)   At the time of issuance or renewal of all Class A, B, C, D,
and J liquor licenses, or whenever there is a change of a license from one
holder to another, the license holder, management and employees involved with
the sale or service of alcohol within the town shall have taken and been
certified as having completed an alcohol server training program. Said
license holder, management and employees shall present a valid certification
of successful completion of an alcohol server training program certified by
the Rhode Island Department of Mental Health, Retardation and Hospitals.
Anyone subject to this section shall be required to be recertified at least
once every three years.



   (B)   Failure of the license holder to provide evidence of
completion of such a training program by its employees may result in the
non-issuance or suspension of a license until proof of certification is
provided. New employees shall be allowed 60 days after hire to obtain said
certification. Failure of an employee to be certified within 60 days of hire
or failure of an existing employee to be certified within 60 days of the
passage of this section shall result in the employee being ineligible to work
in the licensed business until a certificate is presented. An extension of
time for certification may be granted for good cause by the Board of License
Commissioners.



   (C)   In the case of a Class D license, the person responsible for
the day-to-day operation of the club and all employees of the establishment,
shall be required to complete such a training program.



   (D)   Violations of this section shall be subject to the penalties
of § 111.99, with each day of violation constituting a separate violation.



(Ord. passed 7-6-09; Am. Ord. 2012-12, passed 9-4-12) Penalty, see § 111.99



ENFORCEMENT



§ 111.97  VIOLATIONS: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION, OR FINE.



   Every license issued by the BLC pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws, Title 3,
Ch. 5 (the Licensing Laws), as may be amended from time to time, shall be
subject to revocation or suspension or the licensee shall be subject to fine
under § 111.99 by the BLC for breach by the holder thereof of any of the
licensing laws or any of the rules and regulations of the BLC in this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-26-86)



§ 111.98  BURDEN OF PROOF OF VIOLATION.



   A violation of any of these regulations need only be proven to the
satisfaction of the Town Board of Licensing Commissioners ("BLC").  The BLC
is entitled to rely on any evidence it deems material or relevant, and may
find a violation solely by inference from the facts presented.  A police
report indicating a violation, or an affidavit of any public official
indicating the same, constitutes prima facie evidence of a violation and
shifts the burden to the licensee to demonstrate compliance with and
adherence to these regulations.



(Ord. passed 5-26-86)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a maximum fine of $1000 for each offense.



(R.I. Gen. Laws § 3-5-21)



   (B)   (1)   Each separate occurrence of any of the activities
prohibited by § 111.09(D)(1) shall be considered a separate violation of law
by:



         (a)   The person or persons engaging in such activity;



         (b)   Each operator of the premises, whether or not on
the premises at the time of the occurrence; and



         (c)   Each employee who observed or should have observed
the violation but condoned, allowed, or failed to take immediate action to
stop it.



      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of § 111.09
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and/or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days.



      (3)   The violation of any provision of § 111.09 by any
operator of any licensed premises shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall
constitute grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of all alcoholic
beverage licenses or other licenses issued to the premises and/or operator.



(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-2-98)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS, JUKE BOXES



Section



Amusements



   112.01   License for theatrical, sports performances, and public
exhibitions



   112.02   License for amusement rides



   112.03   License for midways, fairs, public resorts



   112.04   License for movie theatre



   112.05   Issuance of license; location; term



Amusement Games



   112.20   Definitions



   112.21   License required



   112.22   Application for license



   112.23   License approval, issuance



   112.24   Rules of operation



   112.25   Fees



   112.26   Inspection of premises



   112.27   Expiration, renewal of licenses



   112.28   Revocation of suspension of license



   112.29   Allowing operation by minor after 10 p.m. prohibited



 



   112.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license shows and exhibitions, see § 5-22-1 et seq.



AMUSEMENTS



§ 112.01  LICENSE FOR THEATRICAL, SPORTS PERFORMANCES AND PUBLIC
EXHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall, within the town, publicly or for any pay or
for any profit or for any advantage to himself, exhibit or promote or take
part in any theatrical performance, or rope or wire dancing or other show or
performance, or conduct, engage in or promote any wrestling, boxing or
sparring match or exhibition, nor shall any person in this town for any
pecuniary profit or advantage to himself, promote any public roller skating
rinks or halls, or give any dance or ball without a license from the Council.



   (B)   Every person taking such license shall pay to the Treasurer
the sum of $20 for any single performance, show, exhibition, dance or ball.



('73 Code, § 3-1)  (Ord. passed 7-20-21)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.02  LICENSE FOR AMUSEMENT RIDES.



   (A)   No person in the town shall publicly or for any pay or profit
or advantage to himself operate or promote any roller coaster, merry-go-round
or whip, so-called, or any other public amusement of a like character without
first having obtained a license for that purpose from the Council.



   (B)   Every person taking such license shall pay to the Treasurer
the sum of $20.



('73 Code, § 3-4)  (Ord. passed 7-20-21)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  LICENSE FOR MIDWAYS, FAIRS, PUBLIC RESORTS.



   (A)   No building, house, room, platform, pavilion or space in the
town shall be used as a midway, fair, public bathing beach, or a public
amusement resort where various forms of public amusements or public
entertainments are conducted or where various games are carried on for profit
or where various merchandise or commodities are sold to the public in booths,
stands, spaces or counters unless the owner thereof shall first obtain a
license for that purpose from the Council.



   (B)   Every person taking such license shall pay to the Treasurer
the sum of $20.



('73 Code, § 3-7)  (Ord. passed 7-20-21)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  LICENSE FOR MOVIE THEATRE.



   (A)   No building, house, room, platform, pavilion, land or space in
the town shall be used as a theater or a place to show moving pictures,
television, whether drive-in theaters, so-called, or otherwise, for public
use or profit, unless the owner thereof shall first obtain a license for that
purpose from the Council.



   (B)   Every person taking such a license shall pay to the Treasurer
the sum of $150.



('73 Code, § 3-8)  (Ord. passed 9-4-51)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; LOCATION; TERM.



   Every license granted under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
issued by the Town Clerk and shall designate the location or place where the
license is to operate and shall not authorize the exercise of such license at
any place other than therein designated.  Such licenses may be granted at
any time or times and shall terminate on the third Wednesday in April, next
after the granting thereof.



('73 Code, § 3-10)  (Ord. passed 7-20-21; Am. Ord. 9-4-51)



AMUSEMENT GAMES



§ 112.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMUSEMENT GAME  Any mechanical, electric or electronic device,
including jukeboxes, used or designed to be operated for entertainment or as
a game by the insertion of a piece of money, coin, token or other article, or
by paying money to have it activated. This definition does not include:



      (1)   Rides;



      (2)   Bowling alleys;



      (3)   Any device maintained within a residence for the use of
the occupants thereof and their guests;



      (4)   Any device the possession or use of which is prohibited
by law.



   OWNER.  A record owner, contract purchaser, lessee, assignee, bailee,
receiver or trustee.



   PERSON.  One or more individuals, a corporation, partnership,
association, trust or firm and any trustee, receiver or assignee.



   TOWN.  The town of Middletown.



('73 Code, § 13A-1)  (Ord. passed 5-5-82)



§ 112.21  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall maintain or operate an amusement game in town unless
said person first obtains a license under this subchapter.



('73 Code, § 13A-2)  (Ord. passed 5-5-82)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.22  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   An application for an amusement game license shall be made to
the Council on forms which shall include the following information:



      (1)   If an individual, the name, address, date of birth,
social security number, place of birth, and telephone number of the applicant;



      (2)   If a firm, corporation, partnership, or association, the
names, dates of birth, Social Security numbers, telephone numbers, and places
of birth of the principals, officers, or partners, and the names and
addresses of the stockholders of closely held corporations;



      (3)   The name, address, and Social Security number of any
person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association having any financial
interest in such amusement games;



      (4)   A description of the location where such amusement games
are to be located, including the square footage of the proposed operating
area;



      (5)   Prior convictions of any crime or misdemeanor of the
applicant (if an individual) or of the principals, partners, officers and
stockholders of the applicant (if a firm, corporation, partnership, or
association).



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for an amusement game license,
the Town Clerk shall refer it to:



      (1)   The Building Official to determine whether the premises
in which the applicant intends to locate amusement games complies with all
applicable building and zoning laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.  For
that purpose the Building Official and employees of his department shall have
the right to enter upon and inspect the premises during normal business hours;



      (2)   The Chief of Police, who shall investigate the type of
amusement games sought to be licensed, the proposed location, and the
applicant.



('73 Code, § 13A-3)  (Ord. passed 5-5-82)



§ 112.23  LICENSE APPROVAL, ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Upon completion of the application, the Town Clerk shall
forward it, with the recommendations of the Building Official and Chief of
Police, to the Council for its review and action.



   (B)   In approving a license, the Council may establish conditions
and safeguards to promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare
of the town and its inhabitants.



   (C)   Upon approval by the Council, the Town Clerk shall issue a
license upon payment of the license fee established in § 112.25. The license
shall state:



      (1)   The maximum number of amusement games permitted in the
proposed location;



      (2)   Any other conditions or restrictions imposed by the
Council.



('73 Code, § 13A-4)  (Ord. passed 5-5-82)



§ 112.24  RULES OF OPERATION.



   (A)   The licensee shall comply with all provisions of law,
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the conduct of business and the use
and maintenance of the premises where such amusement games are located.



   (B)   The licensee shall cause the amusement game license to be
posted at all times in a conspicuous place in such premises.



   (C)   The licensee shall maintain good order on the premises at all
times.  The lack of good order on the premises shall include but shall not
be limited to the following:



      (1)   Fighting and rowdy behavior;



      (2)   Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in
premises that are not licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages;



      (3)   Gambling;



      (4)   Permitting the use of marijuana or any controlled
substance, possession of which is prohibited by state law.



   (D)   The licensee shall not permit an amusement game to be placed
or operated after 10:00 p.m. by a person under the age of 18 unless
accompanied by a parent or other guardian over the age of 21.



   (E)   The licensee shall provide a sufficient number of responsible
supervisory personnel to assure the safe and orderly operation of the
premises at all times.



   (F)   The licensee shall not allow amusement games therein to be
played on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.



   (G)   The licensee shall not allow more amusement games than the
number permitted in the license to be located in such premises at any time.



   (H)   The licensee shall not permit the playing of a juke box
between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M. and at all other times shall
modulate the volume of music so as not to cause a disturbance, as defined in
§ 130.76.



('73 Code, § 13A-5)  (Ord. passed 5-5-82; Am. Ord. passed 8-5-91) 
Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.25  FEES.



   (A)   An application for an amusement game license shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $50 to cover administrative costs.



   (B)   The annual fee for an amusement game license shall be $75 for
each machine authorized hereunder.



   (C)   The fees fixed herein may be modified from time to time by
ordinance of the Council.



('73 Code, § 13A-6) (Ord. passed 5-5-82)



§ 112.26  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   Any premises in the town containing amusement games, when open to
transaction of business, shall be subject to inspection by any police officer.



('73 Code, § 13A-7)  (Ord. passed 5-5-82)



§ 112.27  EXPIRATION, RENEWAL OF LICENSES.



   Amusement game licenses shall expire annually on May 5.  Applications
for renewal of said licenses shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to
expiration of sold licenses.



('73 Code, § 13A-8)  (Ord. passed 5-5-82)



§ 112.28  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   The Council may revoke or suspend an amusement game license for cause
after notice to the licensee and a public hearing. 



('73 Code, § 13A-9)  (Ord. passed 5-5-82)



§ 112.29  ALLOWING OPERATION BY MINOR AFTER 10:00 P.M. PROHIBITED.



   In the event the licensee and/or owner and/or operator of the premises
containing amusement games shall knowingly permit any person under the age of
18 unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian over the age of 21 to play or
operate an amusement game after 10:00 p.m., such licensee and/or owner and/or
operator shall be subject to the penalty of § 112.99.



('73 Code, § 13A-10)  (Ord. passed 5-5-82) Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which a penalty
is not otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.



CHAPTER 113:  FOOD SERVICE



Section



Mobile Food Service Units



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Purpose



   113.03   License requirement; fee



   113.04   License application; application fee; investigation



   113.05   Approval, conditions, issuance of license



   113.06   Compliance with state regulations required



   113.07   Other requirements of operation



   113.08   Revocation or suspension of license



   113.09   Expiration of licenses; renewals



 



   113.99   Penalty



MOBILE FOOD SERVICE UNITS



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOBILE FOOD SERVICE UNITS.  Any movable restaurant, motor vehicle,
truck, van, trailer, cart, bicycle or other movable unit, in or on which food
or beverage is stored, transported or prepared for retail sale or
distribution at temporary locations.



   OWNER.  Any person, corporation, partnership, franchise holder,
association, trust, or firm which owns the business of selling cooked or
prepared food and beverage from mobile food units.



('73, § 12-B.2)  (Ord. passed 6-16-82)



§ 113.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the retail sale and
distribution of food and beverages from trucks, vans and other movable units
at the location of industrial and manufacturing plants and operations,
construction sites, and municipal buildings in the town.  The Council finds
that such regulation is necessary to preserve the health, safety and general
welfare of the town and its inhabitants.



('73 Code, § 12-B1)  (Ord. passed 6-16-82)



§ 113.03  LICENSE REQUIREMENT; FEE.



   (A)   No person shall operate and maintain a mobile food service
unit for the purpose of selling and distributing food or beverage at
industrial and manufacturing plants and operations, construction sites, and
municipal buildings within the town unless the owner first obtains a mobile
food service unit licensed under this chapter.



   (B)   The license fee for each such mobile food service unit
operating within the town shall be $100 per year or any part of a year.



('73 Code, § 12-B.4)  (Ord. passed 6-16-82)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.04  LICENSE APPLICATION; APPLICATION FEE; INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   An application for a mobile food service unit license shall be
made to the Council under oath on forms which shall include the following
information:



      (1)   The name, residence address, and date of birth of the
owner;



      (2)   The names, residence addresses, dates of birth, and
motor vehicle operator's license numbers of all persons who will be operating
the mobile food service unit in the town;



      (3)   The nature of the food service business to be conducted;



      (4)   The proposed location or locations where the business of
the mobile food service unit will be conducted within the town:



      (5)   Whether the applicant has received written permission
from the owner of the premises where he proposes to park or stand his mobile
food service unit for the purpose of selling or distributing food or
beverages, and, written permission to serve the industrial or manufacturing
plant or operation or from the owner of construction site or from the
municipal building which the applicant intends to serve.  The applicant
shall submit with the application evidence of such written permission;



      (6)   Prior convictions of any crime or misdemeanor of the
applicant (if individual) or of the principals, partners, officers, and
stockholders of the applicant (if a firm, corporation, partnership, or
association) and of the persons who will be operating the mobile food service
unit within the town;



      (7)   Whether the applicant has received all necessary
approval from the Rhode Island Department of Health with respect to his
mobile food service unit;



      (8)   The registration numbers of any mobile food service unit
the applicant proposes to operate in the town.



   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee
of $25 to cover administrative costs.



   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for a mobile food service unit
license, the Town Clerk shall refer it to the Chief of Police, who shall
investigate the applicant, and all other persons identified in the
application and the Chief of Police shall report his findings to the Council.



('73 Code, § 12-B.5)  (Ord. passed 6-16-82)



§ 113.05  APPROVAL, CONDITIONS, ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The Town Clerk shall forward the completed application to the
Council for its review and action.



   (B)   No license shall be issued hereunder unless the Council finds:



      (1)   That the applicant has received written permission to
park or stand his mobile food service unit and sell or distribute food or
beverage therefrom upon the premises proposed by the applicant from the owner
of such premises, and, written permission to serve the industrial or
manufacturing plant or operation, the construction site, or the municipal
building which the applicant proposes to serve;



      (2)   That the applicant has received all necessary approvals
with respect to his mobile food service unit from the Rhode Island Department
of Health;



      (3)   That the applicant has a suitable refuse container for
the deposit of papers and other solid wastes by customers and by the
applicant's  employees, which is designed and placed so that it can be
readily used, cleaned and kept clean, in order to prevent the accumulation of
litter;



      (4)   That the proposed location of the mobile food service
unit will not cause or create a threat or danger to the health, safety, and
general welfare of the town and its inhabitants.  In making such
determinations, the Council may consider the proximity of the proposed
location of the mobile food service unit to schools and recreational
facilities, whether the proposed location is already serviced by any other
mobile food service units licensed hereunder, and such other factor or
factors which reasonably relate to the health, safety, and general welfare of
the town and its inhabitants.



   (C)   In approving a license, the Council may establish reasonable
conditions and safeguards to promote and protect the health, safety, and
general welfare of the town and its inhabitants.



   (D)   Licenses are issued hereunder for the specific purpose of
providing necessary food service to industrial and manufacturing plants and
operations, construction sites, and municipal buildings.  No license shall
be issued, therefore, for the operation and maintenance of any mobile food
service unit within 1,000 feet of any permanent retail food establishment.



   (E)   In approving an application for license hereunder, the Council
shall specify the premises upon which such mobile food service unit may stand
or park for the purpose of selling or distributing food or beverage, and the
name or identity of the industrial or manufacturing plant or operation, the
construction site, or the municipal building which the applicant shall serve.



   (F)   Upon approval by the Council, the Town Clerk shall issue a
license upon payment of the fee established hereunder.  The license shall
specify:



      (1)   The premises upon which such mobile food service unit
may stand or park for the purpose of selling or distributing food or beverage;



      (2)   The name or identity of the industrial or manufacturing
plant or operation, the construction site, or the municipal building which
the licensee shall be authorized to serve.



('73 Code, § 12-B.6)  (Ord. passed 6-16-82)



§ 113.06  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATIONS REQUIRED.



   The owner and the owner's employees shall comply with all regulations
of the Rhode Island Department of Health applicable to the sale of food from
mobile food service units.



('73 Code, § 12-B.3)  (Ord. passed 6-16-82)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.07  OTHER REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   The licensee shall comply with all provisions of law,
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the operation and maintenance of
any mobile food service unit licensed hereunder.



   (B)   The licensee shall cause the license issued hereunder to be
posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the mobile food service unit.



   (C)   The licensee, and all employees of the licensee, shall be
courteous to all persons and shall not annoy any of the inhabitants of the
town, and, shall conduct themselves in a lawful manner at all times.



   (D)   A licensee shall not cause his mobile food service unit to
stand or park for the purpose of selling or distributing food or beverage at
any location not authorized or specified in his license nor shall the
licensee serve any industrial or manufacturing plant or operation,
construction site, or municipal building not authorized and identified in his
license.



('73 Code, § 12-B.7)  (Ord. passed 6-16-82)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.08  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   The Council may revoke or suspend a mobile food service unit license
after notice to the licensee and a public hearing for any of the following
causes:



   (A)   Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application;



   (B)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor of either the licensee
or any employee of the licensee who maintains and operates a mobile food
service unit within the town;



   (C)   Conducting the licensed business in an unlawful manner, in
violation of this chapter, state or federal law, or in such a manner as to
cause breach of the peace, to create a nuisance, or to constitute a menace to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the town and its inhabitants;



   (D)   In the event either the owner of the premises upon which the
licensee is authorized to park or stand for the purpose of selling or
distributing food or beverage, or the industrial or manufacturing plant or
operation, construction site, or the municipal building which the licensee is
authorized to serve, or both, withdraws permission to park or stand said
mobile food service unit on said premises and/or serve said plant, operation,
construction site, or municipal building. 



('73 Code, § 12-B.8)  (Ord. passed 6-16-82)



§ 113.09  EXPIRATION OF LICENSES; RENEWALS.



   Mobile food service unit licenses shall expire annually from the date
of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter.  Application for
renewal of a license shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the
expiration of said license.



('73 Code, § 12-B.9)  (Ord. passed 6-16-82)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   In the event any person violates any of the provisions of §§ 113.01
through 113.09, he shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $100, or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both.



('73 Code, § 12-B.10)  (Ord. passed 6-16-82)



CHAPTER 114:  FORTUNETELLERS; TATTOOS



Section



Fortunetellers



   114.01   License required



   114.02   Application; application fee



   114.03   Contents of application



   114.04   Investigation of applicant



   114.05   Issuance of license



   114.06   Bond required



   114.07   License fee



   114.08   License display



   114.09   False advertising prohibited



   114.10   License revocation



   114.11   Charitable revocation



Tattooing



   114.25   Tattooing defined



   114.26   License required



   114.27   License issued by Council



   114.28   Application for license



   114.29   Approval by Police Chief required



   114.30   Investigation required



   114.31   License fee; duration



   114.32   Display of license



   114.33   Transfer of license



   114.34   Tattooing regulations



   114.35   Revocation of license



FORTUNETELLERS



§ 114.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business of palmistry, phrenology, or the
telling of fortunes by any manner whatsoever within the town unless such
person shall have first been duly licensed by the town for such purpose, and
shall have obtained a permit therefor.



('73 Code, § 3-11)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.02  APPLICATION; APPLICATION FEE.



   Every person desiring to engage in the business of palmistry,
phrenology or the telling of fortunes by any manner whatsoever shall make
application to the Town Clerk's office for a permit therefor, which
application shall be in the form prescribed by this subchapter.  A fee of
$10 shall be paid to the Town Clerk at the time the application is filed.



('73 Code, § 3-12)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)



§ 114.03  CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.



   Every applicant for a license under this subchapter shall file with the
Town Clerk a written application stating his full name and address, together
with the age of the applicant, his former business, previous experience or
qualifications as to such palmistry, phrenology, or the telling of fortunes
by any manner whatsoever, together with the names and addresses of at least
three citizens who own real estate in the town as references regarding such
previous experience or qualification, and as to the character of such
applicant; such application to be signed by the applicant and sworn to as to
the truth thereof before any official authorized to administer an oath in the
town.



('73 Code, § 3-13)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)



§ 114.04  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.



   The Town Clerk shall forward the application to the Police Department
which shall cause an investigation to be made as to the character and
background of the applicant.  The Chief of Police shall make a report, in
writing, as to his findings which shall be referred to the Council with the
application.



('73 Code, § 3-14)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)



§ 114.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   The Council, upon receipt of the application and recommendation of the
Chief of Police, may grant such license if, in its opinion, the applicant is
properly qualified to carry on such business.  Every applicant shall be
given an opportunity to be present when the Council considers the application
and shall be given an opportunity to be heard on his application before the
Council.  No license shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of
the United States or who does not possess a good moral character.



('73 Code, § 3-15)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)



§ 114.06  BOND REQUIRED.



   Every person whose application for a license has been approved under
the provisions of this subchapter shall, before receiving such license from
the Town Clerk's office to engage in such business, execute and file a surety
bond in the amount of $1,000 to the town, conditioned to reimburse any person
for all damages resulting from any act on the part of such licensee in the
course of carrying on such business or for damages resulting to any person
from any act on the part of such licensee, contrary to the provisions of this
subchapter or any omission on his part to perform any duties prescribed by
the terms thereof.



('73 Code, § 3-16)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)



§ 114.07  LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   Every person to whom a license is granted shall pay to the
Town Clerk's office therefor a license fee in the following amount:



      $10 per day;



      $30 per week;



      $50 per month; and



      $200 per year.



   (B)   The annual fee herein provided shall be assessed on a calendar
year basis and on and after July 1; the amount of such fee for an annual
license shall be one-half the amount stipulated above for the remainder of
the year.



('73 Code, § 3-17)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)



§ 114.08  LICENSE DISPLAY.



   Every license issued under this subchapter shall allow only the person
named therein to conduct such business and the license granted shall be
displayed in plain view to the public patronizing such licensee.



('73 Code, § 3-18)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.09  FALSE ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.



   Any person securing a license under this subchapter who makes any false
or fraudulent representation by advertising or otherwise shall be guilty of
violating the provisions of this subchapter and the same shall be sufficient
grounds for a revocation of such license.



('73 Code, § 3-20)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.10  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   Any license granted under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
cancelled and revoked by the Council upon the conviction of the holder
thereof of a violation, or upon conviction of any misdemeanor or felony by
any court of competent jurisdiction or by the holder violating any of the
provisions of the code, other ordinances or rules and regulations of the town.



('73 Code, § 3-19)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)



§ 114.11  CHARITABLE EXEMPTION.



   No license shall be required of persons pretending to tell fortunes or
practice palmistry, phrenology or any form of fortunetelling in a regularly
licensed theater, or as a part of any play, exhibition, fair, or show
presented or offered in aid of any benevolent, charitable, or educational
purpose.



('73 Code, § 3-21)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76)



TATTOOING



§ 114.25  TATTOOING DEFINED.



   For the purposes of this chapter, TATTOOING shall mean the practice of
marking the skin with indelible patterns or pictures by making punctures and
inserting pigments.



('73 Code, § 23-1)  (Ord. passed 4-1-57)



§ 114.26  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall tattoo another, or offer to tattoo another, or operate
or conduct a tattooing establishment of any sort within the town without
first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.



('73 Code, § 23-2)  (Ord. passed 4-1-51)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.27  LICENSE ISSUED BY COUNCIL.



   The license required by this subchapter shall be issued by the Council.



('73 Code, § 23-6)  (Ord. passed 4-1-57)



§ 114.28  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Applicants for a license under this subchapter shall file with the Town
Clerk a written, sworn application in triplicate, signed by the applicant,
giving the following information:



   (A)   Name and address of the applicant (both domiciliary and
local), address, age, date and place of birth.



   (B)   The names and addresses of all partners, if a partnership, and
the names and addresses of all officers and stockholders, if a corporation.



   (C)   A complete list of all prior arrests, if any, and all
convictions, whether felonies or misdemeanors, of the applicant, and of all
persons having any interest in the business of the applicant.



   (D)   The location where the applicant proposes to conduct his or
her tattooing business.



   (E)   A copy of the applicant's tattoo parlor/shop registration with
the Rhode Island Department of Health plus a copy of the Department of Health
registration of each tattoo artist that will be tattooing in the applicant's
establishment. All such registrations must be up-to-date.



('73 Code, § 23-3)  (Ord. passed 4-1-57; Am. Ord. passed 3-3-08)



§ 114.29  APPROVAL BY POLICE CHIEF REQUIRED.



   Each application for a license under this subchapter shall be made out
in triplicate, one copy for the Town Clerk, one copy for the Chief of Police
and the third copy for the applicant.  No license shall be issued to any
applicant unless his or her application is approved by the Chief of Police.



('73 Code, § 23-4)  (Ord. passed 4-1-57; Am. Ord. passed 3-3-08)



§ 114.30  INVESTIGATION REQUIRED.



   The Chief of Police shall make such investigation as may be necessary
to ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character.



('73 Code, § 23-5)  (Ord. passed 4-1-57; Am. Ord. passed 3-3-08)



§ 114.31  LICENSE FEE; DURATION.



   Every applicant for a license under this subchapter, before being
granted a license, shall pay an annual license fee of $50 to the Town
Clerk.  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance.



('73 Code, § 23-7)  (Ord. passed 4-1-57)



§ 114.32  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Each license herein provided for shall be posted conspicuously at the
location where the applicant intends to conduct his tattooing.



('73 Code, § 23-8)  (Ord. passed 4-1-57)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.33  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   If the licensee shall move his tattooing business to another location
within the town the license may be transferred to such new location upon
application to the licensing authority, giving the street and number of the
new location.



('73 Code, § 23-9)  (Ord. passed 4-1-57; Am. Ord. passed 3-3-08)



§ 114.34  TATTOOING REGULATIONS.



   Notwithstanding the holding of a license, the following prohibitions
and restrictions shall apply to all tattooing in the town:



   (A)   No person while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotic shall be tattooed.



   (B)   No person under 18 years of age shall be tattooed, and the
licensee shall require photo identification as proof of age before tattooing
any person.



   (C)   The records required to be maintained by the Department of
Health's Rules and Regulations for the Registration of Tattoo Artists and
Tattoo Parlors, Section 17.0, as most recently amended, shall at all times be
available for inspection by proper police and service personnel.



   (D)   No tattooing establishment shall remain open later than 11:00
p.m.



('73 Code, § 23-11)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76; Am. Ord. passed 3-3-08) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.35  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Every license issued under this subchapter is subject to the right,
which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the license for any fraud,
misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for
license, conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude,
any violation of this subchapter, or failure to comply with any regulations
or order issued by the Rhode Island Department of Health.  The applicant
shall, if he or she desires, have the right to a hearing upon revocation,
which hearing shall be held subject to such rules and regulations as may be
set by the licensing authority; provided, that if the Department of Health
shall order a revocation for sanitary or health reasons, the applicant shall
not be entitled to any hearing prior to revocation.



('73 Code, § 23-12)  (Ord. passed 8-16-76; Am. Ord. passed 3-3-08)



CHAPTER 115:  PEDDLERS, VENDORS, SOLICITORS, JUNK STORES



Section



Hawkers and Peddlers



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   License required; exception



   115.03   Annual license fees



   115.04   Persons exempted from license fees



   115.05   License not transferable



   115.06   License display required; failure to display



   115.07   Revocation of licenses



Vendors



   115.15   Vendors defined



   115.16   Licensing provisions



Solicitors and Canvassers



   115.30   Permit required



   115.31   Display of permit



   115.32   Application procedure



   115.33   Permit procedure



   115.34   Filing an appeal



   115.35   Docketing the appeals



   115.36   Appellate procedure



   115.37   Appellate relief



   115.38   Observance of signs



   115.39   Restrictions



   115.40   Exemptions



   115.41   Destruction of permit



   115.42   Duration of permit



Junkyards



   115.55   Automobile junkyard defined



   115.56   License required



   115.57   License application



   115.58   Hearing on application; objections



   115.59   Location requirements for auto junkyard



   115.60   Duration, suspension and revocation of licenses



   115.61   Police inspection



   115.62   Transactions with unlicensed minors prohibited



   115.63   Burning regulations



 



   115.99   Penalty



HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   HAWKER. Any person selling or offering for sale, any goods, wares, or
merchandise whatsoever including any food or beverage, on any public street,
highway, or public right-of-way from a stationary location.



   PEDDLER. Any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, or
other merchandise whatsoever, including any food or beverage, from a vehicle,
cart or any other conveyance which is not stationary.



(R.I. Gen. Laws § 5-11-1.1)



§ 115.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.



   No person shall hawk or peddle, or sell or offer for sale, or carry
into the town to be sold or bartered from packs, packages, horses, carts or
other vehicles, or in any other way, any goods, wares, merchandise, ice cream
or other articles of substance from vehicles and baskets without first
obtaining a license therefor from the Council, unless such person shall have
obtained a license to peddle from the General Treasurer of the state as
provided in R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 5-11-1 through 5-11-3 as amended, or is
exempted from the requirements of a town license under the provisions of R.I.
Gen. Laws § 5-11-18.



('73 Code, § 12-1)  (Ord. passed 4-21-48)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.03  ANNUAL LICENSE FEES.



   The annual fee for a license under this subchapter, which shall be paid
by the applicant for the use of the town, shall be as follows:



   (A)   For selling or offering for sale as a hawker or peddler
watches, jewelry, gold or silver ware, or articles manufactured of German
silver, or patent medicines, the sum of $50.



   (B)   For selling or offering for sale as a hawker or peddler any
goods, wares, merchandise, ice cream or other articles or substances; fruits
or vegetables from vehicles or baskets, other than matches, jewelry, gold or
silver ware, or articles manufactured of German silver, or patent medicines,
from vehicles, the sum of $50; from hand or push carts or on foot without
vehicle or cart, the sum of $50.



('73 Code, § 12-2)  (Ord. passed 4-21-48; Am. Ord passed 4-15-51)



§ 115.04  PERSONS EXEMPTED FROM LICENSE FEES.



   No license fee under this subchapter shall be charged to any person
selling religious books and publications in behalf of bible, tract, or other
religious or moral societies for the purpose of promoting religious or moral
improvement and which are sold for that purpose and not for any pecuniary
profit; nor to any person selling or offering to sell or peddle any
tow-cloth, knit stockings, gloves, mitts, or other articles of household
manufacture or articles manufactured with his own hands, nor to any milkman,
or to any farmer selling the produce of his farm or selling both the produce
of his farm and the produce of other farms.



('73 Code, § 12-3)  (Ord. passed 4-21-48) 



§ 115.05  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   No license under this subchapter shall authorize any person other than
the one named in such license to act thereunder, and no license shall be
transferable.



('73 Code, § 12-4)  (Ord. passed 4-21-48) 



§ 115.06  LICENSE DISPLAY REQUIRED; FAILURE TO DISPLAY.



   Every person selling or offering for sale as a hawker or peddler any
goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever who shall, after being by any police
officer, any inhabitant of the state or any person having a license under
this subchapter, requested to show a license, neglect or refuse for the space
of ten minutes to show a license then in force and allow the same to be read,
shall, if sued or prosecuted under this subchapter, be adjudged to pay all
the costs of such suit or prosecution, although it shall appear in trial that
he had a license duly issued and in force at the time of the alleged offense.



('73 Code, § 12-5)  (Ord. passed 4-21-48)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.07  REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   Any license issued hereunder may be revoked at the pleasure of the
Council.



('73 Code, § 12-6)  (Ord. passed 4-21-48) 



VENDORS



§ 115.15  VENDORS DEFINED.



   The words ITINERANT VENDORS for the purpose of this subchapter shall be
construed to mean and include all persons, either by themselves or by their
agents, who engage in a temporary or transient business in the town or in
traveling from place to place therein, selling goods, wares and merchandise,
and for the purpose of carrying on such business, hire, lease or occupy any
building or structure for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise; and no such itinerant vendor shall be exempt from the provisions
of this subchapter by reason of associating himself temporarily with any
local dealer, trader or auctioneer, or by continuing such temporary or
transient business in connection with or as a part of the business of, or in
the name of, any local dealer, trader or auctioneer; provided, however, if
such transient trader shall have carried on such business for two previous
seasons and shall continue to carry on and conduct such business until such
time as he shall be assessed upon the regular tax rolls of this town for such
goods, wares and merchandise and shall pay the regular town tax thereon, he
or it shall no longer be deemed an itinerant vendor and subject to the
provisions of this subchapter; provided, further, that this subchapter shall
not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents
in the usual course of business or to the bona fide sales of goods, wares and
merchandise by sample and future deliveries, or to hawkers on the streets, or
to peddlers from vehicles, or to sheriffs, constables or public officers of
the state or town selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law, or
to bona fide assignees, for the benefit of creditors residing within this
state, or to receivers appointed in the state, selling goods, wares and
merchandise in the state.



('73 Code, § 12A-1)  (Ord. passed 6-2-75)



§ 115.16  LICENSING PROVISIONS.



   Every itinerant vendor shall, before engaging in business, procure from
the Council an itinerant vendor's license, and for the purpose shall file
with the Town Clerk an application therefor under oath, disclosing the names
and residences of the owners or parties in whose interest such business is to
be conducted, and setting forth the nature and place of business intended to
be engaged in by such applicant.  The itinerant vendor shall pay to the Town
Clerk a fee of $350 for such license.  Such license when issued shall be
signed by the president of the Town Council and countersigned by the Town
Clerk, who shall affix the seal of the town.



('73 Code, § 12A-2)  (Ord. passed 6-2-75)  Penalty, see § 115.99



SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS



§ 115.30  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in door-to-door soliciting or canvassing within
the town without first having obtained a solicitor's permit from the Chief of
Police in accordance with this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.31  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   Any person issued a solicitor's permit hereunder shall carry the permit
upon his or her person at all times while engaged in the activity permitted;
such persons shall produce the permit upon the demand of any law enforcement
official of the state or town and upon the demand of any person then being
solicited or canvassed by the permit holder.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92)



§ 115.32  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   Each person desiring to engage in door-to-door canvassing or soliciting
within the town shall apply for a permit by providing the Chief of Police
under oath with the following information upon a form to be supplied by the
Chief of Police:



   (A)   Name of solicitor or canvasser;



   (B)   Residence address of solicitor or canvasser;



   (C)   Date of birth and social security number of solicitor or
canvasser;



   (D)   Name of organization or entity being represented by he
solicitor or canvasser, if any;



   (E)   Address, telephone number and name of the town, county or
statewide head of the organization or entity being represented by the
solicitor or canvasser, if any;



   (F)   A brief statement of the nature of the organization or entity
being represented by the solicitor or canvasser, if any;



   (G)   Make, model and license plate of automobile(s) to be used
while soliciting, if any;



   (H)   A statement detailing the past record for convictions of any
crime by the person applying, excluding violations of non-moving traffic
offenses, to include the date and place of conviction and the crime for which
said person was convicted;



   (I)   A statement authorizing the Chief of Police to make inquiry
into the veracity of all information provided upon the application form;



   (J)   A statement acknowledging that the applicant has carefully
read the completed application form, that the information provided is true
and correct to the best of his or her knowledge, and acknowledging that any
statement proven later to have been falsely made will constitute grounds for
denial or revocation of the permit;



   (K)   Customarily acceptable proof of the applicant's identity;



   (L)   The dated signature of the applicant;



   (M)   A statement of the applicant's appellate rights hereunder; and



   (N)   A passport-sized photograph of applicant taken within six
months of application date.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92)



§ 115.33  PERMIT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a fully completed application for a permit
hereunder the Chief of Police shall issue a solicitor and canvasser's permit
within the three business days next following the date of application,
exclusive of Sundays and legal holidays unless he shall find any one of the
following:



      (1)   The applicant has provided false information upon the
application; or



      (2)   The applicant has been adjudicated guilty of having
violated any provision of this subchapter within the 12 months next preceding
the application date; or



      (3)   The applicant has been adjudicated guilty of a crime of
violence, theft, moral turpitude, narcotics, breaking and entering, sexual
assault or violation of the criminal gambling or weapons provisions of Rhode
Island law, federal law or the laws of any other state, within five years
next preceding the application date.



   (B)   If the Chief of Police shall find that any one or more of the
above conditions obtains he shall endorse the application with the word
"denied" over his dated signature across its face and append thereto a brief
statement of his reasons for denying the permit.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92; Am. Ord. 09-16, passed 9-8-09)



§ 115.34  FILING AN APPEAL.



   Any person denied a permit hereunder may within 10 business days of its
denial, excluding Sundays and legal holidays, file a simple written statement
with the Town Clerk claiming an appeal.  Failure to file within the time
stated shall constitute a forfeiture of an applicant's appellate rights
hereunder.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92)



§ 115.35  DOCKETING THE APPEALS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a claim of appeal, the Town Clerk shall place
the written claim upon the agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Town Council, provided it is received prior to the deadline for inclusion
on that agenda and notify the appellant in writing of the date, time and
place of said meeting.



   (B)   If a claim of appeal is received after the deadline for
inclusion on the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council it
shall be placed upon the agenda for the following meeting and the appellate
shall be notified in writing of the site, time and place of said meeting. 



   (C)   Appeals hereunder shall be given first priority upon said
agenda, and if more than one such appeal is received said appeals shall be
ordered upon said agenda according to the date and time of their receipt.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92)



§ 115.36  APPELLATE PROCEDURE.



   The Town Council shall provide a complete and impartial hearing upon
each appeal. The appellant must show by clear and convincing evidence that
the permit was improperly denied.  The Town Council, after hearing the
evidence, shall render its decision at the same meeting at which the evidence
was offered unless there exists good cause for the delay or unless the
applicant consents to a delay.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92)



§ 115.37  APPELLATE RELIEF.



   The Town Council shall be empowered to:



   (A)   Reverse the decision of the Chief of Police and order him in
writing to grant the permit as applied for within 24 hours; or



   (B)   Grant the permit with special conditions reasonably related to
the circumstances shown at the hearings; or



   (C)   Uphold the decision of the Chief of Police by affirming the
denial of the permit.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92)



§ 115.38  OBSERVANCE OF SIGNS.



   No person issued a permit hereunder shall enter upon any private or
public premises whereon there is conspicuously posted a sign or other
artifice clearly purporting to prohibit trespassers, solicitors or canvassers.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.39  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Sollcitors and canvassers shall not be engaged in soliciting
or canvassing upon property or within buildings owned by the town and used
for town business during the hours of town use and operation.



   (B)   Solicitors and canvassers shall not block or cause to be
blocked any highway, street, private or public access within the town.



   (C)   Time limit on soliciting. No person, whether registered under
this subchapter or not, shall go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon
or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any
door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting prior to 9:00
a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.40  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following activities are expressly excluded from the operation and
effect of this subchapter:



   (A)   Otherwise lawful parades;



   (B)   Otherwise lawful assemblies or demonstrations upon public
lands or places; and



   (C)   Any otherwise lawful activity by or on behalf of a legitimate
candidate for public office organized and conducted according to R.I. Gen.
Laws, Title 17 entitled "Elections."



(Ord. passed 3-16-92)



§ 115.41  DESTRUCTION OF PERMIT.



   No person shall destroy or cause to be destroyed any permit issued
hereunder while it remains valid.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.42  DURATION OF PERMIT.



   Permits issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of 30 days from
the date of issue.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92)



JUNKYARDS



§ 115.55  AUTOMOBILE JUNKYARD DEFINED.



   For the purposes of this subchapter and as used herein, the term
AUTOMOBILE JUNK YARD connotes a place where three or more unserviceable,
discarded, worn-out or junked automobiles, or bodies, engines, tires, parts
or accessories thereof, are gathered together or stored.



('73 Code, § 14-1)  (Ord. passed 3-21-66)



§ 115.56  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business of purchasing, selling,
bartering or dealing in junk, old metal or second-hand articles, including
unserviceable, discarded, worn-out or junked automobiles, or the parts
thereof, whether as keeper of a shop or storehouse for the reception thereof,
or as a gatherer thereof in any container or conveyance, or shall establish,
operate or maintain an automobile junkyard, unless such person shall be duly
licensed by the Council, and such license shall be issued subject to the
conditions and restrictions hereinafter set forth.



('73 Code, § 14-2)  (Ord. passed 3-21-66)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.57  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Every applicant for any license authorized to be granted hereunder
shall set forth on a form, to be furnished by the Town Clerk, the following
information:



   (A)   Name and address, both of residence and of business, of the
applicant.



   (B)   Business or employment of the applicant during the five years
next preceding the application.



   (C)   Age of the applicant.



   (D)   Such other information as may reasonably be required by the
Council to enable it to determine the eligibility of the applicant for the
license applied for.



('73 Code, § 14-3)  (Ord. passed 3-21-66) 



§ 115.58  HEARING ON APPLICATION, OBJECTIONS.



   (A)   The Council, before granting a license hereunder to keep a
shop or storehouse for the reception of any junk, old metals or other
secondhand articles or to establish, operate or maintain an automobile
junkyard, in any location not lawfully occupied for such purpose at the time
of application for such license, shall hold a public hearing, notice of which
shall be posted at least seven days but not more than 14 days prior to such
hearing, in not less than two public places in the town, and in a newspaper
of general circulation in the town; provided, that before the Council shall
post or publish notice of such hearing, it shall collect from the applicant
for such license a fee of $10, plus the cost of publishing and posting such
notice.



   (B)   No license shall be issued to the keeper of any shop or
storehouse for the reception of any junk, old metals or other second-hand
articles or to a person establishing, operating or maintaining an automobile
junkyard, in any location not lawfully occupied for such purpose at the time
of the application for such license, where the owners or occupants of the
greater part of the land within 200 feet of such building or place proposed
for the location of such junkyard shall file with the Council their objection
to the granting of such license.



('73 Code, § 14-4)  (Ord. passed 3-21-66) 



§ 115.59  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR AUTO JUNKYARD.



   (A)   No license shall be granted for an automobile junkyard, other
than one operated and maintained entirely within a building, unless:



      (1)   It is more than 600 feet from any state highway; and



      (2)   It is more than 300 feet from any park, bathing beach,
playground, school, church or cemetery and is not within ordinary view
therefrom; and



      (3)   It is screened from view by natural objects or
buildings, or by a well constructed and properly maintained fence at least
six feet high, or by planting shrubs, trees or flowering plants, the foliage
of which provides a suitable and sufficient screen, such screening to be such
as is acceptable to said town and so specified on the license.



   (B)   The provisions of divisions (A)(1) and (2), however, shall not
apply to any automobile junkyard in existence as of May 6, 1966, and having a
valid license issued pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 5-21-1.



('73 Code, § 14-5)  (Ord. passed 3-21-66) 



§ 115.60  DURATION, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   All licenses granted under the provisions of this subchapter shall
expire one year from the date of their issuance.  Any license may be
suspended or revoked by the Council for any violation or failure to observe
the conditions and restrictions of this subchapter, or of any state law
pertaining to such business, and in such case no rebate shall be made from
the annual license fee.



('73 Code, § 14-7)  (Ord. passed 3-21-66) 



§ 115.61  POLICE INSPECTION.



   Every shop, storehouse, container, conveyance or place of business of
any person licensed under this subchapter shall be subject to the inspection
and examination of the Chief of Police or any of his authorized agents.



('73 Code, § 14-9)  (Ord. passed 3-21-66) 



§ 115.62  TRANSACTIONS WITH UNLICENSED MINORS PROHIBITED.



   No person licensed as herein provided shall directly or indirectly
either purchase or receive in barter or exchange any of the materials or
articles designated in § 115.46 from any minor unless such minor shall be
licensed in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



('73 Code, § 14-8)  (Ord. passed 3-21-66)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.63  BURNING REGULATIONS.



   The burning of materials on the premises that may be licensed under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be subject to such regulation as may from
time to time be issued by the Council, or by the Fire Chief if this authority
is specifically delegated to him by the Council, for the purpose of
preventing, so far as possible, burning that may produce obnoxious odors or
cause smoke in such volume as to be a nuisance to occupants of land adjoining
the licensed premises.



('73 Code, § 14-10)  (Ord. passed 3-21-66)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§ 115.15 or
115.16 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned for not more than 30
days.



('73 Code, § 12A-3)  (Ord. passed 6-2-75) 



   (B)   Any person adjudicated guilty of violating any provision of §
115.30 through § 115.42 by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be
subject to revocation of his or her active permit and a fine of up to $100.00
and/or 30 days imprisonment for each offense.



(Ord. passed 3-16-92)



   (C)   Any person who engages in the business of buying, selling,
bartering or dealing in junk, old metals or second-hand articles, including
second-hand automobiles, without having a currently valid license as
hereinbefore provided, or who violates any of the provisions of §§ 115.55
through 115.63, shall, on conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $100 or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



   (D)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which
there is not otherwise a penalty shall be subject to the penalty of § 10.99.



CHAPTER 116:  BODY WORKS SERVICES



Section




General Provisions




   116.01   Legislative findings, intent and authority



   116.02   Licenses required



   116.03   Authority to promulgate rules



   116.04   Fees for licenses; non-transferability



   116.05   Expiration date of licenses



   116.06   Definitions



   116.07   Exceptions and exclusions



   116.08   Display of licenses



   116.09   Advertisement



   116.10   Required records



   116.11   Supervisor



   116.12   Requirements for licensure of body works personnel



   116.13   Requirements for licensure of body works establishment



   116.14   Employee and independent contractor restrictions



   116.15   Sanitation and decency code



   116.16   Facilities



   116.17   Criminal background check




Enforcement




   116.96   Suspension and revocation of license



   116.97   Public nuisance



   116.98   Civil injunction



 



   116.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 116.01  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS, INTENT AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Town Council has become aware of the existence in other
Rhode Island communities of  body works establishments, massage parlors, and
spas, which facilities are in fact being used and operated as brothels and
for sex trafficking.



   (B)   The Town Council has determined that such establishments are
contrary to the general health, safety and welfare of the town.



   (C)   The Town Council desires to establish rules and regulations to
govern such establishments for the protection of the general health, safety,
welfare and good of the residents of the town.



   (D)   The Town Council believes that it is in the best interest of
the town to establish its rules and regulations prior to the establishment of
any such businesses in the town.



   (E)   This section is established pursuant to the authority granted
in R.I. Gen. Laws, § 23-20.8-3(h).



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-13, passed 9-6-16)



§ 116.02  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Body works personnel license. All personnel must obtain a body
works personnel license issued by the Town Council before performing, or
offering to perform, any body works services for hire, compensation or
reward; before being compensated for any services or work in any
establishment; and before conducting any type of business for reward, hire or
compensation within any establishment.



   (B)   Body works establishment license.  All persons, firms,
corporations or other entities that own, operate, conduct or manage a
location used to provide body works services, or that holds themselves out as
being engaged in the practice of body works services at any location in the
town, must obtain a body works establishment license for that location from
the Town Council before offering, engaging in, providing or allowing body
works services for hire, reward or compensation at that location.



   (C)   Location of body works services.  No person, firm,
corporation or other entity shall perform, or offer to perform, body works
services within the town at any location other than a duly licensed body
works establishment.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.03  AUTHORITY TO PROMULGATE RULES.



   The Town Council is hereby authorized to formulate rules and
regulations governing body work personnel and body work establishments, and
to establish fees for the issuance of licenses thereunder.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)



§ 116.04  FEES FOR LICENSES; NON-TRANSFERABILITY.



   (A)   Body works personnel license.  The fee to obtain a body works
personnel license, and any renewal thereof, shall be $75.  The license is
not transferable.



   (B)   Body works establishment license.  The fee to obtain a body
works establishment license, and any renewal thereof, shall be $250.  The
license is not transferable.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)



§ 116.05  EXPIRATION DATE OF LICENSES.



   Body works personnel licenses and body works establishment licenses
shall automatically expire on the July 1 of each year.  Applications for
renewal must be submitted at least 30 days prior to expiration date.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.06  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Any person who applies for a license as required by this
chapter. In the event the applicant is a non-natural person (e.g., a
corporation), the term APPLICANT shall also include a natural person legally
authorized to act on behalf of the APPLICANT, and the person submitting the
application to the Town Council pursuant to this chapter.



   APPROVED.  Licenses APPROVED by the Town Council in accordance with
accepted standards.



   BODY RUBS and BODY STIMULATIONS.   The manipulation or conditioning of
part or parts of the body by any means not regulated by R.I. Gen. Laws Ch.
23-20.8.



   BODY WORKS and BODY WORKS SERVICES.  Body rubs, body stimulations,
manipulation or conditioning of any part or parts of the body, spa services,
and spa treatments performed by any person not licensed under R.I. Gen. Laws,
Title 23.



   BODY WORKS ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.  The license required by §
116.02(B) of this chapter.



   BODY WORKS PERSONNEL LICENSE.  The license required by § 116.02(A) of
this chapter.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  The office, place of business, premise or location
where body works are offered or provided for hire, reward or compensation.



   INSPECTOR.  Includes, but is not limited to, the Police Chief, the
Fire Chief, the Building Official and/or the Fire Marshal, and/or their
designees.



   PERSONNEL.  Any person who performs body works services for hire,
compensation or reward, or any person who is employed by or otherwise
compensated by any establishment as defined herein, or any person who is
permitted by an establishment to conduct any type of business for reward,
hire or compensation within that establishment.



   SPA SERVICES and SPA TREATMENTS.   Any service or treatment not
regulated by R.I. Gen. Laws Ch. 23-20.8, provided to treat the skin or body
for remedial, hygienic, relaxation or other purposes, including but not
limited to, vapor, pool, baths, saunas, dry saunas, towel treatments,
showers, body scrubs and body showers.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks,
or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola.



   SUPERVISOR.  The person or persons designated by an establishment to
ensure compliance with this chapter.



   TOWN.  The Town of Middletown, Rhode Island.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-13, passed 9-6-16)



§ 116.07  EXCEPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   Persons excepted. Physicians, nurses, physical therapists,
school athletic trainers, chiropodists, chiropractors, massage therapists,
barbers, hair dressers, manicurists and estheticians duly licensed by the
state are exempt from the license requirements of § 116.02(A) of this
chapter.



   (B)   Establishments excepted. Hospitals, nursing and convalescent
homes, and other similar licensed institutions where massage and baths may be
given, are exempt from the license requirements of § 116.02(B) of this
chapter.  Also, any facility conducting services of a hospital, nursing and
convalescent home, or other similar institutions as determined by the Town
Council, but due to some limiting factor is not subject to licensing, shall
be similarly exempt from the license requirements of § 116.02(B) of this
chapter.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)



§ 116.08  DISPLAY OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Body works personnel license.  Every licensee shall carry his
or her original personnel license at all times when on the premise of an
establishment during its hours of operation. Additionally, every licensee
shall display his or her original personnel license in a conspicuous manner
whenever practicing or providing body works for hire, reward or compensation.



   (B)   Body works establishment license.  The body works
establishment license shall be conspicuously displayed in a public area of
the body works establishment at all times.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)



§ 116.09  ADVERTISEMENT.



   No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall advertise any body
works services, unless such services are to be performed by a licensed body
works personnel, and the advertisement includes the body works personnel
license number(s) of the person or persons offering to provide the body works
services, and the body works establishment license number of the
establishment where such services are to be performed.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.10  REQUIRED RECORDS.



   Each body works establishment shall maintain records of all personnel
on the premises.  The records shall be subject to inspection upon request by
any inspector, and/or his or her designee.  The records shall include the
following:



   (A)   Each personnel’s full legal name, date of birth, home
address, and telephone number, employment position, date first employed and,
if applicable, date terminated.



   (B)   The number and expiration date of each personnel’s body
works personnel license.



   (C)   All current personnel records and records of all personnel
associated with the establishment for the previous year.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.11  SUPERVISOR.



   Each body works establishment shall designate at least one supervisor
who is responsible for the body work establishment’s compliance with this
chapter.  The supervisor shall agree to be on the premises of any body works
establishment whenever it is open to the public, and shall agree to be
responsible for cooperating with inspections or investigations conducted by
the inspectors authorized to inspect the establishment pursuant to this
chapter, or any other applicable section or chapter of this code of
ordinances, or the Rhode Island General Laws.  Upon the request of any
authorized inspector, the supervisor shall immediately provide personnel
records required by this chapter to be maintained on the premises.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.12  REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSURE OF BODY WORKS PERSONNEL.



   Before performing, or offering to perform, body works services for
hire, compensation or reward, or conducting any type of business for hire,
compensation or reward within any establishment, all personnel shall submit
an application to the Town Council that includes the following information:



   (A)   The full legal name and any other names used by the applicant.



   (B)   The current residential address and telephone number of the
applicant, and the two previous residential addresses and business addresses,
if any.



   (C)   The applicant’s height, weight, eye color, and hair color.



   (D)   Written proof, to the satisfaction of the Town Council, that
the applicant is at least 18 years of age.



   (E)   The applicant’s business, occupational or employment history
for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application.



   (F)   The body works personnel or similar license history of the
applicant; including whether that person, in previously operating in the town
or another city, county or state under a license or permit, has had that
license or permit revoked or suspended; and the reasons and dates for the
revocation or suspension.



   (G)   All criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations.



   (H)   The name(s) of the body works establishment(s) at which the
applicant plans to be employed.  If the applicant intends to work at
multiple establishments, he or she shall designate a primary address for
receiving all correspondence related to his or her permit renewal.



   (I)   Such other identification and information as may be required
by the Town Council to verify the truth of the matters specified in this
section, or any additional information required to show that the applicant
has met the minimum qualifications to be licensed pursuant of this chapter.



   (J)   An application is deemed complete and validly filed when the
Town Council has received all information required by this code, the results
of a Department of Justice and Rhode Island Bureau of Criminal Identification
criminal background check, and any fees associated with the application.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)



§ 116.13  REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSURE OF BODY WORKS ESTABLISHMENT.



   Before conducting any type of business for reward, hire or compensation
within any establishment, all persons, firms, corporations or other entities
who own, operate or conduct an establishment shall first submit an
application to the Town Council that includes the following information:



   (A)   The full legal name any other names used by the applicant. 
If the applicant is:



      (1)   An individual, the individual shall state his/her full
legal name;



      (2)   A partnership, the name of the partnership shall be set
forth exactly as shown in its partnership agreement.  The information
required by this section shall be furnished for the responsible person;



      (3)   A corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set
forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation.  The information
required by this section shall be furnished for the responsible person.



   (B)   The current residential address and the telephone number of
the applicant, and the two previous residential addresses and business
addresses, if any.



   (C)   Written proof, to the satisfaction of the Town Council, that
the applicant is at least 18 years of age.



   (D)   The applicant’s occupational or employment history for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the application.



   (E)   If the applicant intends to practice body works at the
proposed establishment, a copy of his or her body works personnel license.



   (F)   The body works establishment or similar business license
history of the applicant; including whether that person, in previously
operating in the town or another city, county or state under a license or
permit, has had that license or permit revoked or suspended; and the reasons
and dates for the revocation or suspension.



   (G)   All criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations.



   (H)   A statement of how many personnel the applicant intends to
employ at the establishment.



   (I)   The full name, address and telephone number of every personnel
who will be associated with the proposed establishment, and a copy of every
proposed personnel’s body works personnel license.



   (J)   The full name, address and telephone number of each personnel
who will be designated as the supervisor for the proposed establishment, and
a copy of each proposed supervisor's body works personnel license.



   (K)   Information demonstrating that the proposed establishment is
consistent with the applicable land use designation and town zoning code.



   (L)   Written proof that the proposed establishment is compliant
with all applicable health, safety, building, fire safety, and sanitary
standards under this code of ordinances and the Rhode Island General Laws.



   (M)   Where a building permit is necessary as a prerequisite to
occupancy of a building, the body works establishment license application is
not complete and validly filed until proof of submittal of the building
permit application is provided.



   (N)   Such other identification and information as may be required
by the Town Council to verify the truth of the matters specified in this
section, or any additional information required to show that the applicant
has met the minimum qualifications to be licensed pursuant of this chapter.



   (O)   An application is deemed complete and validly filed when the
Town Council has received all information required by this code, the results
of a Department of Justice and Rhode Island Bureau of Criminal Identification
criminal background check, and any fees associated with the application.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)



§ 116.14  EMPLOYEE AND INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR RESTRICTIONS.



   It is a violation of this chapter for any person, partnership,
corporation, establishment, owner or other entity to employ any person not
holding a personnel license for the purpose of providing body works; to
employ any person not holding a personnel license to work in an establishment
in any capacity; or to allow any person not holding a personnel license to
provide or offer to provide body works services or otherwise conduct business
in the Establishment.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.15  SANITATION AND DECENCY CODE.



   (A)   All personnel engaged in the practice of body works shall wear
garments that cover the entire body, exclusive of the head, neck, arms, legs,
hands and feet.  All personnel must be fully covered from a point not more
than four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck,
excluding the arms.  Such garments shall not be transparent and must be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any personnel to directly or indirectly
touch, or offer to touch, a customer’s specified anatomical areas.



   (C)   All customers’ specified anatomical areas must be fully
draped at all times while any personnel is in the same cubicle or room.



   (D)   No instruments or devices designed or used for direct
application to the skin shall be applied directly to the skin unless
sterilized.  The part of the body being treated shall be covered with a
clean towel, or else the instrument shall be covered in a similar manner.



   (E)   Cleaning of hands.  All personnel shall thoroughly cleanse
his or her hands by washing with soap and hot water immediately before
providing body works services.



   (F)   Working hours.  No establishment shall offer or provide body
works services between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.



   (G)   Designation of name.  No licensed person shall operate under
any name or conduct his or her business under any designation not specified
in his or her license.



   (H)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person, partnership,
corporation, establishment, owner or any other entity to conduct, cause to be
conducted, or allow to be conducted in any establishment any activity
prohibited by R.I. Gen. Laws Title 11, Chapters 11-1 et seq.



   (I)   Change of address.  Every licensee shall notify the Town
Council not longer than five days after any change of name or of home or
business address.  Any new license or amendment to an existing license
required because of the foregoing shall be issued with a set fee charge at
the discretion of the Town Council.



   (J)   Inspections.  Town inspectors may at any time, with or
without prior notice, inspect an establishment and the manner of its
operation to insure that it is operating in compliance with this chapter.



   (K)   Devices that can be utilized as an early warning system to
alert personnel, supervisors, owners or any other persons to the presence of
law enforcement or local authorities on the premises are prohibited in
establishments.  Such prohibited devices include, but are not limited to,
light or music dimmers, electronic detection devices, external or internal
video equipment and alarm systems other than those used for fire alarms.



   (L)   Invalidation. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of these rules and regulations shall be decided invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of these
regulations that shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the
provisions of these regulations are hereby declared severable.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.16  FACILITIES.



   Every establishment shall meet the following standards:



   (A)   It shall be connected to the public sewerage system, or an
approved private sanitary sewage system in the event public sewerage is not
available.



   (B)   It shall be well lighted, well ventilated and properly heated
when seasonally indicated.



   (C)   No room used by personnel or an establishment to provide body
works may be used as a residence or sleeping quarters.



   (D)   There shall be an adequate supply of hot and cold running
water at all times.



   (E)   There shall be approved toilet and washing facilities within
the premises, readily available to the patrons and affording sufficient
privacy.



   (F)   Adequate dressing rooms, toilets and washing facilities shall
be provided.



   (G)   All rooms and furniture and equipment therein shall be kept
clean at all times.



   (H)   There shall be installed a heat and smoke detecting system
approved by the town Fire Marshal.



   (I)   There shall be adequate facilities for  cleaning and
sterilizing to prevent infectious organisms.



   (J)   All rooms shall be arranged so as to afford adequate fire
protection, and shall have satisfactory means of egress in case of fire as
approved by the Building Inspector and Fire Marshal.



   (K)   All equipment, instruments, devices, robes, sheets, blankets,
pillow cases, wearing apparel, towels and other materials that may come in
direct contact with the body shall be properly cleaned and sterilized.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.17  CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK.



   (A)   Any person applying for a license under this chapter shall
undergo a criminal background check. Such persons shall apply to the
Middletown Police Department (the "Department") for a nationwide criminal
records check. Fingerprinting shall be required. Upon the discovery of any
disqualifying information as defined in division (B), the department shall
inform the applicant, in writing, of the nature of the disqualifying
information and, without disclosing the nature of the disqualifying
information, shall notify the Town Council, in writing, that disqualifying
information has been found. In those situations in which no disqualifying
information has been found, the department shall inform the applicant and the
Town Council in writing of this fact. An applicant against whom disqualifying
information has been found may request that a copy of the criminal background
report be sent to the Town Council, which shall make a judgment regarding the
licensure of the applicant. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of
the costs of the criminal records check.



   (B)   "Disqualifying information" means those offenses, including,
but not limited to, those offenses defined in R.I. Gen. Laws, §§ 11-37,
11-37-8.1. 11-37-8.3, 23-17-37, 11-34 and 11-34.1.



(Ord. 2016-13, passed 9-6-16)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 116.96  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Whenever the Town Council or Town Administrator shall have
reason to believe that any person licensed under this chapter has been
convicted of any sexual offense, or that any person is operating in violation
of this chapter or any regulations promulgated under this chapter, the Town
Council or Town Administrator, may, pending an investigation and hearing,
suspend for a period not exceeding 90 days any license issued under authority
of this chapter, and the Town Council may, after due notice and hearing,
revoke the license if it is found that the person is operating in violation
of those rules and regulations or any provision of this chapter. The holder
of a license shall upon its revocation promptly surrender it to the Town
Clerk. Revocation shall be in addition to any other penalty that may be
imposed as a result of a violation.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Town Council or Town
Administrator refusing to grant an application for a license under this
chapter, or suspending or revoking any license already issued may, within 30
days, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, after receiving notice of that
decision or order of the Town Council or Town Administrator, seek review of
said decision or order by the Superior Court in the manner provided for in
R.I. Gen. Laws, Title 42, Chapter 35.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-13, passed 9-6-16)



§ 116.97  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
of the provisions in this chapter shall be, and is hereby declared to be, a
public nuisance and shall, at the discretion of the town, be a cause of
action pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 10-1-1 et seq.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)



§ 116.98  CIVIL INJUNCTION.



   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be, and is hereby
declared to be, contrary to the public interest, and shall, at the discretion
of the town, create cause for injunctive relief.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Criminal penalties.  In addition to any applicable provision
of this chapter or of the Rhode Island General Laws, any violation of this
chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and is punishable as follows:



      (1)   Upon a first conviction, by a fine not exceeding $100;



      (2)   Upon the second conviction within one year of a prior
conviction, by a fine not exceeding $200, and by imprisonment not exceeding
30 consecutive days; and



      (3)   Upon any subsequent conviction within one year of two
prior convictions, by a fine not exceeding $500, and by imprisonment not
exceeding one year.



   (B)   Separate offense for each day. Any person, firm, corporation
or other entity that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any
such entity commits, continues, permits or causes a violation thereof.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 9-21-15)



CHAPTER 117:  ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   117.01   Legislative findings and intent



   117.02   Definitions



   117.03   Operating requirements



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND INTENT.



   The Town Council of the Town of Middletown, Rhode Island, finds:



   (A)   The Constitution of the State of Rhode Island, Article XIII,
Section 2, grants to the Town of Middletown the power to "enact and amend
local laws relating to its property, affairs and government" as long as such
local laws are consistent with the Constitution and laws enacted by the
General Assembly. This delegation of power includes the police power to enact
reasonable legislation to regulate and supervise adult-oriented
establishments in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Numerous studies based on a substantial number of cities and
towns in the United States demonstrate that:



      (1)   Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent
adult-oriented establishments, especially those which provide closed booths,
cubicles, stalls or rooms for the private viewing of so-called "adult" motion
pictures and/or video tapes and/or live entertainment;



      (2)   Such closed booths, cubicles, stalls and rooms are often
used by patrons to engage in sexual acts;



      (3)   Male and female prostitutes frequent adult-oriented
establishments to provide sex for hire to patrons in such booths, cubicles,
stalls and rooms; 



      (4)   The use of doors, curtains, blinds or other closures on
the entrances of such booths, cubicles, stalls and rooms facilitates and
encourages their use for sexual acts between patrons and prostitutes or other
persons, thereby promoting prostitution and the commission of sexual acts
which cause blood, semen and urine to be deposited on the floors and/or walls
of such enclosed areas;



      (5)   Patrons and other persons who enter such booths,
cubicles, stalls and rooms may come into contact with deposits of blood,
semen and urine, endangering their health and safety; and



      (6)   The reasonable regulation and supervision of
adult-oriented establishments tends to discourage sexual acts and
prostitution. Conversely, a failure to impose such regulation and supervision
is likely to be detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety of the
citizens of the town.



   (C)   The potential problems associated with adult-oriented
establishments require special supervision from the town's public safety
agencies in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of
patrons and other persons in such establishments, as well as the health,
safety and welfare of the town's citizens.



   (D)   The intent of the Council in enacting this chapter is to
impose comprehensive, reasonable regulations on adult-oriented establishments
in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the town. It is not the intent of the Council to deny to any person rights to
speech protected by the Constitutions of the United States or the State of
Rhode Island, nor is it the intent of the Council to impose any limitations
or restrictions on the sale, distribution, exhibition, viewing or possession
of any non-obscene materials, including sexually-oriented films, video-tapes,
books or other materials, except content-neutral time, place and manner
regulations permitted by law.



(Ord. passed 4-20-98)



§ 117.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  All
words and phrases in this chapter, whether defined in this section or not,
shall be interpreted so as to carry out the Council's intent as stated in §
117.01.



   ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE.  Any amusement machine that is regularly used
for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
proscribed sexual activities for observation by patrons.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE.  Any establishment which:



      (a)   Has a substantial portion of its stock and trade in
books, films, video cassettes, or magazines or other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on proscribed sexual
activities; and



      (b)   Presents adult entertainment for patrons.



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT.  Any exhibition or display of proscribed sexual
activity to patrons, by an entertainer or employee of an adult-oriented
establishment or by any mechanical, electrical or electronic machine or
device.



   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  An enclosed building with a
capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on proscribed sexual activity
for observation by patrons.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.   An enclosed building with a capacity
of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on proscribed sexual activity for observation by
patrons.



   ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT.  An adult bookstore, adult motion
picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, and any other business or
premises accessible to the public which regularly offers or presents any
proscribed sexual activity to patrons, whether or not in booths, cubicles,
stalls or rooms separate from the common areas of the premises. This
definition includes any adult entertainment studio or any premises that are
physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an
adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter
studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, or similar term. However, this
definition does not include any establishment that serves alcoholic or cereal
malt beverages for consumption on the premises and is regulated under §
111.09 of the Town Code.



   AMUSEMENT MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electrical or electronic machine
or device, except jukeboxes, billiard tables or pool tables, which upon the
payment of a charge or upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate,
disk, or card may be operated as a game or for entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score. Examples of AMUSEMENT MACHINES include
pinball machines, skillball, mechanical grab machines, electronic baseball,
football, hockey or basketball machines, air propelled machines or games,
shooting games, video games, and video monitoring machines.



   COUNCIL.  The Town Council of the Town of Middletown, Rhode Island.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person, including an independent contractor, who
renders any services in an adult-oriented establishment directly related to
any of its adult-oriented activities.



   ENTERTAINER.  Any person who performs or presents entertainment in an
adult-oriented establishment for wages, gratuities, or any other kind of
compensation, whether as an employee, contractor or guest of the
establishment.



   INSPECTOR.  The zoning enforcement officer of the town, or an employee
of the town Building Department or town Police Department, or any other
person who is designated to inspect premises regulated under this chapter.



   MINOR.  A person under the age of 18 years.



   OPERATOR.  The property owner, owner of the business, license holder,
manager, person in charge, or any person operating an adult-oriented
establishment.



   PROSCRIBED SEXUAL ACTIVITY:



      (a)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality,
oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts prohibited by law;



      (b)   Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breasts; and



      (c)   The display of post-pubertal human genitals, buttocks or
pubic area, or the female breast below the top of the nipple, whether or not
these body areas or parts are covered or screened with a transparent or
semi-transparent material.



PROSCRIBED SEXUAL ACTIVITY does not include bona fide medical or educational
publications or films; art or photography publications which devote at least
25% of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with the subjects of
art or photography; news periodicals containing photographs of nude or
semi-nude persons in connection with the dissemination of the news; or
publications or films which publish photographs or depictions of nude or
semi-nude persons when describing human cultures in which nudity or
semi-nudity is indigenous to the population.



(Ord. passed 4-20-98)



§ 117.03  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Adult-oriented establishments shall be subject to all of the
following requirements:



      (1)   Adult-oriented establishments shall be well-lighted
whenever they are open for business. Overhead lighting in such establishments
shall illuminate every area accessible to patrons at an intensity level of
not less than one footcandle, as measured at the floor level.



      (2)   Adult-oriented establishments shall be physically
arranged so that the entire interior of any booths, cubicles, stalls or rooms
used for adult entertainment is clearly visible from the common areas of the
premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles, stalls or rooms shall not be
blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, blinds or any other closure,
obstruction or screen.



      (3)   Adult-oriented establishments shall have windows on each
side of the establishment facing a public way. The area of such windows shall
not be less than three square feet for every lineal foot of each side facing
a public way. No window facing a public way may be covered or obscured to any
extent, so that the interior is clearly visible through such windows at every
point.



      (4)   Adult-oriented establishments shall be open to
inspection by one or more inspectors, without advance notice, whenever they
are open for business and at any other reasonable time. Every room and every
area of the establishment shall be subject to inspection.



      (5)   No adult-oriented establishment may be operated on a lot
that is less than 500 feet from any church, school, child-care facility,
park, or from the nearest boundary of any residential district.



      (6)   No adult-oriented establishment may be operated on a lot
that is less than 1,000 feet from an existing adult-oriented establishment.



   (B)   The following conduct is expressly prohibited in
adult-oriented establishments:



      (1)   No minor shall be admitted to or remain upon any part of
an adult-oriented establishment, including parking lots and other exterior
areas.



      (2)   No entertainer in an adult-oriented establishment, while
performing or entertaining, shall come within five feet of any patron or
receive any tips or other gift or remuneration directly from any patron. If
the establishment uses a stage for entertainment, all entertainers shall
remain on the stage and all patrons shall remain off the stage during such
entertainment.



      (3)   No entertainer or employee or any other person in an
adult-oriented establishment shall engage in any proscribed sexual activity
defined in § 117.02.



   (C)   Every adult-oriented establishment already in operation in the
town on the effective date of this chapter shall comply with all of its
requirements and provisions except the location and window requirements of §
117.03(A)(3), (5) and (6) above; provided, however, that any existing windows
facing a public way in such establishments shall not be removed, reduced in
size, or covered or obscured to any extent.



   (D)   Responsibilities of operators and employees:



      (1)   The operator of an adult-oriented establishment has an
affirmative duty to ensure full compliance with all of the operating
requirements stated in § 117.03(A) above and all of the specific
prohibitions stated in § 117.03(B) above.



      (2)   Each employee of an adult-oriented establishment has an
affirmative duty to ensure full compliance with all of the specific
prohibitions stated in § 117.03(B) above.



      (3)   The affirmative duties of operators and employees
prescribed by this section is not limited by the provisions of any employment
or other contract.



(Ord. passed 4-20-98)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Each operator of an adult-oriented establishment, whether or
not on the premises at the time of the violation, shall be subject to
punishment as prescribed in this chapter for all offenses occurring on the
premises, except that operators whose responsibilities are limited by an
employment contract or agreement to certain defined periods of time shall be
subject to punishment only for offenses occurring during such time. The
responsibility of an operator under this provision shall not be affected by
any responsibility of an employee for the same offense.



   (B)   Each employee of an adult-oriented establishment who observed
or should have observed an offense under § 117.03(B), or whose
responsibilities include the prevention of such offenses, and who condoned,
allowed, or failed to take immediate action to stop such offense, shall be
subject to punishment for such offense.



   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and/or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days.



   (D)   Each violation of any of the requirements of § 117.03(A) and
any of the prohibitions of § 117.03(B) shall be considered a separate
offense, and any violation continuing for more than one day shall be
considered a separate offense for each day of violation.



   (E)   The repeated violation of any provision of this chapter by any
operator of an adult-oriented establishment shall be deemed a public
nuisance. For purposes of this provision, repeated violation may be shown by
proof of five or more separate violations, as defined in this chapter, within
a six-month period.



(Ord. passed 4-20-98)



CHAPTER 118:  TOBACCO REGULATIONS



Section



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   License required



   118.03   License eligibility



   118.04   License application; term



   118.05   Requirements and prohibitions applicable to licensees



   118.06   Suspension or revocation of license; fines and costs



   118.07   Use of premises during license suspension



   118.08   Vending machines



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR. A distinguishable taste or aroma, other than the
taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint, or wintergreen, imparted either
prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product or component part
thereof, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas relating to any
fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage,
herb, or spice; provided, however, that no tobacco product shall be
determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because of the use of
additives or flavorings or the provision of ingredient information.



   CIGAR.  Any roll of tobacco other than a cigarette wrapped entirely or
in part in tobacco or any substance containing tobacco and weighing more than
four pounds per thousand.



   CIGARETTE.



      (1)   Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance
not containing tobacco, and



      (2)   Any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing
tobacco which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the
filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or
purchased by, consumers as a cigarette described in division (1) above.



   COMPONENT PART. Any element of a tobacco product, including, but not
limited to, the tobacco, filter, and paper, but not including any constituent.



   CONSTITUENT. Any ingredient, substance, chemical, or compound, other
than tobacco, water, or reconstituted tobacco sheet, which is added by the
manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacture, or
packing of the tobacco product. Such term shall include a smoke constituent.



   CONSUMER. A person who purchases a tobacco product for consumption and
not for sale to another.



   COUPON. Any voucher, rebate, card, paper, note, form, statement,
ticket, image, or other issue; whether in paper, digital, or other form; used
for commercial purposes to obtain an article, product, service, or
accommodation without charge or at a discounted price.



   DISTINGUISHABLE. Perceivable by an ordinary consumer by either the
sense of smell or taste.



   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. An electronic device which can be used to
deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold
separately. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE includes any such electronic smoking
device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic
cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe,
and electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. ELECTRONIC
SMOKING DEVICE does not include any product that has been approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and
sold solely for such an approved purpose.



   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any business which does not
sell food or beverages and for which the principal or core business is
selling electronic smoking devices, as evidenced by any of the following: 33%
or more of floor or display area is devoted to electronic smoking devices;
or  67% or more of gross sales receipts are derived from electronic smoking
devices.



   FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any tobacco product, other than a cigarette,
that contains a constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor.



   FULL RETAIL PRICE.  The higher of the price listed for a tobacco
product on its packaging or the price listed on any related shelving,
posting, advertising, or display where the tobacco product is sold or offered
for sale, plus all applicable taxes and fees if such taxes and fees are not
included in the listed price, and before the application of any discounts or
coupons.



   LITTLE CIGAR. Any roll of tobacco other than a cigarette wrapped
entirely or in part in tobacco or any substance containing tobacco and
weighing no more than four pounds per thousand. LITTLE CIGAR includes, but is
not limited to, tobacco products known or labeled as "small cigar" or "little
cigar."



   NON-CIGARETTE TOBACCO PRODUCT. A tobacco product that is not a
cigarette.



   PACKAGE OR PACKAGING. A pack, box, carton, or container of any kind or,
if no other container, any wrapping (including cellophane) in which a tobacco
product is sold or offered for sale to a consumer.



   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, firm, limited liability
company, joint stock company, corporation, proprietorship or employee
thereof, or other legal entity.



   SALE or SELL. Any transfer, exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, or
distribution for a commercial purpose, in any manner or by any means
whatsoever.



   SMOKE CONSTITUENT. Any chemical or chemical compound in mainstream or
sidestream tobacco product smoke that either transfers from any component of
the tobacco product to the smoke or that is formed by the combustion or
heating of tobacco, additives, or other component of the tobacco product.



   TOBACCO PRODUCT.



      (1)   Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or
nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoke, heated,
chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any
other means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, and snuff; and



      (2)   Any electronic device that delivers nicotine or other
substances to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited
to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any provision of divisions (1) and (2)
above to the contrary, TOBACCO PRODUCT includes any component, part, or
accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately, TOBACCO
PRODUCT does not include any product that has been approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product
or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and sold
solely for such an approved purpose.



   TOWN. The Town of Middletown, Rhode Island.



   TOWN COUNCIL. The Middletown Town Council.



   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric, or electronic self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-19-17; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 12-4-17)



§ 118.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or to possess with the
intention of selling tobacco products within the town, including without
limitation, the sale of tobacco products through vending machines, without
having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license from the Town Council
pursuant to this chapter. Such license shall be in addition to any other
license required by state and/or federal law, shall not be transferable and
shall be valid only for the location specified in the license. Failure to
obtain and maintain a valid license shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 and revocation or
suspension of license, as set forth in § 118.06 of this chapter. The fee for
the tobacco dealer's license shall be $100 per year. All licenses granted
under the provisions of this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place within the business so licensed.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-19-17; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 12-4-17)



§ 118.03  LICENSE ELIGIBILITY.



   Licenses shall only be granted to authorize the sale of tobacco
products within the town at a fixed location. The sale of tobacco products by
persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-19-17; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 12-4-17)



§ 118.04 LICENSE APPLICATION; TERM.



   Applications for tobacco dealer's licenses shall be submitted to the
Town Clerk. Licenses shall automatically expire on July 1 of each year.
Applications for renewal must be submitted at least 30 days prior to the
expiration date. No license shall be granted without proof that the applicant
has obtained all necessary state and/or federal licenses for the sale of
tobacco products. No license fees shall be prorated.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-19-17; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 12-4-17)



§ 118.05  REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS APPLICABLE TO LICENSEES.



   (A)   No licensee, or employee or agent of such licensee, shall sell
or possess with the intention of selling a tobacco product to another person
who appears to be under the age of 27 years without first examining the
identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the
minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product.



   (B)   Display of price. The price of each tobacco product offered
for sale shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed to clearly indicate the
price of the product.



   (C)   Packaging and labeling. No licensee, or employee or agent of
such licensee, shall sell any tobacco product unless such product:



      (1)   Is sold in the original manufacturer's packaging
intended for sale to consumers; and



      (2)   Conforms to all applicable federal labeling requirements.



   (D)   Prohibition of tobacco coupons and discounts. No licensee, or
employee or agent of such licensee, shall:



      (1)   Accept or redeem, or offer to accept or redeem, or cause
or hire any person to accept or redeem or offer to accept or redeem any
coupon that provides any tobacco product to a consumer without charge or for
less than the full retail price;



      (2)   Sell any tobacco product to a consumer through a
multiple-package discount (e.g., "buy-two- get-one-free") or otherwise
provide any tobacco product to a consumer for less than the full retail price
in exchange for the purchase of any other tobacco product;



      (3)   Provide any free or discounted item to a consumer in
exchange for the purchase of any tobacco product.



   (E)   Sale of flavored tobacco products prohibited.



      (1)   No licensee, or employee or agent of such licensee,
shall sell any flavored tobacco product to a consumer. A non-cigarette
tobacco product is presumed to be a flavored tobacco product if a
manufacturer or any of the manufacturer's agents or employees has:



         (a)   Made a public statement or claim that the
non-cigarette tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor,
including, but not limited to, text and/or images on the product's labeling
or packaging that are used to explicitly or implicitly communicate
information about the flavor, taste, or aroma of a non-cigarette tobacco
product; or



         (b)   Taken action directed to consumers that would be
reasonably expected to result in consumers believing that the non-cigarette
tobacco product imparts a characterizing flavor.



      (2)   Each licensee shall maintain on the premises the
original labeling and packaging provided by the manufacturer for all tobacco
products that are sold or offered for sale by the licensee separately from
the original packaging designed for retail sale to the consumer. The original
labeling and packaging from which the contents are sold separately shall be
maintained during such time as the contents of the package are offered for
sale, and may be disposed of upon the sale of the entire contents of such
package.



      (3)   This division (E) shall not apply to the following
businesses:



         (a)   A smoking bar as defined in R.I. Gen. Laws §
23-20.10-2(15); or



         (b)   An electronic smoking device establishment.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-19-17; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 12-4-17)



§ 118.06  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES AND COSTS.



   The Middletown Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter. All licensees shall be subject to a compliance check at least two
times a year; violators shall be checked more frequently, until two
consecutive compliance checks are completed without violation. If an alleged
violation occurs, the Middletown Police Department shall issue a citation
requiring the licensee to appear before the Middletown Municipal Court. If,
after a hearing, the Court finds that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Court shall impose a civil fine of $250 for a first offense.
For a second offense, the Court shall impose a civil fine of $500, together
with a 14-day suspension of the tobacco retailer's license. For a third or
subsequent offense, the Court shall impose a civil fine of $500 and the Town
Council shall have the authority to revoke or suspend the license at a show
cause hearing. If a licensee maintains its license for 36 consecutive months
without a violation, any new violation shall be treated as a first offense.
It is the intent of this legislation that all fines collected by the town
hereunder shall be used for the purposes of the Middletown Police Department
conducting tobacco product compliance checks and the Middletown Prevention
Coalition providing tobacco education.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-19-17; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 12-4-17)



§ 118.07  USE OF PREMISES DURING LICENSE SUSPENSION.



   During the period of any suspension of a tobacco dealer's license, the
licensee shall remove all tobacco products from the retail display area of
the location and secure them in a locked area for the duration of the
suspension. If, at any time during the suspension period, the licensee is
found to be selling, distributing, or delivering any tobacco products, the
license shall be revoked by the Town Council.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-19-17; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 12-4-17)



§ 118.08  VENDING MACHINES.



   Businesses which have vending machines shall be subject to the same
fines and penalties as described in § 118.06 of this chapter. In the event
that a tobacco dealer's license is suspended or revoked, then the vending
machine shall be removed from the licensed location for the period of
suspension or revocation.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-19-17; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 12-4-17)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



Alcohol Related Offenses



   130.01   Possession, consumption by minors prohibited



   130.02   Indecent intoxication



   130.03   Consumption on streets, parking lots



   130.04   Consumption on beach, parks



Offenses Against Property



   130.15   Private real property



   130.16   Private personal property



   130.17   Town property; damage to and trespass upon



   130.18   Town personal property



   130.19   Throwing glass, etc., on public property



Offenses Against Public Peace and Safety



   130.30   Loitering



   130.31   Attempting violation or avoiding compliance



   130.32   Disorderly conduct



   130.33   Mischief, disorderly conduct in public



   130.34   False alarms and reports



   130.35   Interfering with town officers, employees



   130.36   Impersonating town officers, employees



   130.37   Curfew for minors



   130.38   Purchase, sale or delivery of tobacco products to persons
under eighteen



   130.39   Regulating the operation of cigarette and tobacco vending
machines



   130.40   Smoking prohibited on public beaches, recreational areas,
campgrounds, parks, and outside municipal buildings



Offenses Related to Traffic



   130.50   Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic



   130.51   Play vehicles restricted



   130.52   Sledding and coasting on Green End Avenue



Weapons



   130.65   Restrictions on air guns, other knives, toys



   130.66   Restrictions on other guns



   130.67   Discharge of firearms prohibited while hunting on Sunday



   130.68   Discharge of firearms prohibited in beach areas



Noise



   130.75   Purpose



   130.76   Definitions



   130.77   Measurement of sound



   130.78   Exceptions



   130.79   Noise disturbances prohibited



   130.80   Maximum permissable sound levels by receiving land use



   130.81   Emergency signaling devices



   130.82   Specific activities prohibited



   130.83   Musical instruments and similar devices



   130.84   Regulation of sound equipment and sound amplifying equipment



   130.85   Motorized vehicles



   130.86   Construction



   130.87   Stationary Non-emergency signaling devices



   130.88   Animals and birds



   130.89   Implementation, administration and enforcement



   130.90   Departmental actions



   130.91   Permits and sound variances



 



   130.99   Penalty



ALCOHOL RELATED OFFENSES



§ 130.01  POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION BY MINORS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Unlawful possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by
underage persons.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of
age to purchase, possess, consume or be under the influence of any alcoholic
beverages within the Town of Middletown, except as permitted in R.I. Gen.
Laws § 3-8-11.1(c).



      (2)   Any police officer who has reasonable grounds to believe
that a person between 18 years of age to 20 years of age inclusive, has
consumed any alcoholic beverage, to include the odor or presence of alcoholic
beverages upon the breath of said person, shall be permitted to request the
person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis and/or submit such
person to a standardized field sobriety test.



      (3)   The results of any preliminary chemical breath analysis
or standardized field sobriety test shall be admissible and shall be used to
determine whether the person has consumed alcohol internally or possessed any
alcoholic beverage.



      (4)   Any person between 18 years of age and 20 years of age
inclusive who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis
and/or refuses to submit to a standardized field sobriety test as provided in
this section, who appears to be under the influence of any alcoholic beverage
by a detectable smell of alcohol combined with slurred speech, unsteady gait
or bloodshot eyes, shall constitute prima facie evidence of having consumed
alcohol internally and having possessed any alcoholic beverage, and shall be
subject to the sanctions within this section.



      (5)   Parental notification. Any police officer, upon
determination that a person is under the age of 21, and has allegedly
consumed, possessed or purchased any alcoholic beverages, or had any bodily
alcohol content in violation of this section shall notify the parent,
guardian or custodian within 24 hours if reasonably ascertainable by the law
enforcement agency.



   (B)   Social host offenses.



      (1)   As used in this section, PERMIT means to give permission
for, or approval of, the possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage
by any form of conduct, that would cause a reasonable person to believe that
permission or approval has been given.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or
exercises control over private real property, to permit another person under
the age of 21 years of age who is not his/her child or minor ward to possess
or consume alcoholic beverages on the property.



      (3)   The prohibitions of this section apply to only a person
who is present and in control of the property at the time the possession or
consumption occurs. If the owner or person in control of the property is not
present, but it can be shown that the owner or person in control of the
property had prior knowledge of use of the property by underage persons where
alcohol would be consumed and permitted it to occur, the provisions of this
section shall apply to such owner or person in control of the property. The
prohibitions of this section do not apply to the owners of rental property or
the agent of an owner of rental property, unless the possession or
consumption occurs in the individual unit in which the owner or agent resides
or unless possession or consumption occurs while the owner or agent is
present on the property or unless it can be shown that the owner or agent had
knowledge of and permitted the consumption of alcohol by an underage person
to occur on the property.



('73 Code, § 16-2)  (Ord. passed 6-5-61; Am. Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-1-10;
Am. Ord. 2011-1, As Amended, passed 2-22-11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Alcohol licenses, see Chapter 111



§ 130.02  INDECENT INTOXICATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to be indecently intoxicated
anywhere within the town.



('73 Code, § 16-8)  (Ord. passed 8-21-05)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to punish indecent intoxication, see R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-6-3



§ 130.03  CONSUMPTION ON STREETS, PARKING LOTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage,
or to have in his or her possession any open container thereof, at any time,
upon any public street, sidewalk, or parking lot.  A parking lot shall
include private commercial property upon which the public is invited and
which is not licensed under R.I. Gen. Laws, Title 3, Chapter 7.



(Ord. passed 6-18-86)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  CONSUMPTION ON BEACH, PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage,
or to have in his or her possession any open container thereof, in any public
park or beach, at any time or in any municipal campgrounds between the hours
of 10:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.  This section does not apply to functions or
gatherings specifically authorized by the Council.



(Ord. passed 6-18-86)  Penalty, see § 130.99



OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



§ 130.15  PRIVATE REAL PROPERTY.



   No person shall, knowingly and without proper authority, destroy,
damage, deface, molest or otherwise interfere with, or trespass upon, any
real property of another.



('73 Code, § 16-12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.16  PRIVATE PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   No person shall, knowingly and without proper authority, use, tamper
with, render inoperative, destroy, damage, remove, deface, molest or
otherwise interfere with any personal property of another.



('73 Code, § 16-11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.17  PUBLIC PROPERTY; DAMAGE TO AND TRESPASS UPON.



   No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly destroy, damage,
deface, molest or otherwise interfere with or trespass upon any real property
belonging to, leased to or used by the town or any agency thereof.



('73 Code, § 16-17)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.18  TOWN PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly use, tamper with,
render inoperative, destroy, damage, remove, deface, molest or otherwise
interfere with any books, records, furniture, equipment, gear, apparatus,
tools or other items of personal property belonging to, leased to or used by
the town or any agency thereof.



('73 Code, § 16-16)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.19  THROWING GLASS, ETC., ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump, deposit or strew,
or cause to be thrown, dumped, deposited or strewn, any bottle, glass,
crockery, can, plastic or similar container, or part thereof, upon the ground
or within or about any building in any public park or beach or in any public
street or sidewalk.



('73 Code, § 16-24)  (Ord. passed 7-7-75) Penalty, see § 130.99



OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



§ 130.30  LOITERING.



   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in
a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals
under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property
in the vicinity.  Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes
flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or
herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any
object.  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it
impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself or
herself and to explain his or her presence or conduct.  No person shall be
convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not
comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the person was true and, if it had been believed by the
police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.  Any police
officer may arrest any person suspected of being a loiterer or prowler
without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay in arresting the
suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the suspect's escape.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned
by a police officer, or where a "no loitering" sign or signs have been
posted, to loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public
sidewalk, street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion of
private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct
unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon.  It shall
be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the
entrance to any building open to the public.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any
thoroughfare or place open to the public for the purpose of inducing,
enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to commit an act of
prostitution.  Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such action is consistent with the intent to induce,
entice, solicit, or procure another to commit an act of prostitution are that
the person is a known prostitute or panderer and repeatedly beckons, in the
attempt to stop or engage male or female passersby in conversation, or
repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles by engaging their
operators by hailing, waving of arms, or other bodily gestures.  The
violator's conduct must be such as to demonstrate a specific intent to
induce, entice, solicit, or procure another to commit an act of
prostitution.  No arrest shall be made for a violation of this division
unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to
explain his or her conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this
division if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and
disclosed a lawful purpose.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACEhas the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:  an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general
public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment,
and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds
enclosing them.



Penalty, § 130.99



§ 130.31  ATTEMPTING VIOLATION OR AVOIDING COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to commit any
act which is prohibited by this code or other ordinance or by any rule,
regulation, order or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to authority
thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any person to aid or abet another in
the commission or attempted commission of any act which is prohibited by this
Code or other ordinance or by any rule, regulation, order or notice duly
promulgated or given pursuant to authority thereof.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to avoid the
doing of any act which is required by this code or other ordinance or by any
rule, regulation, order or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to
authority thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any person to aid or abet
another in the avoidance or attempted avoidance of any act which is required
by this code or other ordinance or by any rule, regulation, order or notice
duly promulgated or given pursuant to authority thereof.



('73 Code, § 16-3)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.32  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another by doing any of the following:



   (A)   Engaging in fighting, threatening harm  to persons or
property or in violent or turbulent behavior;



   (B)   Making any unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive
language to any person;



   (C)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another under
circumstances in which the conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;



   (D)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public
street, road, highway, or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public
or private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others and by any
act which serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;



   (E)   Creating a condition which is physically offensive to person
or which presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any
other act which serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;



   (F)   Exposes his or her genitals to the view of others under
circumstances in which his or her conduct is likely to cause affront,
distress or alarm to other persons;



   (G)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lascivious
purpose looks into an occupied dwelling on the property through a window or
other opening;



   (H)   Engages in conduct which obstructs or interferes physically
with a lawful meeting, procession or gathering.  In no event shall this
section be construed to prevent lawful picketing or lawful demonstrations
including but not limited to labor disputes.



   (I)   Expectorate, urinate, or defecate on any public property,
public street, alley or sidewalk or the floor of any public place or public
building or any place or building where the public has a right to gather or
to which it has access.



(Ord. passed 10-26-98; Am. Ord. passed 8-21-00)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.33  MISCHIEF, DISORDERLY CONDUCT IN PUBLIC.



   No person shall revel, quarrel, commit any mischief or otherwise behave
in a disorderly manner, or use any indecent, profane or insulting language in
any street, wharf or other public place in the town, or any hall or place of
entertainment, to the disturbance or annoyance of the peaceable inhabitants
of the town or any portion of them or shall aid, assist, encourage or promote
the same to be done by any person or persons.



('73 Code, § 16-6)  (Ord. passed 1-15-17; Am. Ord. Passed 3-16-59) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.34  FALSE ALARMS AND REPORTS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false
alarm of fire.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false
alarm of explosion or impending danger of explosion.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false
alarm of the need for police protection, assistance or investigation, or any
false report to the Police Department.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false
alarm of the need for an ambulance or medical assistance.



('73 Code, § 16-7)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.35  INTERFERING WITH TOWN OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES.



   No person shall carelessly or wilfully interfere with, hinder or
obstruct any officer or employee of the town who is engaged in, en route to
or returning from, the performance of official duty, whether such
interference, hindrance or obstruction be by threat, assault or otherwise.



('73 Code, § 16-14) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.36  IMPERSONATING TOWN OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES.



   No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee
of the town, or without proper authority wear or display any uniform,
insignia or credential which identifies any town officer or employee; nor
shall any person without proper authority assume to act as an officer or
employee of the town, whether to gain access to premises, obtain information,
perpetrate a fraud, or for any other purpose; provided, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent a private citizen from making a lawful
citizen's arrest for felony or breach of the peace committed in his presence.



('73 Code, § 16-15) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.37  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall loiter about any
public street, park or other public place between 10:00 p.m. and the time of
sunrise of the following day, and no child under the age of 16 years of age
shall loiter about any public street, park or other public place between 9:00
p.m. and the time of sunrise of the following day, unless accompanied by his
parent or guardian having legal custody of his person or by such guardian's
spouse over the age of 21 years.



   (B)   No parent, guardian or other person having legal care, custody
or control of any minor under the age of 18 or 16 years shall permit such
minor to violate the provisions of division (A) of this section.



('73 Code, § 16-4)  (Ord. passed 6-4-62)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.38  PURCHASE, SALE OR DELIVERY OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER
EIGHTEEN.



   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase nor shall any
person, firm or corporation sell, give, allow to be sold, given or delivered
to any person under 18 years of age any tobacco in the form of cigarettes,
cigars, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, or snuff, except that persons under 18
years of age may purchase tobacco products for the purpose of law enforcement
or government research involving monitoring compliance with this section,
providing that the persons under 18 years of age are supervised by an adult
law enforcement official.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation that holds a retail tobacco
products dealer's license shall display prominently for public view at each
cash register and vending machine within the outlet where tobacco products
are sold a sign referring to the age restriction for the sale of tobacco
products to individuals.



   (C)   No person under 18 years of age shall misrepresent his or her
age through the presentation of false identification for the purpose of
purchasing or receiving tobacco products.



(Ord. passed 6-20-95)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.39  REGULATING THE OPERATION OF CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO VENDING
MACHINES.



   (A)   Any device or vending machine dispensing cigarettes or any
other tobacco product shall be registered by the town. The registration shall
be issued without charge upon application therefor to the Town Clerk. Failure
to register shall constitute a violation of this section.



   (B)   No cigarettes nor any other tobacco product shall be sold from
any device or vending machine which is in an area not continuously supervised
and in direct line of sight of an authorized person employed by the person,
firm, or corporation that owns the business occupying the premises in which
the device or vending machine is located, nor shall any tobacco product be
sold from any device or vending machine which is in an area supervised by
such an authorized person unless such device or vending machine is equipped
with an electronic locking device which will not allow the device or vending
machine to dispense a pack of cigarettes, or any other tobacco product,
unless it is electronically unlocked from a secured position inaccessible to
the public and under the supervision of an authorized person employed by the
person, firm or corporation that owns the business occupying the premises in
which the device or vending machine is located.



   (C)   No cigarettes nor any other tobacco product shall be sold from
any device or vending machine from which non-tobacco products are sold.



   (D)   No cigarettes shall be sold in packs which contain less than
20 cigarettes.



(Ord. passed 6-20-95)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.40  SMOKING PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC BEACHES, RECREATIONAL AREAS,
CAMPGROUNDS, PARKS, AND OUTSIDE MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Legislative findings and intent.



      (1)   The use of tobacco for smoking purposes is being found
to be increasingly dangerous, not only to the person smoking but also to the
nonsmoking person who is required to breathe the contaminated air. A
pervasive intrusion of the nonsmoker's right to unpolluted air space is the
uncontrolled smoking on town beaches, recreational areas, campgrounds, parks,
and outside municipal buildings.



      (2)   The town is committed to keeping its beaches,
recreational areas, campgrounds, parks, and outside municipal buildings
clean, safe, healthy, and pleasant for everyone.



      (3)   Smoking is hazardous to health and numerous studies have
shown that secondhand smoke is a significant public health hazard.



      (4)   Smoking in public places, including beaches,
recreational areas, campgrounds, parks, and outside municipal buildings
endangers children and others by exposing them to secondhand smoke.



      (5)   The United States Environmental Protection Agency has
classified secondhand smoke as a Group A carcinogen, the most dangerous class
of carcinogen.



      (6)   Exposure to secondhand smoke substantially increases the
risk in non-smokers of lung cancer, cardiovascular disease and other acute
and chronic health conditions.



      (7)   The United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) has found that secondhand smoke causes children to suffer
from lower respiratory tract illnesses, such as bronchitis and pneumonia,
exacerbates childhood asthma, and increases the risk of chronic middle ear
infections in children.



      (8)   Discarded cigarettes and cigarette butts contain the
same chemicals and toxins as the cigarettes themselves. Discarding cigarette
butts, cigar butts, and tobacco waste is unsightly, unclean, and particularly
hazardous to small children who handle and sometimes ingest them.



      (9)   Cigarette butts are a significant pollutant on beaches
and, if uncollected, may wash directly into ocean waters to the detriment of
marine life and all ocean users.



      (10)   Cigarette butts do not biodegrade and they contain 200
known poisons, 63 of which are shown to cause cancer.



      (11)   Prohibiting smoking and the improper disposal of
tobacco products on the town's beaches, recreational areas, campgrounds,
parks, and outside municipal buildings is necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare of all residents and visitors. The Town Council
intends, by the enactment of this section, to protect the health and
atmospheric environment of all residents and visitors by regulating smoking
on the town's public beaches, recreational areas, campgrounds, parks, and
outside municipal buildings.



   (B)   Definitions. As used in this section:



      MUNICIPAL BUILDING.  Any building owned, leased, or operated by
the town, including, without limitation, Middletown Town Hall and the
Middletown Public Library.



      PUBLIC BEACH or PUBLIC BEACHES. Any beach facility owned, leased
or operated by the town, including without limitation, Sachuest (Second)
Beach and Third Beach, and their respective parking lots, concession areas
and other facilities.



      PUBLIC CAMPGROUND. Any campground owned, leased or operated by
the town, including without limitation, the Second Beach Campground.



      PUBLIC PARK. Any public park owned, leased or operated by the
town, and their respective parking lots, concession areas and other
facilities.



      PUBLIC RECREATIONAL AREA. Any athletic or recreational facility
including, but not limited to, any playing field, ball field, basketball
court, tennis court, or playground which is owned, leased or operated by the
town, and their respective parking lots, concession areas and other
facilities.



      SMOKING, TO SMOKE or SMOKE. The inhaling, exhaling, breathing,
carrying, or possession of any lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, other product
containing any amount of tobacco, or other similar heated or lit product,
including the use of electronic smoking devices or so called e-cigarettes, or
the carrying of any lighted smoking equipment or paraphernalia.



   (C)   Smoking prohibited on public beaches, recreational areas,
campgrounds, parks, and within 50 feet of the exit and entrance doorways to
any municipal building.



      (1)   No person shall smoke a cigarette, cigar, electronic
smoking device or other tobacco-related product on, or within 20 feet of any
public beach, public recreational area, public campground or public park, or
within 50 feet of the exit and entrance doorways to any municipal building.



      (2)   No person shall dispose of cigarette butts, cigar butts,
or any tobacco-related waste on, or within 20 feet  of any public beach,
public recreational area, public campground or public park.



(Ord. 2015-5, passed 7-6-15; Am. Ord. 2015-13, passed 11-2-15; Am. Ord.
2018-20, passed 11-5-18)  Penalty, see § 130.99



OFFENSES RELATED TO TRAFFIC



§ 130.50  OBSTRUCTING PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.



   (A)   No person shall stand, be or remain in or upon any sidewalk,
street, wharf or other public place in the town so as to obstruct the free
and uninterrupted passing thereon of persons or vehicles entitled to the use
thereof.



   (B)   Any person standing, remaining, sitting or lounging as
aforesaid shall immediately move on and away when requested to do so by any
police officer or by any pedestrian or vehicle driver whose passing is so
obstructed.



('73 Code, § 16-18)  (Ord. passed 10-16-22)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Other traffic regulations, see Chapters 70 and 71



§ 130.51  PLAY VEHICLES RESTRICTED.



   No person shall drive or propel any tricycle, velocipede or other play
vehicle propelled by human power on the sidewalks of any street, square or by
way of the town or upon any public footpath in the town. 



('73 Code, § 16-10)  (Ord. passed 8-21-05)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Restrictions on minibikes, dirt bikes, see § 70.05



§ 130.52  SLEDDING AND COASTING ON GREEN END AVENUE.



   No person shall sled, slide or coast with any kind of sled or device of
any description on Honeyman's Hill, within the confines of the public highway
in the town known as Green End Avenue, starting from its junction with
Turner's Road on the east and extending to its junction with Miantonomi
Avenue on the west.



('73 Code, § 16-13)  (Ord. passed 1-28-24)  Penalty, see § 130.99



WEAPONS



§ 130.65  RESTRICTIONS ON AIR GUNS, OTHER KNIVES, TOYS.



   (A)   No person under 19 years of age shall use, sell, offer to sell
or have in his possession any air rifle or air pistol or any similar
instrument in which the propelling force is a spring or air; except that such
devices used in connection with an amusement licensed by the Council or at
pistol ranges duly authorized by law, shall not be considered a violation of
this section.



   (B)   Subject to the qualification made in subsection (A) of this
division, no person under 19 years of age shall fire or discharge within the
town any air gun or spring gun or other device, which is calculated or
intended to propel or project a bullet or pellet or similar projectile.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 19 years of age to
use or have in his possession any knife which opens automatically by hand
pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the
knife, or any dart of any type whether or not the point thereof is covered,
or any bow and arrow, slingshot, bean blower, or any other toy or device of
any sort which propels any projectile or pellet by air, spring, rubber band,
explosive substance, or any other force.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
give away or distribute any knife which opens automatically by hand pressure
applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife, any
dart of any type whether or not the point thereof is covered, any bow and
arrow, slingshot, bean blower, or any other toy or device of any sort which
propels any projectile or pellet by air, spring, rubber band, explosive
substance, or any other force.



   (E)   The provisions of divisions (C) and (D) of this section shall
not apply to the sale or purchase of any archery equipment by any person
licensed by the state to shoot a bow and arrow, or by a member of any duly
organized archery club; nor shall those subsections apply to the use of any
bow and arrow at any archery range or contest conducted and supervised by a
duly organized archery club or other similar organization, and the provisions
of those subsections shall not apply to the sale, purchase or use of any
scientific or educational toys, which include rocket kits, missiles and other
scientific toys of such nature.



('73 Code, § 16-19)  (Ord. passed 10-1-56; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-71) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.66  RESTRICTIONS ON OTHER GUNS.



   The use of rifles, revolvers or pistols, other than low-pressure air
rifles or air pistols, within the town is  prohibited,  except  on 
ranges  for rifle  or  pistol shooting that meet the requirements of the
police department; provided, that this section shall not apply to law
enforcement officers or to members of the armed forces of the United States
or this state while acting in line of duty, nor shall it apply to the use of
blank ammunition in theatrical performances or at military funerals or at
sporting events when the use of blank ammunition is appropriate, nor shall it
apply to persons lawfully defending life or limb or to persons lawfully
defending their property.



('73 Code, § 16-20)  (Ord. passed 10-30-62)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.67  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED WHILE HUNTING ON SUNDAY.



   No person shall use or discharge any rifle or other firearm in the
pursuit or hunting of birds or animals in the town during the first day of
the week commonly called Sunday.



('73 Code, § 16-21)  (Ord. passed 11-3-33)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.68  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED IN BEACH AREAS.



   No person shall use or discharge any rifle or other firearm in the
pursuit or hunting of birds or animals on any part of Second or Third Beach
or the waters immediately adjacent thereto, including mooring areas as
defined in § 93.03.



(Ord. 09-05, passed 4-20-09)



NOISE



§ 130.75  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to establish standards for 
the  control of  noise  pollution  in the town by setting maximum
permissible sound levels for various activities to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare.



   (B)   This subchapter may be cited as the "Noise Abatement Chapter"
of this town.



   (C)   This subchapter shall apply to the control of all noise
originating within the limits of the town or originating from properties
lying outside the limits of the town owned or controlled by the town, except
where either:



      (1)   A state or federal agency has adopted a different
standard or rule than that prescribed in this chapter and has so pre-empted
the regulation of noise from a particular source as to render this subchapter
inapplicable thereto; or



      (2)   The Town Council has determined that, by reason of
public acceptance of the activity producing a particular noise, such noise is
deemed acceptable to the residents of the town.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91)



§ 130.76  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms shall have the meanings given. 
Definitions of technical terms used in this subchapter, which are not herein
defined, shall be obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued
by A.N.S.I. or its successor body.



   A-SCALE (dBA). The sound level in decibels measured using the
A-weighted network as specified in A.N.S.I. Standard 1.4-1971 for sound level
meters. The level is designated db(A) or dBA.



   AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL. The noise associated with a given environment,
exclusive of a particular noise being tested, being usually a composite of
sounds from many sources near and far, exclusive of intruding noises from
isolated identifiable sources.



   A.N.S.I. The American National Standards Institute or its successor
body.



   CONSTRUCTION. Any and all activity necessary or incidental to the
erection, assembly, alteration, installation, repair or equipment of
buildings, roadways or utilities, including land clearing, grading,
excavating and filling.



   DECIBEL (dB). A logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure of 10
used in describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to
the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the
reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square
meter).



   DEMOLITION. Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.



   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion thereof regularly used for
residential occupancy.



   DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE. A device used primarily on trucks and buses to
convert the motor from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for
the purpose of vehicle braking without the use of wheel brakes.



   EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities or
work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger.



   IMPULSIVE SOUND. Sound of short duration, usually less than one second,
with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.  Examples of sources of impulsive
sound include explosions, drop-forge impacts and the discharge of firearms.



   LOT. Any area, tract or parcel of land owned by or under the lawful
control of one distinct ownership.  Abutting "platted lots" under the same
ownership shall be considered a "lot."  The lot line or boundary is an
imaginary line at ground level which separates a lot and its vertical
extension owned by one person from that owned by another.



   MIXED USE. A dwelling unit or school located in a commercial or
industrial zone.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor-operated vehicle licensed for use on the
public highways. but not including a motorcycle.



   MOTORBOAT. See watercraft.



   MOTORCYCLE. Any motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground. The term shall include motorized bicycles. motor scooters,
mopeds and the like.



   NARROW BAND SOUND. Sound characterized by normal listeners as having a
predominant pitch or series of pitches; sound described by such listeners as
"whine," "hiss," "toot," or "wail;" or a sound whose frequencies occupy an
octave band or less.



   NOISE. With the exception of farm implements and farm animals, time
signals, fire, police or ambulance sirens, burglar alarms, refrigerator
system alarms and noise customarily involved in the construction or
demolition of buildings or other structures, it is a noise which is
objectionable due to volume, intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness,
occurring on any premises, which is transmitted outside the property on which
it originates.



   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which exceeds the dBA level for such sound
set out in this subchapter.



   NOISE SENSITIVE ACTIVITIES. Activities which should be conducted under
conditions of exceptional quiet, including, but not limited to, operation of
schools, libraries open to the public, churches, hospitals and nursing homes.



   NOISE SENSITIVE AREA. Any area posted with noise sensitive signs and
subject to the noise levels set forth in the table in § 130.80.



   NONCONFORMING USE. A use of a structure, building or land which was
established as a permitted use and which has been lawfully continued pursuant
to the Zoning Ordinance of the town, but which is not a permitted use in the
zone in which it is now located.



   OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including road
vehicles, but excepting watercraft, used off public roads for recreational
purposes.



   PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership or corporation,
including any officer, department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of the
United States, a state or any political subdivision of a state, including the
town.



   PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SOUND. The steady, impulsive or narrow band
property of a sound, the level of the sound and the extent to which it
exceeds the background sound level.



   PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound for which the information content is
unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as, but not limited to,
understandable spoken speech, comprehensive of whether a voice is raised or
normal or comprehensive rhythms.



   POWERED MODEL VEHICLE. Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or
landborne model plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designed to carry
persons, including. but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or
rocket.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, highway, boulevard, alley,
easement or public space which is owned by or controlled by a public
governmental entity.



   PUBLIC SPACE. Any real property, including any structure thereon, which
is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.



   PURE TONE. Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or
set of single pitches.



   REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line along the ground surface, and
its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person
from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real
property divisions.



   RECEIVING LAND USE. The use or occupancy of the property which receives
the transmission of sound.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any property on which is located a building or
structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes.



   SOUND. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that
cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound
may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity
and frequency.



   SOUND LEVEL. The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a
sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or C, as
specified in A.N.S.I. specifications for sound level meters (A.N.S.I.
Standard 1.4-1971, or the latest approved revision thereof).  If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.



   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument which includes microphone, amplifier,
RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output or display meter, and
weighting networks, used to measure sound pressure levels, which complies
with A.N.S.I. Standard 1.4-1971.



   SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual
pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as
produced by sound energy.



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base 10 of the
ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micronewtons
per square meter (20x10-6N/m2).  The sound pressure level is denoted Lp or
SPL and is expressed in decibels.



   STEADY SOUNDS. A sound whose level remains essentially constant (+/-2
dBA) during the period of the sound level meter.



   TOWN.  The Town of Middletown, Rhode Island.



   USED and OCCUPIED. These terms include the words "intended, designed or
arranged to be" (used or occupied).



   WATERCRAFT. Any contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means
of transportation or recreation on water.



   ZONING DISTRICTS. Those districts established in the Zoning Ordinance
and indicated on the Official Zoning Map.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91)



§ 130.77  MEASUREMENT OF SOUND.



   (A)   If the measurements of sound are made with a sound level
meter, it shall be an instrument in good operating condition, meeting the
requirements of a Type I or Type II meter, as specified by A.N.S.I. Standard
1.4-1971.  For purposes of this section, a sound level meter shall contain
at least an A-weighted scale and both fast and slow meter response capability.



   (B)   If the measurements are made with other instruments, the
procedure shall be carried out in such a manner that the overall accuracy is
at least that called for in A.N.S.I. Standard 1.4-1971 for Type II
instruments.



   (C)   When the location or distance prescribed in this subchapter
for measurement of sound is impractical or would provide misleading or
inaccurate results, measurements may be taken at other locations or distances
using appropriate correction factors specified in this subchapter.



   (D)   Procedures and tests required by this subchapter and not
specified herein shall be placed on file with the Town Clerk.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91)



§ 130.78  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency;



   (B)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work;



   (C)   Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities
conducted on any private property, public space or public right of way;



   (D)   Agricultural activities, exclusive of those involving the
ownership or possession of animals or birds;



   (E)   The emission of sound in the performance of military
operations, exclusive of travel by individuals to or from military duty;



   (F)   The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons or in
fireworks displays licensed by the town, from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.;



   (G)   The emission of sound in the operation of snow removal
equipment; and



   (H)   The emission of sound relative to permitted construction and
demolition activities, provided that such activities do not occur between
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91)



§ 130.79  NOISE DISTURBANCES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, except
as permitted, any noise or sound which constitutes a noise disturbance, as
defined in this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.80  MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE.



      (A)   With the exception of sound levels elsewhere
specifically authorized or allowed in this subchapter, the following table
sets forth the maximum permissible sound levels allowed at or within the real
property boundary of a receiving land use:



 




SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE




Location of Receiving Land Use

 

Time

 

Sound Limit



Zoning District:
 
7 a.m. to 10 p.m.
 

65 dBA



   Residential
 
10 p.m to 7 a.m.
 

55 dBA



Zoning District:
 

At all times

 

75 dBA



   General Business,


   Office Business,


   Limited Business,


   Light Industrial,


   and Municipal


   Industrial Park


Other:
 
 




   Public Water
 

At all times

 

65 dBA



Other:
 
 




   Noise Sensitive
 
7 a.m. to 10 p.m.
 

65 dBA



   Area
 
10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
 

55 dBA





 



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the
maximum permissible sound levels, at all times, allowed at or within the real
property of a receiving land use, shall be 55 dBA, for sound levels emitting
from any business with a liquor license.



(Ord. passed 12-6-93)



   (C)   For any source of sound which emits a pure tone, the maximum
sound level limits set forth herein above shall be reduced by five dBA.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91)



§ 130.81  EMERGENCY SIGNALING DEVICES.



   (A)   No person shall operate or permit the intentional sounding
outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or
similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes
or for testing, as provided in division (B) below.



   (B)   Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device will occur
at the same time of day each time the test is performed, but not before 8:00
a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.  Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle
test time.  In no case shall the test time exceed 60 seconds.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.82  SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Sales by "Hawking" or "Barking."  No person shall create a
noise disturbance by offering for sale or selling anything by shouting or
outcry across a real property boundary or in a noise sensitive area.



   (B)   Vehicle or Motorboat Repairs or Testing. No person shall
repair, rebuild, modify or test any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motor boat
in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a real property
boundary or within a noise sensitive area.



   (C)   Powered Model Vehicles.  No person shall operate or permit
the operation of a powered model vehicle in a public or private space out of
doors or within a noise sensitive area between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. the following day.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.83  MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AND SIMILAR DEVICES.



   No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any
drum, musical instrument or similar device which produces sound in such a
manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary or outdoors within a noise sensitive area.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.84  REGULATION OF SOUND EQUIPMENT AND SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT.



   Except for activities open to the public and for which a permit or a
noise variance having been issued by the town, no person shall operate. play
or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph or
other sound amplifying equipment so as to create a noise disturbance.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.85  MOTORIZED VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate the engine providing motive power, or
any auxiliary engine, of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more for a consecutive period longer than
20 minutes while such vehicle is standing and located within 150 feet of
property zoned and used for residential purposes, except where such vehicle
is standing within a completely enclosed structure.  This section shall not
apply to delivery or pick-up vehicles that require the operation of the
engine to unload or load their vending loads.



   (B)   No person shall operate, within the speed limits specified in
this division, either a motor vehicle or a combination of vehicles of a type
subject to registration, at any time or under any condition of grade, load,
acceleration or deceleration in such a manner as to exceed the noise limit
listed in the table in (C) below for the category of motor vehicle, based on
the legal speed limit, posted or not, of the road or way on which such
vehicle or vehicles are operated.  Such noise shall be measured at a
distance of not more than 50 feet from the center line of travel under test
procedures established by (D) below.  If the distance of the measuring
instrument from the center line of travel is less than 50 feet, such listed
noise limits shall be corrected to reflect the equivalent noise limits for
the actual distance.



   (C)   Noise limit in relation to the legal speed limit. The table
below applies to the total noise from a vehicle or combination of vehicles
and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any
other provision of the town code relating to motor vehicle muffler or noise
control:



 


NOISE IN RELATION TO LEGAL SPEED LIMIT



Type of Vehicle
 
38 mph or less
 
Over 38 mph


Any motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000
pounds or more and any combination of vehicles towed by such motor vehicle
 

88 dBA

 

92 dBA



Any motorcycle
 

82 dBA

 

86 dBA



Any other motor vehicle and any combination of motor vehicles towed by such
motor vehicle
 

76 dBA

 

82 dBA




 



                           



   (D)   The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound
level meter meeting the standards prescribed by A.N.S.I. The instrument shall
be maintained in calibration and good working order.  A calibration check
shall be made of the system at the time of any noise measurement. 
Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation
of the noise source. The microphone during measurement shall be positioned so
as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured
noise.  A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required.
Traffic, aircraft and other transportation noise sources and other background
noise interfere with the primary noise being measured.



   (E)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall at all times be
equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to
prevent noise which exceeds the dBA levels set forth in the table in (C)
above.  No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon
a motor vehicle on a highway.  Every motorboat shall at all times be
equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to
prevent noise which exceeds the dBA levels set forth in the table in (C) for
35 mph or less.



   (F)   No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle
or motorcycle by installation of a muffler or bypass and no person shall
operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle which has been so modified.



   (G)   No person shall operate a recreational vehicle or permit the
operation of one or more recreational vehicles, individually or in a group or
in an organized racing event, on public or private property, in such a manner
as to create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or in a
noise sensitive area.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.86  CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of any tool or
equipment in construction, drilling or demolition work, or in preventive
maintenance work for public service utilities, which creates a noise
disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise
sensitive area.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Emergency work or repair work performed by and for
governmental entities or public service utilities; or



      (2)   Work for which a variance has been obtained from the
Town Council.



   (C)   The use of domestic power tools or equipment is subject to the
noise levels set forth in the table in § 130.80.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.87  STATIONARY NON-EMERGENCY SIGNALING DEVICES.



   (A)   No person shall operate or permit the sounding of any
stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily
for non-emergency purposes, from any place, for more than one minute in any
one hour.



   (B)   Devices used in conjunction with places of religious worship
shall be exempt from the operation of this section.



   (C)   Variances for sound sources covered by this section, may be
granted by the Town Council.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.88  ANIMALS AND BIRDS.



   No person shall own, possess or harbor any animal or bird which
frequently or for a continued duration emits sound that is native to the
species, which sound exceeds the dBA levels set forth in the table in §
130.80.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.89  IMPLEMENTATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be implemented, administered and
enforced by the Police Department or any other town department or division
designated by the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter which prohibit a person from
making or continuing noise disturbances, or causing the same to be made or
continued, across a real property boundary or within a noise sensitive area,
shall be enforced by the Police Department or any other town department or
division designated by the Director of Public Safety.



   (C)   To implement and enforce this subchapter, the Police
Department, or any other duly designated town agency, shall have the power to:



      (1)   Conduct research, monitoring and other studies related
to sound;



      (2)   Conduct programs of public education regarding the
causes, effects and general methods of abatement and control of noise, as
well as the actions prohibited by this subchapter and the procedures for
reporting violations;



      (3)   Coordinate the noise control activities of all town
departments;



      (4)   Review public and private projects, including those
subject to mandatory review or approval by other departments, for compliance
with this subchapter, if these projects are likely to cause sound in
violation of this subchapter;



      (5)   Issue sound variances pursuant to § 130.91;



      (6)   Prepare recommendations for consideration by Council,
after publication of notice and after a public hearing, for establishing the
boundaries of noise sensitive areas.



   (D)   Whenever a violation of this subchapter occurs and two or more
persons are present in or on the lot from which the sound emanates and it is
impossible to determine which of said persons is the violator, the owner of
the lot shall be presumed responsible for the violation if present; in the
absence of such owner, the tenant or tenants of such lot or any person
present with the direct consent of the owner shall be held responsible for
the violation.



   (E)   In the case of continuing violations, the Town Solicitor may
institute an action for injunctive relief against the owner and/or tenant of
the lot.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91)



§ 130.90  DEPARTMENTAL ACTIONS.



   All departments and agencies of the town shall carry out their programs
in furtherance of the policies set forth in this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91)



§ 130.91  PERMITS AND SOUND VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Police Department, upon written application, shall have
the authority, consistent with this section, to issue to each property in the
town not more than one permit per year,provided any such permit is limited in
duration to a period not to exceed 12 hours.  The failure of the Police
Department to issue a sound permit, after a written application, shall not
preclude an application for a sound variance as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   The Town Council shall have the authority, consistent with
this section, to grant sound variances from this subchapter after public
hearing.



   (C)   Any person seeking a sound variance under this section shall
file an application with the Town Council.  The application shall contain
information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity
for which the sound variance is sought into compliance with this subchapter
would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community
or on other persons.



   (D)   All applications for sound variances shall be subject to a fee
of $50 per day if granted and, whether granted or denied, an amount
sufficient to cover the cost of advertising and notification to all residents
and property owners within 100 feet of the real property boundary from which
the noise source emanates. Advertisement shall be made at least once, seven
days prior to the public hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the town.  Notification shall be by regular mail at least seven days prior
to the public hearing.



   (E)   In determining whether to grant or deny an application, or
revoke a variance previously granted, the Town Council shall balance the
hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons if the sound
variance is not allowed, against the adverse impact on the health, safety and
welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any
other adverse impact, if the sound variance is allowed.  Applicants for
sound variances and persons contesting sound variances may be required to
submit any information that the Town Council may reasonably require. In
granting or denying an application or in revoking a sound variance previously
granted, the Town Council shall file in the Office of the Town Clerk a copy
of the decision and the reasons for granting. denying or revoking the sound
variance.



   (F)   Sound variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant
containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted
activity.  The sound variance shall not become effective until all
conditions are agreed to by the applicant.  Noncompliance with any condition
of the sound variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to
those provisions of this subchapter regulating the source of sound or
activity for which the sound variance was granted.



   (G)   Determination of modification of a granted variance shall be
made in accordance with the rules and procedures set forth in the section for
original applications.



(Ord. passed 8-5-91)



§ 130.99  PENALTY. 



   (A)   (1)   Any person found in violation of § 130.01(A) shall
be fined $150 to $750 and/or mandatory completion of a three-hour alcohol
education and awareness program approved by the Middletown Municipal Court,
to be completed within a three-month period.



      (2)   Any person who commits a second violation of §
130.01(A) shall be fined $300 to $750 and undergo a substance abuse
assessment by a licensed substance abuse professional and complete all
necessary treatment ordered by the Municipal Court.



      (3)   Any person who commits a third violation of § 130.01(A)
shall be fined $450 to $750.



      (4)   Any person who fails to complete the mandatory alcohol
awareness program shall be subject to a $350 fine.



      (5)   The Municipal Court, in the exercise of its discretion,
can order in lieu of the fine imposed for a first violation, that the person
charged be responsible for payment of the cost to complete an alcohol
education and awareness program and/or the Municipal Court shall have the
discretion to approve an alternative alcohol education program that it deems
appropriate.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-1-10; Am. Ord. 2011-1, As Amended,  passed 4-4-11)



   (B)   (1)   Any person found in violation of § 130.01(B) shall
be fined not less than $350 nor more than $1,000 and/or mandatory completion
of a three- hour alcohol education and awareness program approved by the
Middletown Municipal Court, to be completed within a three-month period. 
The person shall be responsible to pay for the cost of the program.



      (2)   Any person who commits a second violation shall be fined
not less than $750 nor more than $1,000 and mandatory completion of an
alcohol education and awareness program approved by the Municipal Court, to
be completed within a three- month period. The person shall also be
responsible to pay for the cost of the program.



      (3)   The Municipal Court, in the exercise of its discretion,
can order in lieu of the fine imposed for a first violation that the person
charged be responsible for payment of the cost to complete an alcohol
education and awareness program and/or the Municipal Court shall have the
discretion to approve an alternative alcohol education program it deems
appropriate.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-1-10; Am. Ord. 2011-1, As Amended, passed 2-22-11)



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of §§ 130.02 -
130.04, 130.32(I) or 130.75 - 130.91 shall be subject to the following
penalty:



      (1)   For a first offense, $100.  The person charged with a
violation of any provision of §§ 130.02 - 130.04, 130.32(I) or 130.75 -
130.91 shall, for a first offense, be given the opportunity to pay the fine
assessed by mail which shall be indicated on the summons issued by the
charging officer.  Should the alleged violator elect not to pay the fine
assessed by mail, said person shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Municipal Court.



      (2)   For any second or subsequent violation of §§ 130.02 -
130.04, 130.32, or 130.75 - 130.91, a hearing before the Municipal Court is
required, and the alleged violators shall be subject to the penalties as
outlined in § 10.99.



(Ord. passed 8-21-00)



   (D)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
there is not otherwise a penalty shall be subject to the penalty of § 10.99.



('73 Code, § 16-9)  (Ord. passed 10-2-72)



   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall sell or allow to be
sold or delivered to any person under 18 years of age tobacco products except
as permitted by § 130.38 shall for the first offense be subject to a fine of
$200, for the second offense, be subject to a fine of $350, and for the third
and any subsequent offense, be subject to a fine of $500; provided however,
that in the event that there are no offenses in three successive years from
the date of the last offense, then the next offense shall be treated as a
first offense.



(Ord. passed 6-20-95)



   (F)   Any person under 18 years of age who shall violate the
provisions of § 130.38(A) or (C) shall be subject to a fine of $100, for the
first offense and $250 for the second offense and subsequent offenses and/or
shall be required to perform community service.



(Ord. passed 6-20-95)



   (G)   Any person, firm, or corporation who owns a business occupying
the premises in which a device or vending machine which dispenses cigarettes
or any other tobacco product is located who shall violate any of the
provisions of § 130.39(A), (B) and (C), and any person, firm or corporation
who shall violate § 130.39(D), shall for the first offense be subject to a
fine of $200, for the second offense, be subject to a fine of $350, and for
the third and any subsequent offense, be subject to a fine of $500, provided,
however, that in the event that there are no offenses in three successive
years from the date of the last offense, then the next offense shall be
treated as the first offense.



(Ord. passed 6-20-95)



   (H)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of § 130.40(C)
shall be subject to the following penalties:



      (1)   For a first offense, a fine of $100. The person charged
with a violation of any of the provisions of § 130.40(C) shall, for a first
offense, be given the opportunity to pay the fine assessed by mail which
shall be indicated on the summons issued by the charging officer. Should the
alleged violator elect not to pay the fine assessed by mail, said person
shall be entitled to a hearing before the Municipal Court.



      (2)   For a second offense, a fine of $200, and a hearing
before the Municipal Court shall be required.



      (3)   For a third or subsequent, a fine of $300, and a hearing
before the Municipal Court shall be required.



      (4)   The court may, in addition to the fine imposed upon a
conviction, require that any person convicted of a violation of §
130.40(C)(2), pick up litter on a Middletown public beach, recreational area,
campground or park for no more than four hours.



      (5)   Any person convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of § 130.40(C) may, upon a showing that payment of the total fine
would pose a hardship on the defendant or his or her family, be sentenced to
perform public community restitution on any Middletown public beach,
recreational area, public campground or park in lieu of the total fine that
would otherwise be imposed.



(Ord. 2015-5, passed 7-6-15; Am. Ord. 2015-13, passed 11-2-15)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES





         151.   CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF CONTROL





         152.   ZONING CODE





         153.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT




CHAPTER 150: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES



Section



Impact Fees Generally



   150.15   Legislative findings



   150.16   Intents and purposes



   150.17   Rules of construction



   150.18   Definitions



   150.19   Administration of impact fee



IMPACT FEES GENERALLY



§ 150.15  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.



   The Town Council of the Town of Middletown finds, determines, and
declares that:



   (A)   The town must expand its recreational facilities and
equipment, police station facilities and equipment, fire station facilities
and equipment, sewer facilities, and other municipal facilities in order to
maintain current standards if new residential and commercial development is
to be accommodated without decreasing current standards. This must be done in
order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare.



   (B)   The State of Rhode Island through the enactment of Rhode
Island General Laws Chapter 45-22.4-1 et seq., Rhode Island Development
Impact Fee Act provides for orderly growth and makes provisions for
protecting public investment in public facilities.



   (C)   The imposition of impact fees is one of the preferred methods
of ensuring that residential and commercial development bears a proportionate
share of the cost of capital facilities necessary to accommodate the needs of
future residents of such developments.  This must be done in order to
promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare.



   (D)   Residential land development, except as exempted in §
150.19(D) hereof, creates demand for the acquisition or expansion of parks,
open space and recreational facilities, the construction of park
improvements, expansion of police and fire facilities, expansion of other
municipal facilities, and sewer facilities expansion.  Commercial
development creates demand for police, fire, and sewer facilities.  The fees
established by § 150.19 are derived from and based upon the costs of
providing additional capacity to general government, recreation, police,
fire, and sewer facility improvements necessitated by the new land
developments for which the fees are levied.



(Ord. passed 8-16-04; Am. Ord. 2016-15, passed 10-3-16; Am. Ord. 2018-6,
passed 3-19-18)



§ 150.16  INTENTS AND PURPOSES.



   (A)   This subchapter is intended to assist in the implementation of
the Middletown Comprehensive Community Plan.



   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the use and
development of land so as to assure that new residential and commercial
development bears its proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures
necessary to provide general government, park and recreational, police, fire
and sewer facility improvements in the town.



(Ord. passed 8-16-04; Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed 3-19-18)



§ 150.17  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be liberally construed
so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public
health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   For the purpose of administration and enforcement, unless
otherwise stated in this subchapter, the following rules of construction
shall apply to the text hereof:



      (1)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this subchapter and any caption, the text shall control.



      (2)   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
discretionary; the word "may" is permissive.



      (3)   Words used in the present shall include the future; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



      (4)   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", designed
for", "maintained for", and "occupied for".



      (5)   The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation,
a partnership, an unincorporated association, or any other similar entity.



      (6)   The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances
or circumstances of like kind or character.



      (7)   The word "Town Administrator" means the Town
Administrator or the municipal officials he/she may designate to carry out
the administration of this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 8-16-04; Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed 3-19-18)



§ 150.18  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
The following terms shall be defined according to the Rhode Island
Development Impact Fee Act, (RIGL 45-22.4-1 to 9).



   (A)   APPLICANT.  A person obtaining a building permit or other
appropriate municipal permit to proceed with development for an activity
requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to § 150.19 and any successor in
interest of such person.



   (B)    CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Improvements with a useful life of ten
years or more, which increases or improves the service capacity of a public
facility.



   (C)    CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.  That component of a municipal
budget that sets out the need for public facility capital improvements, the
costs of such improvements, and proposed funding sources. A CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM must cover at least a five year period and should be
reviewed at least every five years.



   (D)    COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT. For the purposes of this subchapter
commercial development includes any nonresidential development such as:
retail commercial, service businesses, office, industrial, light industrial
and institutional uses.



   (E)   DEVELOPER.  A person or legal entity undertaking development.



   (F)    GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY.  A unit of local government;



   (G)    IMPACT FEE.  The charge imposed upon new development by a
governmental entity to fund all or a portion of the public facility's capital
improvements affected by the new development from which it is collected.



   (H)    PROPORTIONATE SHARE. That portion of the cost of system
improvements which reasonably relates to the service demands and needs of the
project.



   (I)   PUBLIC FACILITIES.



      (1)   Water supply production, treatment, storage, and
distribution facilities;



      (2)   Wastewater and solid waste collection, treatment, and
disposal facilities (referred to as "Sanitary Sewer Facilities");



      (3)   Roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way,
traffic signals, landscaping, and local components of state and federal
highways;



      (4)   Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment,
and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, bank and shore
projections, and enhancement improvements;



      (5)   Parks, open space areas, and recreation facilities
(referred to as "Recreation Facilities");



      (6)   Police (referred to as "Police Facilities"), emergency
medical, rescue, and fire protection facilities (referred to as "Fire
Facilities");



      (7)   Public schools (referred to as "School Facilities"); and



      (8)   Libraries, senior centers and other public facilities
consistent with the town's capital improvement program (the Public Facilities
listed in divisions (1), (3), (4) and (8) hereof are collectively referred to
as "General Government Facilities").



(Ord. passed 8-16-04; Am. Ord. 2016-15, passed 10-3-16; Am. Ord. 2018-6,
passed 3-19-18)



§ 150.19  ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEE.



   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of the Rhode
Island Development Impact Fee Act R.I.G.L. 45-22.4-1 et seq.



   (A)   Generally.  All applicants for new residential development
shall be assessed Development Impact Fees (hereafter known as "Fees"). Five
types of assessments shall be imposed: Parks and Recreation Facilities Fee,
Police Facilities Fee, Fire Facilities Fee, General Government facilities,
and Sewer Facilities fee, unless otherwise provided herein.  All applicants
for new commercial development shall be assessed for the same facilities,
with the exception of General Government, and Parks and Recreation
Facilities.  All owners of property owned by the state or federal government
which is converted to private ownership or control shall also be assessed
Development Impact Fees.



   (B)   Report: Adoption of findings.  The findings set forth in the
Middletown Impact Fee Study report, dated February 20, 2018, as amended
(hereafter referred to as "Report") and the Middletown Sanitary Sewer Impact
Fee Report dated October, 2015 (hereinafter referred to as "Sanitary Sewer
Report") are adopted herewith.  The Reports assess Town facilities and
provides the data sources and methodology upon which the following fees are
based. The Reports are on file at the Town Clerk's office and are available
for examination by the public upon request.



   (C)   Calculation of fees.  The fees shall be calculated according
to the formulas set forth in the Report.  Over time, the variables in the
formulas may change, causing the fees to change. For residential uses, the
fees, including Sanitary Sewer fees, shall be calculated on the basis of each
new residential dwelling unit.  For commercial/nonresidential uses, the fees
shall be calculated on the basis of 1,000 gross square feet of new building
space, provided that Sanitary Sewer fees for such uses shall be calculated
based on the displacement of the water meter servicing the facility, as
hereinafter set forth. The following sets forth the adopted fees per new
residential dwelling unit and  new commercial space,  as outlined in the
Report.



         (1)   Impact Fees.



 


Residential (per housing unit)

 

Recreation Facilities

 

Fire Facilities

 

Police Facilities

 

General Government Facilities

 

Total





Single Family
 
$594
 
$977
 
$496
 
$528
 
$2,595


Multifamily
 
$453
 
$745
 
$378
 
$402
 
$1,978


Mobile Home
 
$426
 
$701
 
$355
 
$379
 
$1,861


Commercial
(1,000 sq, ft.)


Retail
 
$0
 
$661
 
$602
 
$0
 
$1,263


Office
 
$0
 
$837
 
$235
 
$0
 
$1,072


Industrial/Flex
 
$0
 
$459
 
$120
 
$0
 
$579




 



      (2)   Sanitary Sewer Impact Fees.



 




Residential (per housing unit)

 

Sanitary Sewer



Single Family
 
$1,305


Multifamily
 
$920


Mobile Home
 
$677



Nonresidential (per size/type meter)

 

Sanitary Sewer



0.75" Displacement
 
$1,305


1.0" Displacement
 
$2,218


1.5" Displacement/Turbine
 
$4,306


2.0" Displacement/Turbine
 
$6,916


3.0" Compound
 
$13,962




 



      (3)   Credits. An adjustment shall be made to any impact fee
for facilities that were funded by the issuance of bonds.  The annual debt
service for the bonds apportioned to the facilities expansion shall be
subtracted from the impact fee as presented within the calculations in the
report, and will be reviewed accordingly on an annual basis.  The applicable
credits shall be deducted from the fees set forth in the preceding
subsections.



   (D)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Low and moderate income housing.  Low and moderate
income housing units shall be exempt from the requirements of this
subchapter.  "Low and moderate income housing units" shall mean dwelling
units that are subsidized by the federal or state government under a program
to assist in the construction of permanent low or moderate income housing, as
defined by the Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation
(RIHMFC), whether built or operated by a public agency or a nonprofit
organization.  Only the subsidized units in a low and moderate income
housing project are exempt from the requirements of this section.  All other
units in a low and moderate income housing project are subject to the fees.



      (2)   Renovation and repair.  Development Impact fees shall
not be imposed for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an
existing structure or rebuilding a damaged structure unless there is an
increase in the number of dwelling units or any other measurable unit for
which an impact fee is collected.  Impact fees may be imposed when property
which is owned or controlled by federal or state government is converted to
private ownership or control.



      (3)   Lots of record. One residential dwelling unit per lot of
record is exempt from the requirements of this subchapter.  For the purposes
of this subchapter, a "lot of record" is a lot which legally exists as of
August 16, 2004, as shown by the Middletown Tax Assessor's certified tax roll
of assessments as of December 31, 2003, and/or duly recorded land evidence
records, or can otherwise be proven to have existed as distinct lot separate
and apart from surrounding property as of August 16, 2004.



   (E)   Administration of fees.



      (1)   Assessment.  All impact fees imposed pursuant to the
authority granted in this chapter shall be assessed upon the issuance of a
building permit or other appropriate permission to proceed with the
development of, or change in use to, a residential dwelling unit or
commercial unit.  As part of the building permit process, the Town Planner
shall review the building permit application and assess the appropriate fees
according to division (C) above prior to the Building Inspector issuing a
building permit.  For property which is converted from state or federal
ownership or control to private ownership or control, the Town Planner shall
assess the appropriate fee upon the effective date of transfer of ownership
or control.



      (2)   Collection.  All impact fees imposed pursuant to the
authority granted in this chapter shall be collected in full upon the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy or other final action authorizing
the intended use of a structure.  All fees collected shall be kept in a
restricted interest-bearing account.



      (3)   Expenditure.  Town Council shall approve expenditure of
the fees.  The fees shall only be expended for the intended purpose of
providing and/or making capital improvements that reasonably relate to the
service demands and needs of new development and shall not be used in lieu of
regular capital improvement funds.  Interest earned by the account shall be
credited to the account and shall be solely for the purposes specified above
for the account.



      (4)   Refunds. Within eight years of the date of collection,
impact fees shall be expended or encumbered for the construction of public
facilities’ capital improvements, however, if the expenditure or
encumbrance is not feasible within eight years, the town may retain impact
fees for a period of 10 years if there are compelling reasons for such a
longer period. The governing body shall identify, in writing, the compelling
reasons for retaining impact fees for a longer period of time over eight
years. If impact fees are not expended or encumbered within this period, the
town shall refund to the applicant or his or her successors the amount of fee
paid and accrued interest. The town shall send the refund to the applicant at
the last known address by certified mail within one-year of the date on which
the right to claim the refund arises. Should the mailing of the fee be
returned, the municipality shall make every effort to obtain a new address
for the fee payer, including a search of the public records, the Secretary of
State’s database, and the database for the contractors’ registration and
licensing board. All refunds due and not claimed within one year shall be
forwarded to the State Treasurer’s office for inclusion in the unclaimed
property fund.



      (5)   Impact fee termination.  Should the town terminate any
or all impact fee requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds shall be
refunded as provided above.  Upon the finding that any or all impact fee
requirements are to be terminated, the town shall place a notice of
termination and availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation
in the community at least two times.  All funds available for refund shall
be retained for a period of one year.  All refunds not claimed within one
year shall be forwarded to the State Treasurer’s office for inclusion in
the unclaimed property fund.



   (F)   Notice to future homeowners.



      (1)   In the instance of a subdivision or land development
project, notice of the fees shall be provided on the record plan (i.e. the
plan that is recorded in the land evidence records).



      (2)   In all instances where a parcel of real property (vacant
or developed) is sold to a new owner prior to the issuance of a building
permit, the seller of the real property shall provide written notice of the
fees to the new owner on or before the date in which the parties enter into a
purchase and sales agreement.  The seller shall maintain said written notice
for his or her records.



   (G)   Alternative means of satisfying assessments for subdivisions
and land development projects. The town may accept the dedication of land,
the construction of public facilities in lieu of payment of impact fees
provided that:



      (1)   The need for the dedication or construction is clearly
documented in the town's capital improvement program and comprehensive plan;



      (2)   The land proposed for dedication for the facilities to
be constructed are determined to be appropriate for the proposed use by the
town;



      (3)   Formulas and/or procedures for determining the worth of
proposed dedications or constructions are established; and



      (4)   The total value of the applicant's contribution shall
not be less than the amount of the particular projected fee involved.  The
value of the applicant's contribution and scope of work shall be determined
by the Planning Board, upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer or other
appropriate professional pursuant to procedures established by the Planning
Board.  The Planning Board shall document the value of the applicant's
contribution.  A copy thereof shall be placed and maintained in the Planning
Department's file for the particular subdivision or land development project.



   (H)   Construction services performed by applicant.  In the event
construction services areperformed by applicant or on its behalf, applicant
shall adhere to town specifications for construction and development. 
Inspections by town staff shall be conducted at key points in the
construction and development process.  In no case shall said inspection be
less than those required for road construction as outlined elsewhere in the
Subdivision and Land Development regulations.  A schedule for inspections
shall be agreed to between town staff and applicant.



   (I)   Relationship to Comprehensive Plan.  No fees or dedication of
land to the public shall be required unless the need for such is documented
in the adopted plans of the town, i.e. the Comprehensive Community Plan, or
the Capital Improvement Program (CIP).  The requirement for dedication of
land or fees shall be based upon the policies and standards set forth in the
above plans and shall reflect the character defined by the Comprehensive
Community Plan for the neighborhood or district in which the subdivision or
development is located.  The nature of the land dedication must reflect the
character of the land being subdivided and must be suitable for the intended
use. Land which is not otherwise developable, i.e. wetlands, slope too steep,
etc. shall not be acceptable for this purpose.



   (J)   Annual review.  The Town Planner with the assistance of the
Department of Public Works, and others as appropriate, shall present an
annual report to the Town Council on the status of any fees collected
pursuant to this subchapter.  The report shall be presented annually to the
Town Council before the adoption of the Capital Improvement Plan.  The
report shall specify the amount of fees collected, how the monies were
expended, and whether there are anticipated expenditures in the future.



(Ord. passed 8-16-04; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-04; Am. Ord. 2016-15, passed
10-3-16; Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed 3-19-18)



CHAPTER 151:  CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF CONTROL



Section



General Provisions



   151.01   Purpose



   151.02   Applicability



   151.03   Determination of applicability



   151.04   Definitions



Provisions; Procedure



   151.10   Plans



   151.11   Fee schedule



   151.12   Plan review



   151.13   Plan approval/disapproval



   151.14   Approval; expiration; renewal



   151.15   Maintenance of measures



   151.16   Liability of applicant



   151.17   Inspections



   151.18   Notification



   151.19   Appeals



Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan



   151.35   Plan preparation



   151.36   Plan contents



   151.37   Performance principles



Enforcement



   151.45   Performance bond



   151.46   Notice of default on performance secured by bond



   151.47   Notice of default on performance secured by cash or
negotiable securities deposit



   151.48   Release from performance bond conditions



 



   151.98   Violations



   151.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The Town Council hereby finds that excessive quantities of
soil are eroding from certain areas that are undergoing development for
non-agricultural uses, such as storage/filling, housing developments,
commercial construction, industrial areas, recreational facilities, and
roads.  This erosion makes costly repairs to gullies, washed out fills,
roads, and embankments necessary.  The resulting sediment clogs the storm
sewers, road ditches and muddies streams, leaves deposits of silt in ponds
and reservoirs and is considered a major water pollutant.



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent soil erosion and
sedimentation from occurring as a result of non-agricultural development
within the town by requiring proper provisions for stormwater disposal and
soil erosion during construction, in order to promote the safety, public
health and general welfare of the town.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.02  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This chapter shall be applicable to any situation involving
any disturbance to the terrain (and its contours) and topsoil or vegetative
ground cover upon any property within the town after determination of
applicability by the Building Official, or his/her designee.



   (B)   Compliance with the requirements described herein shall not be
construed to relieve the applicant of any obligations to obtain necessary
state or federal permits. The Building Official shall notify appropriate
state or federal agencies prior to issuance of a permit for a land-disturbing
activity controlled by the provisions of this chapter. The failure of the
Building Official to notify any necessary state or federal agency shall not
void any permit issued hereunder. The term "Building Official" as used
throughout this chapter means the Building Official or his/her designee. 



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.03  DETERMINATION OF APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any existing
vegetation, grades, or contours of land in a manner which may increase the
potential for soil erosion without first applying for a determination of
applicability from the Building Official. Upon receiving a positive
determination of applicability, the applicant shall submit a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for approval to the Building Official. The
application for determination of applicability shall describe the location,
nature, character, and time schedule of the proposed land-disturbing activity
in sufficient detail to allow the Building Official to determine the
potential for soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from the proposed
project.  In determining the applicability of this chapter to a particular
land-disturbing activity, the Building Official shall consider site
topography, drainage patterns, soils, proximity to watercourses, and other
such information as deemed appropriate. A particular land-disturbing activity
shall not be subject to the requirements of this chapter if the Building
Official finds that erosion resulting from the land disturbing activity is
insignificant and represents no threat to adjacent properties or to the
quality of any coastal feature, flood plain, or watercourse, as defined
herein. The current "Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook," U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, R.I.
Department of Environmental Management and R. I. State Conservation Committee
shall be consulted in making this determination.



   (B)   No determination of applicability shall be required for the
following:



      (1)   Construction, alteration, or use of any additions to
existing single family or duplex homes or related structures, when determined
by the Building Official to be insignificant, and such construction,
alteration and use does not occur within 200 feet of any watercourse or
coastal feature, and the slopes at the site of land disturbance do not exceed
10%;



      (2)   Use of a home garden in association with onsite
residential use;



      (3)   Accepted agricultural management practices such as
seasonal tilling and harvest activities associated with property utilized for
private and/or commercial agricultural or silvicultural purposes;



      (4)   Excavations for improvements other than those described
in division (B)(1) above which exhibit all of the following characteristics:



         (a)   Does not result in a total displacement of more
than 50 cubic yards of material;



         (b)   Has no slopes steeper than 10 feet vertical in 100
feet horizontal or approximately10%; and



         (c)   Has all disturbed surface areas properly and
effectively protected to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation.



      (5)   Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping
purposes on existing developed land parcels or lots, provided that all bare
surfaces are immediately seeded, sodded, or otherwise protected from erosive
actions, and all of the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The aggregate area of such activity does not
exceed 2,000 square feet; and



         (b)   The change of elevation does not exceed two feet
at any point; and



         (c)   The grading does not involve a quantity of fill
greater than 18 cubic yards; except where fill is excavated from another
portion of the same parcel and the quantity does not exceed 50 cubic yards.



      (6)   Grading, filling, removal or excavation activities and
operations undertaken by the town under the direction and supervision of the
Director of Public Works for work on streets, roads or rights-of-way
dedicated to public use, provided, however, that adequate and acceptable
erosion and sediment controls are incorporated in engineering plans and
specifications and followed. Appropriate erosion controls shall apply prior
to and during construction as well as after completion of such activities. 
All such work shall be undertaken in accordance with the performance
principles provided for in § 151.37 and such standards and definitions as
may be adopted to implement said performance principles; and



      (7)   Existing quarrying operations actively engaged in
excavating rock, but shall apply to sand and gravel extraction operations. 



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06) Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. Any person, corporation, or public or private organization
proposing a development or project which would involve disturbance to the
natural terrain as herein defined.



   COASTAL FEATURE. Coastal beaches and dunes, barrier beaches, coastal
wetlands, coastal cliffs, bluffs, and banks, rocky shores, and manmade
shorelines as defined in "The State of Rhode Island Coastal Resources
Management Program," as amended June 28, 1983.



   CUT. An excavation. The difference between a point on the original
ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also,
the material removed in excavation.



   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Any construction, demolition, or removal of
structures, roadways, parking, or other paved areas, utilities, or other
similar facilities, including any action requiring a building permit by the
town.



   EROSION. The removal of mineral and/or organic matter by the action of
wind, water, and/or gravity.



   EXCAVATE. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated, or bulldozed, and including the conditions resulting therefrom.



   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, or other material is placed or
moved to a new location above ground. The fill is also the difference in
elevation between a point of existing undisturbed ground and a designated
point of higher elevation of the final grade.



   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any physical land development activity which
includes such actions as clearance of vegetation (in wetlands), moving or
filling of land, removal or excavation of soil or mineral resources, or
similar activities.



   RUNOFF. The surface water discharge or rate of a given watershed after
a fall of rain or snow and including seepage flows that do not enter the soil
but run off the surface of the land. Also, that portion of water that is not
absorbed by the soil, but runs off the land surface.



   SEDIMENT. Solid material, both mineral and/or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site or origin
by wind, water, and/or gravity as a product of erosion.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). The (approved) document
required before any person may cause a disturbance to the natural terrain
within the town as herein regulated. Also, herein referred to as
SWPPP,APPROVED PLAN.



   SUBDIVISION. The process (and the result) of dividing a parcel of raw
land into smaller buildable sites, blocks, street, open space public areas
and the designation of the location for utilities and other improvements.



   WATERCOURSE. Any tidewater or coastal wetland at its mean high water
level, and any freshwater wetland at its seasonal high water level, including
but not limited to any river, stream, brook, pond, lake, swamp, marsh bog,
fen, wet meadow, or any other standing or flowing body of water. The edge of
the WATERCOURSE as herein defined shall be used for delineation purposes. 



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



PROVISIONS; PROCEDURE



§ 151.10  PLANS.



   (A)   SWPPP.  To obtain approval for a permit under the provisions
of § 151.03 for land-disturbing activity determined to be applicable by the
Building Official, an applicant shall first file a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) signed by the owner of the property, or authorized
agent, on which the work subject to approval is to be performed. The SWPPP,
as described in § 151.36, shall describe and ensure the implementation of
best management practices (BMPs) to be employed by the applicant or the
applicant's  agent, to reduce or eliminate the pollutants in stormwater
discharges at the site.



   (B)   R.I. Freshwater Wetlands Permit.  Where any portion of a
proposed development requires approval under the R.I. Freshwater Wetlands Act
(R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 2-1-15 et seq.), as amended, and where said approval
contains provisions for soil erosion and sediment controls, that approved
site plan shall be a component of the overall SWPPP required for the
development. 



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.11  FEE SCHEDULE.



   The town shall collect fees, from each applicant requesting approval of
a SWPPP.  A fee schedule shall be established by the Town Council, with a
recommendation from the Building Official or designee.  Said fee shall be
based on the administrative and technical costs associated with administering
this chapter and may be revised from time to time.



   (A)   Site plan reviews.



      (1)   Single-Family/Duplex subdivisions.



   No. of Lots            Fee



   1 lot               $100



   2 - 4 lots             150



   5 - 9 lots             300



   10 - 15 lots             400



   16 - 25 lots             550



   26 - 50 lots             700



   51 - 100 lots             950



   100 plus lots:              $950, plus $40 per lot for
each lot over 100.



      (2)   Site plans:  Multi-family, commercial, industrial,
parking lots, pipelines, utilities, land grading, quarrying, mining,
landfills, demolition, and the like.



   Lot Size            Fee



   Up to 30,000 sq. ft.         $150



   30,000 sq. ft - 1.5 acres       200



   2 acres - 5 acres          300



   6 acres - 10 acres          425



   11 acres - 20 acres          550



   21 acres - 50 acres          700



   51 acres - 75 acres          950



   76 plus acres:             $950, plus $40 per acre for each
acre over 75.



   (B)   Site inspections.



      (1)   Single Family/Duplex subdivisions.



   No. of Lots            Fee



   1 lot               $50



   2 - 4 lots            100



   5 - 9 lots            150



   10 - 15 lots            175



   16 - 25 lots            200



   26 - 50 lots            275



   51 - 100 lots            400



   100 plus lots            500



      (2)   Site plans:  (same as division (A)(2) of this section).



   Lot Size            Fee



   Up to 30,000 sq. ft         $75



   30,000 sq. ft.-1.5 acres      100



   2 acres - 5 acres         125



   6 acres - 10 acres         175



   11 acres - 20 acres         250



   21 acres - 50 acres         350



   51 acres - 75 acres         400



   76 plus acres            500



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.12  PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   Within five working days of the receipt of a completed plan,
the Building Official shall send a copy of the plan to the review authorities
which may include the Public Works Department, the Planning Board, or
Planning Department, and Conservation Commission for the purpose of review
and comment. The Building Official may also, within the above time frame,
submit copies of the plan to other local departments or agencies, including
the conservation district that serves the town, in order to better achieve
the purposes of this chapter. Failure of the aforementioned review
authorities to respond within 21 working days of their receipt of the plan
shall be deemed as no objection to the plan as submitted.



   (B)   The time allowed for plan review shall be commensurate with
the proposed development project, and shall be accomplished simultaneously
with other reviews. 



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.13  PLAN APPROVAL/DISAPPROVAL.



   (A)   The Building Official or designee shall notify the applicant,
in writing, either approving or disapproving the plan, with reasons stated if
disapproved, within ten days after he/she has received the written opinion of
the aforementioned review authorities.



   (B)   In approving a plan, the Building Official or designee shall
issue a permit good for two years and may attach such conditions deemed
reasonably necessary by the aforementioned review authorities to further the
purposes of this chapter. Such conditions pertaining to erosion and sediment
control measures and/or devices may include, but are not limited to,
retention of stone walls in place, the erection of walls, silt fences,
drains, dams and structures, planting vegetation, trees, shrubs, furnishings,
necessary easements, and specifying a method for performing various kinds of
work and the sequence or timing thereof. The applicant shall notify the
Building Official or designee in advance of his/her intent to begin
construction work described in the SWPPP. The applicant shall have the SWPPP
on the site during grading and construction. 



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.14  APPROVAL; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Every approval granted herein shall expire at the end of the
time period set forth in the conditions of the bond or in two years,
whichever is longer.. The developer shall fully perform and complete all of
the work required within the specified time period.



   (B)   If the applicant is unable to complete the work within the
designated time period, he/she shall, at least 30 days prior to the
expiration date, submit a written request for an extension of time to the
Building Official, setting forth the reasons underlying  the requested time
extension. If the extension is warranted, the Building Official may grant an
extension of time up to a maximum of one year from the date of the original
deadline. Subsequent extensions under the same conditions may be granted at
the discretion of the Building Official.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.15  MAINTENANCE OF MEASURES.



   Maintenance of all erosion and sediment control measures and controls
for other wastes under this chapter shall be the responsibility of the
applicant. Such erosion and sediment control measures and controls for other
wastes shall be maintained in good condition and working order on a
continuing basis. Watercourses originating and located completely on private
property shall be the responsibility of the owner to the point of open
discharge at the  property line or at a communal watercourse within the
property.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06) Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.16  LIABILITY OF APPLICANT.



   Neither approval of a SWPPP nor compliance with any condition of this
chapter shall relieve the applicant from any responsibility for damage to
persons or property, nor impose any liability upon the town for damages to
persons or property.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.17  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Periodic inspections.  The provisions of this chapter shall
be administered and enforced by the Building Official. All work shall be
subject to periodic inspections by the Building Official. All work shall be
performed in accordance with an inspection and construction control schedule
approved by the Building Official, who shall maintain a permanent file of all
inspections. Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall notify the
Building Official that all grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control
measures and devices, vegetation and  ground cover plantings, and controls
for other wastes has been completed in conformance with the approved plans,
specifications, conditions, and other applicable provisions of this
chapter.  At a minimum, the inspection schedule shall include two
inspections, one to take place during construction and one after final site
stabilization.



   (B)   Final inspection.  Upon such notification of the completion
by the owner, the Building Official shall make a final inspection of the site
and shall prepare a final summary inspection report of findings which shall
be retained in the Building Official's files and in the Department of Public
Works permanent inspections file.



   (C)   Bond release. The applicant may request the release of his/her
performance bond from the Building Official 12 months after the final site
inspection has been completed and approved. In the instance where the
performance bond has been posted with the recording of a final subdivision,
the bond shall be released after the Building Official has been notified by
the Town Planner of successful completion of all plan improvements by the
applicant.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.18  NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   If at any stage, the work in progress and/or completed under
the terms of an approved SWPPP does not conform to such plan, a written
notice from the Building Official to comply shall be transmitted by certified
mail to the owner. Such notice shall set forth the nature of the temporary
and permanent corrections required and the time limit within which
corrections shall be completed.



   (B)   Failure to comply with the required corrections within the
specified time limit shall be considered in violation of this chapter, in
which case the performance bond or cash or negotiable securities deposit
shall be subject to notice of default, in accordance with § 151.46 and/or §
151.47. 



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.19  APPEALS.



   (A)   Administrative procedures:



      (1)   If the ruling made by the Building Official is
unsatisfactory to the applicant, the applicant may file a written appeal. The
appeal shall be to the Board of Appeals within 10 days of the decision.



      (2)   Appeal procedures shall follow current requirements for
appeal to the Board of Appeals.



      (3)   During the period in which the request for appeal is
filed, and until such time as a final decision is rendered on the appeal, the
decision of the Building Official shall remain in effect.



   (B)   Expert opinion. The Board of Appeals may seek technical
assistance on any stormwater pollution prevention plan. Such expert opinion
must be made available in the office of the Building Official as a public
record prior to the appeals hearing. 



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN



§ 151.35  PLAN PREPARATION.



   The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared by a
registered engineer, a soil and water conservation society certified erosion
and sediment control specialist, or a landscape architect. SWPPPs requiring
the practice of engineering shall be stamped and signed by a registered
professional engineer.  Five copies of the plan shall be submitted to the
Building Official.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.36  PLAN CONTENTS.



   (A)   The SWPPP shall include sufficient information about the
proposed activities and land parcel(s) to form a clear basis for discussion
and review and to assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   The plan shall be consistent with the data collection, data
analysis, land plan preparation guidelines in the current Rhode Island Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, prepared by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,  R.I. Department of Environmental
Management, R.I. State Conservation Committee, and at a minimum shall contain:



      (1)   Narrative description. A description of the proposed
land disturbing activity, estimates of the total area of the site and the
total area of the site expected to be disturbed, and any proposed sequencing
of project; soil erosion and sediment control measures, and measures to be
installed to control other wastes that could result from the proposed
activity; and a description of any potential sources of pollution that may be
expected to affect the 1uality of stormwater discharges from the site. 
Supporting documentation, such as a description of the drainage area and the
existing site, and soil maps shall be provided as required by the Building
Official or designee.



      (2)   Construction drawings.  Drawings illustrating in detail
existing and proposed contours, drainage features and limits of  vegetation;
limits of clearing and grading; the location of soil erosion and sediment
controls stormwater management measures, and controls for other wastes;
detail drawings of the controls and measures; the location of stock piles and
borrow areas; sequencing and staging of land disturbing activities; and other
such information needed for construction.



      (3)   Erosion and sediment controls. A description including
construction details appropriate to the site, for both vegetative and
structural practices. Vegetative BMPs are designed to preserve existing
vegetation where attainable and revegetate open areas as soon as practicable
after grading or construction. Structural BMPs divert flows from exposed
soils, filter runoff, store flows or otherwise limit runoff from coming into
contact with exposed, unvegetated areas of the site and to prevent sediments
and/or other pollutants from leaving the site.



      (4)   Post construction stormwater management. A description
of measures that will be installed during the construction project to control
pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur at the site after the
construction operations have been completed. These measures shall be
consistent with the requirements of the stormwater ordinance. Maintenance
activities for these measures shall be described in accordance with division
(B)(6) below.



      (5)   Other controls. 



         (a)   Waste disposal. A description of the other
controls, including construction details appropriate for the site. to
eliminate the discharge of other construction wastes found on the
construction site. All types of waste generated at the site shall be disposed
of in a manner consistent with state law and/or regulations.



         (b)   Good housekeeping. Good housekeeping measures to
provide for the minimization of exposure of construction debris to
precipitation and for the proper disposal of such debris shall be  specified.



         (c)   Spill prevention. Areas where potential spills can
occur shall be identified. The potential tor spills to enter the stormwater
drainage system, shall be eliminated wherever feasible.



      (6)   Maintenance plan. A description of procedures to
maintain. in good and effective operating condition, vegetation stormwater
control measures, and other protective measures, identified in the site plan.



      (7)   Other information.  Other information or construction
plans and details as deemed necessary by the Building Official for thorough
review of the plan prior to action being taken as prescribed in this chapter.
Withholding or delaying submission of such information may be reasons for the
Building Official to judge the application incomplete and grounds for
disapproval.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.37  PERFORMANCE PRINCIPLES.



   The contents of the SWPPP shall clearly demonstrate how the principles,
outlined below, have been met in the design and are to be accomplished by the
proposed development project.



   (A)   Due regard for natural drainage characteristics, topography
and soils shall be indicated.



   (B)   To the extent possible, steep slopes shall be avoided.



   (C)   The grade of slopes created shall be minimized.



   (D)   All post-development stormwater management measures shall
comply with Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances.



   (E)   Original boundaries, alignment and slope of watercourses
within the project locus shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible.



   (F)   In general, drainage shall be directed away from structures
intended for human occupancy, municipal or utility use, or similar structures.



   (G)   All drainage provisions shall be of such a design and capacity
so as to adequately handle stormwater runoff, including runoff from tributary
upstream areas which may be outside the locus of the project.



   (H)   Drainage facilities shall be installed as early as feasible
during construction and, if possible prior to site clearance.



   (I)   Fill located adjacent to watercourses shall be adequately
protected from erosion by means of rip-rap, gabions,  retaining  walls,
vegetative stabilization, or similar measures.



   (J)   Temporary vegetation and or mulching shall be used to protect
bare areas and stockpiles from erosion during construction.  The smallest
areas feasible shall be exposed at any one time and disturbed areas shall be
protected during the non-growing months, November through March.



   (K)   Permanent vegetation shall be planted immediately following
fine grading.



   (L)   Trees and other existing vegetation shall be retained whenever
feasible.  The area within the drip line shall be fenced or roped off to
protect trees from construction equipment.



   (M)   All areas damaged during construction shall be re-sodded,
re-seeded or otherwise restored.



   (N)   Monitoring and maintenance inspections shall be scheduled
prior to commencing the project. 



   (O)   All controls installed or used to achieve compliance with this
SWPPP must be properly operated and maintained at all times.



   (P)   Sediment controls, stormwater measures, and other controls
shall protect downstream water bodies from adverse water quality impacts
resulting form construction activities.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 151.45  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   (A)   Before approving a SWPPP, the Building Official or designee
may require the applicant to file a surety company performance bond, deposit
of money, negotiable securities or other method of surety, as specified by
the Building Official or designee. When any land-disturbing activity is to
take place within 200 feet of any watercourse or coastal feature or within an
identified flood hazard district, or on slopes in excess of 10%, the filing
of a performance bond shall be required. The amount of such bond, as
determined by the Public Works Director or in his/her absence, the Building
Official, shall be sufficient to cover the cost of implementing all erosion
and sediment control measures shown on the plan.



   (B)   The bond or negotiable security filed by the applicant shall
be subject to approval in the form, content, amount and manner of execution
by the Finance Director.



   (C)   A performance bond for a SWPPP for a subdivision may be
included in the performance bond of the subdivision. The posting of such bond
as part of the subdivision performance bond does not, however, relieve the
owner of any requirement(s) of this chapter. 



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.46  NOTICE OF DEFAULT ON PERFORMANCE SECURED BY BOND.



   (A)   Whenever the Building Official shall find that default has
occurred in the performance of any term(s) or condition(s) of the bond or in
the implementation of measures secured by the bond, written notice thereof
shall be made to the applicant and to the surety of the bond by the Town
Administrator. Such notice shall state the nature of default, work to be
done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the
Building Official to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.



   (B)   Failure of the applicant to acknowledge and comply with the
provisions and deadlines outlined in such notice of default shall result in
action by the Town Administrator, without further notice of proceedings
whatsoever, to utilize the performance bond to cause the required work to be
completed by the town, by contract or by other appropriate means as
determined by the Town Administrator. 



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.47  NOTICE OF DEFAULT ON PERFORMANCE SECURED BY CASH OR NEGOTIABLE
SECURITIES DEPOSIT.



   If a cash or negotiable securities deposit has been posted by the
applicant, notice and procedures for default shall be the same as provided
for in § 151.46.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.48  RELEASE FROM PERFORMANCE BOND CONDITIONS.



   The performance bonding requirement shall remain in full force and
effect for 12 months following completion of the project, or longer as deemed
appropriate by the Building Official.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.98  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Revocation or suspension of approval. The approval of a SWPPP
under this chapter may be revoked or suspended only by the Building Official.



   (B)   All work on the project may be halted for an indefinite time
period by the Building Official after written notification is transmitted (by
the Building Official) to the applicant for one or more of the following
reasons:



      (1)   Violation of any condition of the approved plan,
conditions or specifications pertaining thereto;



      (2)   Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation related to the work or work
site; and



      (3)   The existence of any condition or the performance of any
act constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangerment to human
life or the property of others, or contrary to the spirit or intent of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever there is a failure to comply with the provisions of
this chapter, the town shall have the right to notify the applicant that
he/she has five days from the receipt of notice to temporarily correct the
violations and 30 days from receipt of notice to permanently correct the
violations.



    (B)   Should the applicant fail to take the temporary corrective
measures within the five day period and the permanent corrective measures
within the 30 day period, the town shall then have the right to take whatever
actions it deems necessary to correct the violations and to assert a lien on
the subject property in an amount equal to the cost of remedial actions.



   (C)   The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided by law for
the enforcement of common law liens on personal property.  The lien shall be
recorded with the records of land evidence of the town, and the lien shall
incur legal interest in the amount of the prime rate plus 1% from the date of
recording.



   (D)   The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the offender
from compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including revocation of
the performance bond or assessment of a lien on the property by the town.



(Ord. passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-06)



CHAPTER 152:  ZONING CODE



Section



   152.01   Zoning Code adopted



   Appendix A:     Zoning Code



§ 152.01  ZONING CODE ADOPTED.



   The town's zoning ordinance, as originally passed October 30, 2006, and
subsequently amended, is codified as Appendix A to this chapter in order to
maintain the original numbering system established within it.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2012-4, passed 5-21-12)



APPENDIX A:  ZONING CODE



Section



Article 1  Purpose



   100   Short title



   101   Purposes of chapter



   102   Findings



   103   Terminology



Article 2  Zoning Board of Review



   200   Organization



   201   Vote required



   202   Meeting and hearings



   203   Records



   204   Repetitive petitions



   205   Powers of Zoning Board



Article 3  Administration, Enforcement and Procedures



   300   Building Inspector as Zoning Officer



   301   Powers of Zoning Officer



   302   Purposes for which building permit required



   303   Applications for and records of building permit



   304   Technical Review Committee



   305   Development plan review (DPR)



   306   Uses subject to and exempt from development plan review



   307   Development plan review for uses permitted by right



   308   Development plan review for uses requiring a variance or
special use permit



   309   Required guidelines, findings and improvements



   310   Development impact review



   311   Certificates of zoning compliance for new, altered or
nonconforming uses



   312   Expiration of building permits



   313   Completion of work authorized prior to effective date of this
chapter



   314   Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans,
permits and certificates of zoning compliance



   315   Complaints regarding violations



   316   Penalty for violations; recourse of town and duty of Town
Solicitor upon violation



   317   Appeals



   318   Special use permits and variances



   319   Appeal of Planning Board decision



   320   Public hearings



   321   Summary hearings



   322   Decisions and records of the Zoning Board of Review



Article 4  Definitions



   400   Definitions



Article 5  Zoning Districts and Zoning Map



   500   Establishment of zoning districts



   501   Purposes of the various zoning districts



   502   Official zoning map



   503   Rules for interpretation of zoning district boundaries



Article 6  Application of District Regulations



   600   Regulation of structures and land



   601   Special provisions regarding lot width/frontage



   602   Schedule of district regulations - uses and districts



   603   District dimensional regulations



   604   Conservation development dimensional regulations



   605   Maximum building footprint



Article 7  Supplementary Regulations



   700   Purpose



   701   Yard regulations; exceptions



   702   Number of dwelling units or principal building per lot



   703   Accessory uses and structures



   704   Height and yard modifications



   705   Fences, walls and hedges



   706   Vision clearance at street intersections



   707   Setback from wetlands or rivers



   708   Conversion of dwelling to more units



   709   Parking, storage and use of major recreational equipment in
residential districts



   710   Parking and storage of certain vehicles



   711   Minimum residential floor area



   712   Removal of earth products



   713   Airport height regulations; "Airport Approach Plan for Newport
State Airport"



   714   Swimming pools



   715   Drainage



   716   Yard regulations



   717   Drive-up windows



   718   Application to subdivisions (Grandfathering)



   719   Mixed uses within a building



   720   Traffic sensitive districts



   721   Waste receptacle enclosures



   722   Farm-promotion accessory uses



   723   Landscaping



   724   Light industrial district



   725   Ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation



   726   Collection boxes



Article 8  Nonconforming Uses



   800   Continuance of a nonconforming use



   801   Discontinuance of a nonconforming use



   802   Destruction or demolition of nonconforming structures



   803   Extension or alteration



   804   Change of use



   805   Nonconforming lot of record



   806   Effect of enactment of amendment of chapter on building
permits valid as of time of such enactment or amendment



Article 9  Appeals, Special Use Permits and Variances



   900   Powers of Zoning Board of Review



   901   Appeals



   902   Special use permits



   903   Variances



   904   Conditions on variances and special use permits



   905   Expiration and extensions



Article 10  Flood Hazard Areas



   1000   Purpose



   1001   Applicability



   1002   Notification of watercourse alteration



   1003   Use regulations



   1004   [Reserved]



   1005   Definitions



   1006   Duties and responsibilities of Building Inspector



Article 11  Watershed Protection District



   1100   Purpose



   1101   Definition of district



   1102   Areas within Zone 1



   1103   Uses permitted in Zone 1



   1104   Areas within Zone 2



   1105   Uses permitted in Zone 2



   1106   Procedure of special use permits in Zone 1 or Zone 2



   1107   Special use permit submission requirements



   1108   Development plan design standards



Article 12  Signs



   1200   Purpose



   1201   Applicability



   1202   Definitions



   1203   Administration



   1204   Enforcement



   1205   Calculations



   1206   Maintenance and safety



   1207   Nonconforming signs



   1208   Prohibited signs



   1209   Exempt signs



   1210   Temporary signs



   1211   Seasonal signs



   1212   Permitted signs



   1213   Property address



Article 13  Off-street Parking and Loading



   1300   General requirements



   1301   Site improvements



   1302   Location of facility



   1303   Submission of plans



   1304   Minimum and maximum off-street parking requirements



   1305   Off-street loading - applicability



   1306   Off-street loading - location



   1307   Off-street loading - requirements



Article 14  Motels and Hotels



   1400   Purpose



   1401   Procedure for proposed development



   1402   Development plan review requirements



   1403   Standards of development



   1404   Minimum lot size



   1405   Unit size



   1406   Buffer zones



   1407   Utilities



   1408   Kitchen facilities



   1409   Accessory uses



Article 15  Multifamily Dwellings



   1500   Purpose



   1501   Procedures for proposed development



   1502   Development plan requirements



   1503   Standards of development



   1504   Allowable density



   1505   Open space requirement



   1506   Utilities



   1507   Off-street parking



   1508   Building design and location



Article 16  Accessory Family Dwelling Unit



   1600   Purpose



   1601   Requirements



   1602   Procedure



   1603   Change of occupancy



Article 17  Low and Moderate Income Housing - Comprehensive Permit



   1700   Purpose



   1701   Authority



   1702   Eligibility



   1703   Definitions



   1704   Procedure



Article 17A  Community Residences and Family Day Care Homes



   17A00   Purpose



   17A01   Requirements



   17A02   Exemption



Article 18  Shopping Centers



   1800   Purpose



   1801   Procedure for proposed development



   1802   Permitted uses



   1803   Building setback line



   1804   Side and rear yards



   1805   Special buffer requirements adjacent to residential areas



   1806   Access and traffic control



   1807   Off-street parking areas



   1808   Lighting



   1809   Waste receptacle enclosures



   1810   Trash burners and incinerators



   1811   Special requirements for stand-alone buildings



Article 19  Conservation Development



   1900   General



   1901   Purpose



   1902   Applicability



   1903   Permitted uses



   1904   Density



   1905   Open space



   1906   Dimensional requirements



Article 20  Cemeteries



   2000   Purpose



   2001   Procedures and standards for proposed development



   2002   Development plan requirements



   2003   Minimum area



   2004   Special purpose buffer zone



   2005   Regrading



   2006   Alteration of watercourses



   2007   Alteration of existing stone walls



   2008   Crematorium



   2009   Funeral parlors



   2010   Lot coverage



   2011   Height



   2012   Equipment



   2013   Security



   2014   Enforcement



Article 21  Residential Care and Assisted Living Facilities



   2100   Purpose



   2101   Uses and restrictions



   2102   Procedure for proposed development



   2103   Development plan requirements



   2104   Standards of development



   2105   Off-street parking



Article 22  Senior Independent Living Facilities



   2200   Purpose



   2201   Uses and restrictions



   2202   Procedure for proposed development



   2203   Development plan requirements



   2204   Standards of development



   2205   Off-street parking



Article 23  Mobile Home Parks



   2300   Purpose



   2301   Procedures for proposed development



   2302   Development plan requirements



   2303   Standards for development



   2304   Minimum area



   2305   Width and depth



   2306   Buffering



   2307   Recreation and open space



   2308   Access



   2309   Lot requirements



   2310   Street system



   2311   Uses permitted



   2312   Occupancy



   2313   Mobile home subdivisions



   2314   Prohibition of individual mobile homes



Article 24  Transient Trailer Parks



   2400   Purpose



   2401   Definitions



   2402   Procedures for proposed development



   2403   Development plan requirements



   2404   Standards of development



   2405   Required recreation area



   2406   Buffering



   2407   Required separation between transient trailers



   2408   Transient trailer park streets system



   2409   Access



   2410   Internal streets



   2411   Off-street parking and maneuvering space



   2412   Water supply and sewage disposal



   2413   Environmental and open space requirements



   2414   Soil ground cover requirements



   2415   Uses permitted



   2416   Prohibition of individual trailers



Article 25  Wireless Telecommunications Facilities



   2500   Purpose



   2501   Basic requirements



   2502   Procedure for proposed development



   2503   Development plan requirements



   2504   Standards of development



   2505   Miscellaneous additional requirements



   2506   Special requirements for disguised facilities



   2507   Special requirements for co-located antennas



   2508   Conflict with other zoning provisions



Article 25A  Wind Turbines



   25A00   Purpose



   25A01   Applicability



   25A02   Definitions



   25A03   Basic requirements



   25A04   Design standards



   25A05   Procedure



   25A06   Unused or abandoned wind turbines



   25A07   Enforcement



Article 26  Public Zoning Districts



   2600   Creation of public zoning districts



   2601   Change of use



Article 27  Commercial and Industrial Performance Standards



   2700   Purpose



   2701   Application of standards



   2702   Administration of performance standards



   2703   Required data



   2704   Report by expert consultants



   2705   Zoning Officer's action



   2706   Required alterations



   2707   Zoning Board of Review to hear appeal



   2708   Continued enforcement



   2709   Cancellation of permits



   2710   Exemptions



   2711   Noise



   2712   Vibration



   2713   Smoke and air pollution



   2714   Sewage and waste



   2715   Odors



   2716   Toxic matter



   2717   Heat and glare



   2718   Radiation



   2719   Fire and explosives



   2720   Conduct of activities



   2730   Gravel processing and outdoor storage of bulk materials



Article 27A  Mixed-Use Development Projects



   27A00   Purpose



   27A01   Applicability



   27A02   Procedure



   27A03   Definitions



   27A04   Permitted uses



   27A05   Density and dimensional standards



   27A06   Incentives authorized



   27A07   Design standards



Article 28  Amendment



   2800   General



   2801   Conditions upon amendment



   2802   Additional procedures for amendment to zoning map



   2803   Further provisions as to amendment of zoning map



   2804   Duties of the Town Clerk



   2805   Duties of Planning Board



   2806   Repetitive petitions for amendment of chapter or for granting
of exception or variance



   2807   Landowner's protests



Article 29  Legal Status



   2900   Severability



   2901   Provisions of chapter declared to be minimum requirements



   2902   Effective date



ARTICLE 1  PURPOSE



§ 100  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance of
the Town of Middletown or simply as the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 101  PURPOSES OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   The districts and regulations set forth in this chapter are
established in accordance with the Middletown Comprehensive Community Plan
for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the town. The regulations are designed to:



      (1)   Lessen congestion in the streets;



      (2)   Provide adequate light and air;



      (3)   Secure safety from fire, panic, flooding and other
dangers;



      (4)   Prevent the overcrowding of land;



      (5)   Avoid undue concentration of population;



      (6)   Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation,
water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements;



      (7)   Avoid pollution of public water supplies; and



      (8)   Provide for the preservation of open space and
agricultural land.



   (B)   They are designed with reasonable consideration, among other
things, of the character of each district and its suitability for particular
uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging
the most appropriate use of land through the town.



   (C)   These zoning regulations are in accordance with R.I. Gen. Laws
§ 45-24-30 and are adopted to promote the purposes and goals of the
Comprehensive Community Plan, as well as the following:



      (1)   Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare;



      (2)   Provide for a range of uses and intensities of use
appropriate to the character of the town and reflecting current and expected
future needs;



      (3)   Provide for orderly growth and development which
recognizes:



         (a)   The goals and patterns of land use contained in
the town's Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-22.2;



         (b)   The natural characteristics of the land, including
its suitability for use based on soil characteristics, topography, and
susceptibility to surface or groundwater pollution;



         (c)   The values and dynamic nature of coastal and
freshwater ponds, the shoreline and freshwater and coastal wetlands;



         (d)   The values of unique or valuable natural resources
and features;



         (e)   The availability and capacity of existing and
planned public and/or private services and facilities;



         (f)   The need to shape and balance urban and rural
development; and



         (g)   The use of innovative development regulations and
techniques;



      (4)   Provide for the control, protection, and/or abatement of
air, water, groundwater, noise pollution and soil erosion and sedimentation;



      (5)   Provide for the protection of the natural, historic,
cultural, and scenic character of the town or areas therein;



      (6)   Provide for the preservation and promotion of
agricultural production, forest, silviculture, aquaculture, timber resources
and open space;



      (7)   Provide for the protection of public investment in
transportation, water, stormwater management systems, sewage treatment and
disposal, solid waste treatment and disposal, schools, recreation, public
facilities, open space and other public requirements;



      (8)   Promote a balance of housing choices, for all income
levels and groups, to assure the health, safety and welfare of all citizens
and their rights to affordable, accessible, safe, and sanitary housing;



      (9)   Provide opportunities for the establishment of low and
moderate income housing;



      (10)   Promote safety from fire, flood, and other natural or
man-made disasters;



      (11)   Promote a high level of quality in design in the
development of private and public facilities;



      (12)   Promote implementation of the town's Comprehensive Plan
pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-22.2;



      (13)   Provide for coordination of land uses with contiguous
municipalities, other municipalities, the state, and other agencies, as
appropriate, especially with regard to resources and facilities that extend
beyond municipal boundaries or have a direct impact on that municipality;



      (14)   Provide for efficient review of development proposals,
to clarify and expedite the zoning approval process;



      (15)   Provide for procedures for the administration of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, variances, special use permits,
appeals, and, where adopted, procedures for modifications;



      (16)   Provide opportunities for reasonable accommodations in
order to comply with the Rhode Island Fair Housing Practices Act, R.I. Gen.
Laws Title 34, Chapter 37, the United States Fair Housing Amendments Act of
1988 (FHAA), the Rhode Island Civil Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act,
R.I. Gen. Laws Title 42, Chapter 87 and the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990 (ADA), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 102  FINDINGS.



   The following findings are also made as a basis for these regulations:



   (A)   Middletown has been experiencing ever-increasing pressures for
commercial, industrial and residential development. These pressures are in
direct confrontation with the town's concern for the general safety, health
and welfare of its inhabitants and the preservation of its natural resources.
Of particular concern is the impact of future development on traffic, water
supply and open space. In an effort to address these concerns by providing
reasonable safeguards against inappropriate and potentially injurious
development, this chapter has established a Watershed Protection District and
Traffic Sensitive Districts and encourages the continued use of land for
agricultural purposes, and provides for conservation development for the
following reasons.



   (B)   Middletown is the primary watershed and major storage area for
the water supply for the City of Newport and the Town of Middletown. It is
essential that this resource be protected against diminution, damage or
despoliation. Accordingly, this chapter, in recognition of these vital
concerns, has established regulations and limitations with respect to the use
and development of areas within the town which impact the watershed and
storage areas and which are intended to protect this important resource by
establishing a Watershed Protection District.



   (C)   Middletown suffers from serious traffic problems on its major
highways, namely, East and West Main Roads, Valley Road and Aquidneck Avenue.
These problems are evidenced by mounting vehicular congestion and an
increasing number of accidents. These roads are now overtaxed far beyond
their designed capacity and the future development of the town will only
compound this situation. It is essential that future access to and egress
from these highly congested roads be controlled as much as possible in the
interest of public safety. In recognition of this problem, and for the
purpose of providing a measure of control, this chapter has established
Traffic Sensitive Districts.



   (D)   Middletown has a long history as an agricultural community
with large open spaces which contribute to the beauty, quality of life and
ecological balance of the town. It is the utilization of land for
agricultural purposes which provides the most practical way of ensuring the
preservation of these areas. Accordingly, in an effort to support and
encourage the use of land for agricultural purposes to the fullest extent,
this chapter establishes an Agricultural District. The fact that no district
is specifically identified as an Agricultural District has no significance
and the use of land for agricultural purposes shall be considered a primary
use in any district.



   (E)   In recent years, patterns of both residential and commercial
development have been inconsistent with historical rural development
patterns.  Rural development is characterized by large, aggregated,
undeveloped land areas; natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes,
floodplains, wetlands, stream and river corridors, hedgerows and rock
outcroppings, scenic vistas and rural views; significant historic features
such as old barns, heritage trees, etc.; and settlement patterns
characterized by clusters of compact groupings of development in otherwise
wide open spaces and/or appropriate topographic or vegetative screening. 
Conversely, conventional suburban development converts all buildable land
into house lots and streets; except for wetlands, all natural areas are
cleared and graded.  This type of development does not take into
consideration individual characteristics of land including environmental,
cultural and historical resources.  Conservation development, on the other
hand, allows the same number of units as would be allowed under conventional
development, but also ensures a significant portion of land is preserved in
its natural state; thereby fulfilling the goals of Middletown's Comprehensive
Plan.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 103  TERMINOLOGY.



   (A)   CHAPTER shall mean Chapter 152 of the Code of the Town of
Middletown, Rhode Island.



   (B)   ORDINANCE as used herein refers to the Zoning Ordinance of the
Town of Middletown, Rhode Island, being Chapter 152 of the Code of the Town
of Middletown, Rhode Island, as amended by this comprehensive amendment
enacted by the Town Council of the Town of Middletown pursuant to the
rezoning process conducted by the town in 1994 and 2000.



   (C)   REGULATIONS as used herein refers to the Rules and Regulations
Regarding the Subdivision and Development of Land as adopted by the Planning
Board of the Town of Middletown.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 2  ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW



§ 200  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Review hereinafter
called the Zoning Board, or Board, which shall consist of five active members
and three alternate members, who shall have all of the authority and be
subject to all of the duties provided by R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-24, as amended.



   (B)   All members shall be appointed by the Town Council. Each
active member shall hold office for the term of five years; provided that the
terms of each of the five active members shall be staggered so that in April
of each year the Town Council shall appoint one member to the Zoning Board to
succeed the member whose term expires. Alternate members shall be appointed
for a term of one year.  Members may serve no more than two consecutive
terms but may be reappointed after an absence of one term. Each member shall
hold office until his/her successor is duly appointed and qualified. In case
any vacancy occurs on the Board, for any cause, the Town Council shall
appoint a new member for the remainder of any unexpired term.



   (C)   An alternate member may participate in all business before the
Zoning Board but may vote only when sitting as an active member at the
request of the chairperson, if and when an active member is absent or
disqualified or is unable to serve at any hearing. In the event that any
matter before the Board is likely to be continued for more than one hearing,
the chairperson may request that an alternate member participate at such
hearings and the alternate member shall be authorized to vote on the matter
when and if an active member becomes unable to serve at any such hearings.



   (D)   All members of the Board shall be legal residents of the Town
of Middletown and no member shall be an elected official or salaried employee
of the Town of Middletown.



   (E)   In April of each year, the Board shall organize by electing
from its membership a chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary.



   (F)   The Zoning Board of Review, as constituted at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, shall be continued and all members of the Board in
office at the time of adoption of this chapter shall continue to hold office
for the remainder of their respective terms.



   (G)   The Zoning Board shall adopt written rules and regulations for
the conduct of public hearings, the requirements for applications, the order
of procedure or other matters pertaining to the conduct of business; provided
that rules and regulations are adopted following a public hearing thereon,
and are available for general distribution to the public upon request.



   (H)   The chairperson or, in his or her absence, the acting
chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by
the issuance of subpoenas.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 201  VOTE REQUIRED.



   (A)   In conducting hearings and arriving at its decisions, the
Board shall at all times consist of five active members. As soon as a
conflict occurs for a member, that member shall excuse himself or herself,
shall not sit as an active member and take no part in the conduct of the
hearing. Only five active members shall be entitled to vote on any issue.



   (B)   The concurring vote of three members of the Zoning Board shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Zoning Administrative Officer, Building Inspector or Planning Board. The
concurring vote of four members shall be required to decide in favor of an
applicant on the matter of a special use permit or variance or any other
matter upon which the Zoning Board is authorized to pass.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 202  MEETING AND HEARINGS.



   Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and
at such other times as the Board may determine. The chairperson or in his/her
absence, the vice chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses and the submission of explanatory data. All hearings and
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 203  RECORDS.



   The Board shall make a record of all its proceedings and actions,
precisely showing the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member
participating therein and the absence of a member or his/her failure to vote.
This record shall be filed immediately in the Office of the Board and Town
Clerk and shall be available for review by the public.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 204  REPETITIVE PETITIONS.



   (A)   Where the Zoning Board, in the case of a special use permit or
variance, denies an application, the Board may not consider another
application requesting the same special use permit or variance which it had
previously denied, for a period of at least one year from the date of such
denial or withdrawal.



   (B)   The Zoning Board may accept such a repeat application after
six months; provided that the application is accompanied by an affidavit
setting forth facts, to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer, showing a
substantial change of circumstances justifying a rehearing.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 205  POWERS OF THE ZONING BOARD.



   The Zoning Board of Review shall have the power to:



   (A)   Hear and decide appeals in a timely fashion where it is
alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by an administrative officer or agency in the enforcement or
interpretation of this chapter or of any ordinance adopted pursuant hereto;



   (B)   Hear and decide appeals from a party aggrieved by a decision
of an historic district commission pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws §§
45-24.1-7.1 and 45-24.1-7.2;



   (C)   Hear and decide appeals where the Zoning Board of Review is
appointed as the board of appeals for airport zoning regulations;



   (D)   Authorize, upon application in specific cases of hardship,
variances in the application of the terms of this chapter, pursuant to
appeals, special use permits, and variances.



   (E)   Authorize, upon application, in specific cases, special use
permits, pursuant to appeals, special use permits, and variances, where the
Zoning Board of Review is designated as the permit authority for special use
permits;



   (F)   Refer matters to the Planning Board, or to other boards or
agencies of the town as may be deemed appropriate, for findings and
recommendations;



   (G)   Provide for issuance of conditional zoning approvals where a
proposed application would otherwise be approved except that one or more
state or federal agency approvals which are necessary are pending. A
conditional zoning approval shall be revoked in the instance where any
necessary state or federal agency approvals are not received within a
specified time period; and



   (H)   Hear and decide such other matters according to the terms of
this chapter or other statutes and upon which the Board may be authorized to
pass under this chapter or other statutes.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 3  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PROCEDURES



§ 300  BUILDING INSPECTOR AS ZONING OFFICER.



   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector of the Town of
Middletown, hereinafter called the Zoning Officer, to administer and enforce
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 301  POWERS OF THE ZONING OFFICER.



   If the Zoning Officer determines that any of the provisions of this
chapter are being violated, he/she shall notify, in writing, the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Zoning Officer shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land or structures, removal of illegal
structures or additions, alterations or structural changes thereto,
discontinuance of any illegal work being done or shall take any other action
authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with, or to prevent violation
of, its provisions.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 302  PURPOSES FOR WHICH BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No building or structure shall be erected, moved, added to or
structurally altered and no alteration to land resulting in an increase in
impervious surface except for residential driveways and residential patios,
shall be done without a building permit therefor, issued by the Building
Official in accordance with the State Building Code. No building permit shall
be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter or except
after written order from the Zoning Board of Review.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 303  APPLICATIONS FOR AND RECORDS OF BUILDING PERMITS.



   (A)   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape
of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of
structures already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the
proposed structure or alteration.



   (B)   The application shall include such other information as may be
lawfully required by the Zoning Officer, including information concerning
existing or proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the
structure and land; and the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental
units the structure is designed to accommodate. The application shall also
show conditions existing on the lot. to include location of all wetland,
floodplains, coastal features and soils information (if applicable); and such
other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide
for the enforcement of, this chapter.



   (C)   One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by
the Zoning Officer, after marking such copy either as approved or disapproved
and attested thereto by his/her signature on such copy. The second copy of
the plans, similarly marked shall be retained by the Zoning Officer.



   (D)   The Zoning Officer shall maintain a record of all building
permits issued, and copies shall be furnished to any person upon request and
upon receipt of a reasonable fee.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 304  TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Composition. The Planning Board shall establish and oversee a
Technical Review Committee, which shall be composed of the following members:



      (1)   The Administrative Officer (Town Planner), who shall
serve as Chairman of the TRC;



      (2)   The Zoning Officer;



      (3)   The Public Works Director; and



      (4)   The Town Engineer.



   (B)   Quorum, voting, records, meetings.



      (1)   A quorum of the Technical Review Committee shall consist
of at least three members, provided that it must include the Administrative
Officer.



      (2)   An affirmative vote of the majority of the members
present shall be required to take any action.



      (3)   All votes and minutes of the Technical Review Committee
shall comply with the Open Meetings Act.  The Administrative Officer shall
take the minutes of the TRC or may designate a staff member to do so.



      (4)   All records of the Technical Review Committee shall be
in the care of the Administrative Officer.



      (5)   The Technical Review Committee shall meet as necessary.



      (6)   All applications for Development Plan Review shall be
filed with the Zoning Board of Review in accordance with § 305 of this
chapter.



      (7)   The Administrative Officer shall establish a schedule
for application review to ensure compliance with the timeframes provided in
Article 10 of the Middletown Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision
and Development of Land.



   (C)   Town assistance to Technical Review Committee. As considered
necessary by the Technical Review Committee, applications shall be forwarded
to the Police Chief and Fire Chief (or their designees) for review and
comment.  The Police Chief and Fire Chief (or their designees) shall have
the right to attend and speak at any Technical Review Committee meeting. 
The Technical Review Committee shall have the authority to seek assistance
from all other officials and departments of the town and state and federal
agencies.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2013-11, passed 8-19-13)



§ 305  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW (DPR).



   Development Plan Review (DPR) is a procedure for the review of new
commercial development and substantial alteration to existing development in
order to ensure a basic standard of building, site and landscape design. 
DPR shall be required for certain new development and redevelopment as
specified in this subchapter.  Projects exempt from DPR are set forth in §
306.  The rules and regulations for the development of land in the town are
contained in the Middletown Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision
and Development of Land (the “Regulations”).



   (A)   Jurisdiction and purpose. DPR shall be conducted by the
Planning Board pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 45-23-50 and 45-24-49, as
amended. The purpose of such review shall be the reasonable application of
the police power of the town to protect the public from possible detrimental
impacts of certain types of development and certain large scale development,
while at the same time reasonably accommodating the goal of economic
development within the town.



   (B)   Subdivision and land development plans; combined review. Any
subdivision or land development plan (LDP) that is subject to Planning Board
review under the Regulations shall be subject to only one combined review.



   (C)   The review shall be conducted pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws §§
45-23-32 and 45-23-56, as established and set forth in this chapter, as part
of the overall approval process.



   (D)   All applications for DPR shall be filed with the Zoning Board
of Review.  Upon referral of the application by the Zoning Board of Review,
the Planning Board and the Technical Review Committee (TRC), as applicable,
shall have the administrative power and duty, in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the Regulations, to review all plans for the
proposed development.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2013-11, passed 8-19-13)



§ 306  USES SUBJECT TO AND EXEMPT FROM DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.



   When a building permit or zoning relief is requested, the Zoning
Officer shall determine whether or not development plan review is required
based on the criteria below.  Whether or not development plan review is
required, all development, except single-family and two-family residential
development, must meet the design standards of Article 5 of the Regulations,
unless a waiver is granted by the Planning Board.  For development where the
Zoning Officer determines that development plan review is not required,
compliance with the design standards of the Regulations, Article 5 shall be
determined by the Zoning Officer in consultation with the Administrative
Officer.  In cases where it is determined that development plan review is
not required, but one or more waivers from the design standards of the
regulations is requested, the waiver request(s) shall be forwarded by the
Zoning Officer to the Planning Board for consideration.



   (A)   Development subject to development plan review.  Any use
where this chapter specifically requires development plan review, and any
development which proposes one or more of the following is subject to
development plan review: a new principal building; the addition of new floor
area greater than 1,000 square feet to an existing building; or a new parking
area or addition to an existing parking area which in either case results in
greater than 5,000 square feet of new parking surface, except that
applications involving only single-family or two-family residential
development are not subject to development plan review.



   (B)   Residential use.  Development plan review shall not be
required for one- and two-family residences located in any zoning district. 
DPR shall be required for any other residential development, including the
expansion of existing structures and the demolition of existing structures in
coordination with or anticipation of new construction, in any zoning district.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2013-11, passed 8-19-13)



§ 307  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW FOR USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT.



   As set forth in § 306, any use which is permitted by right and subject
to development plan review:



   (A)   Review procedure.  The development plan review application
shall be filed with the Zoning Board of Review by submitting a complete
application to the Zoning Official.  Upon certification of the receipt of a
complete application the Zoning Official shall immediately forward a copy of
the application to the Technical Review Committee. Notice satisfying the
requirements of § 320(A) shall be given for the meeting of the Technical
Review Committee that will consider the application.  Such notice shall be
given as soon as possible after referral by the Zoning Official.  Once
referred by the Zoning Official, development plan review shall begin with a
review of the application conducted by the TRC, pursuant to the procedures
and time periods set forth in Article 10 of the Regulations.  The review by
the Technical Review Committee shall be advisory to the Planning Board, which
shall complete the development plan review.



   (B)   Waiver requests.  The Planning Board shall have the sole
authority to waive any of the development standards contained in Rules and
Regulations Regarding the Development of Land, § 521 - Commercial
Development, subject to the provisions of § 908 of the Regulations, and
provided that the standard is not specifically referenced as a requirement by
this chapter and is not substantially similar to a requirement in this
chapter.  Prior to the granting of waivers the Planning Board shall hold a
public hearing consistent with the notice requirements of § 320(A) of this
chapter.



   (C)   Scope of review.  The decision by the Planning Board shall be
binding upon the permitting authority.  The permitting authority is the
officer responsible for issuing the building permit and/or certificate of
occupancy.  Such decision shall be in writing and shall comply with all
requirements of the Regulations, including those for filing of records and
decisions.  The permitting authority may not issue a permit contrary to the
decision of the Planning Board, but such decision may be considered an
appealable decision, appealable to the Zoning Board of Review, pursuant to
the procedures set forth for the review of a decision of the Planning Board,
as set forth in § 317.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2013-11, passed 8-19-13; Am. Ord. 2018-3,
passed 3-5-18)



§ 308  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW FOR USES REQUIRING A VARIANCE OR SPECIAL USE
PERMIT.



   A use specified in § 602, that is subject to development plan review,
as set forth above, and which also requires a variance or special use permit,
shall be subject to development plan review prior to the hearing by the
Zoning Board.



   (A)   Review procedure.  The development plan review application
shall be filed with the Zoning Board of Review by submitting a complete
application to the Zoning Official.  Upon certification of the receipt of a
complete application the Zoning Official shall immediately forward a copy of
the application to the Technical Review Committee. Notice satisfying the
requirements of § 320(A) shall be given for the meeting of the Technical
Review Committee that will consider the application.  Such notice shall be
given as soon as possible after referral by the Zoning Officer.  The TRC
shall review the application and provide a recommendation to the Planning
Board, pursuant to the procedures and time periods set forth in Article 10 of
the Regulations.  The Planning Board shall complete the review of the
application, including consideration of any waiver requests in accordance
with § 307(B), upon receipt of the recommendation from the Technical Review
Committee.



   (B)   Scope of review.  The review by the Planning Board, including
consideration of any requested waivers from the development standards
contained in Rules and Regulations Regarding the Development of Land, § 521
- Commercial Development, shall be advisory only to the permitting authority,
being the Zoning Board.  Such advisory opinion shall be in writing and shall
comply with all requirements of the Regulations, including those for filing
of records and decisions.  When a Zoning Board decision differs from a
Planning Board recommendation, as part of the decision, the reasons for the
difference shall be clearly stated in writing.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2013-11, passed 8-19-13; Am. Ord. 2018-3,
passed 3-5-18)



§ 309  REQUIRED GUIDELINES, FINDINGS AND IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Specific and objective guidelines.  Recommendations by the
Technical Review Committee and decisions and recommendations by the Planning
Board shall be based upon the specific standards as set forth in Article 5 of
the Regulations.



   (B)   General findings.  Prior to granting any development plan
review approval, or issuing a recommendation in favor of approval to the
Zoning Board of Review, the Planning Board shall find that:



      (1)   The granting of approval will not result in conditions
inimical to the public health, safety and welfare;



      (2)   The granting of such approval will not substantially or
permanently injure the appropriate use of the property in the surrounding
area or zoning district;



      (3)   The plans for such project comply with all the
requirements of this chapter and the Regulations, or that necessary waivers
from the requirements of the Regulations have been granted;



      (4)   The plans for such project are consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan; and



      (5)   Any conditions or restrictions that are necessary to
ensure that these guidelines have been met have been incorporated into the
written approval or recommendation.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2013-11, passed 8-19-13)



§ 310  DEVELOPMENT IMPACT REVIEW.



   The purpose of development impact review is to provide for detailed
analysis of certain land uses which, because of their scale or intensity of
use, have the potential for significant impact on the health, safety or
general welfare of town residents, including negative effects on the
environment, abutting property values, demand for town services and
infrastructure, and traffic safety.



   (A)   Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to any
major subdivision/land development project and any use subject to development
plan review (DPR).  However, the Planning Board may waive this requirement
by majority vote and written decision, upon a finding that the impacts of the
proposed use are too minimal to warrant a development impact review.  The
Planning Board shall inform the applicant at the time of initial review if a
development impact review is required.



   (B)   Requirements.  Applicants within the scope of this section
shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Impact statement. The applicant shall submit to the
Planning Board an impact statement, prepared with the assistance of qualified
consultants, which shall evaluate the potential impact of the development
upon:



         (a)   Traffic and parking conditions on site and within
the surrounding area;



         (b)   Municipal utilities and services, including water
supply, sewage disposal, storm drains, police, fire protection, emergency
services, schools, and other town services;



         (c)   The physical and ecological characteristics of the
site and surrounding land, including wetlands, floodplain, vegetation,
wildlife habitat, and other environmental conditions;



         (d)   The character of the community, including scenic,
historic and archaeological conditions; scale, placement, lighting, parking,
and use of open space.



   (C)   Independent analysis.  The Planning Board, with the advice of
the Planning Department, may select one or more consultants to prepare an
analysis of the impact statement required by this section.  Both the impact
statement and the consultant analysis shall be considered by the Planning
Board in its review of the application.



   (D)   Payment for impact statement and review. 



   (D)   Payment for impact statement and review.



      (1)   The cost of all studies and investigations reasonably
necessary to prepare impact statements required under this section shall be
borne by the applicant. The cost of hiring a consultant(s) to review the
impact statement shall be borne indirectly by the applicant through payment
of a fee to the town upon submission of the application, in addition to the
filing fee. The initial impact review fee shall be determined based on a cost
proposal provided by the town’s consulting engineer for completing the
review. All additional costs incurred beyond those identified in the
engineer’s initial proposal shall also be the responsibility of the
applicant, to be paid to the town prior to the Planning Board taking final
action on the application.



      (2)   Any portion of the fees collected under this section
that remain unused shall be refunded to the applicant upon expiration of the
final appeal period.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-15, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 2013-11,
passed 8-19-13; Am. Ord. 2018-4, passed 3-5-18)



§ 311  CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE FOR NEW, ALTERED OR NONCONFORMING
USES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or
occupancy of any structure or premises, or both, or part thereof, hereafter
created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged
in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have
been issued therefore by the Zoning Officer stating that the proposed use of
the structure or land conforms to the requirement of this chapter.



   (B)   No nonconforming structure or use shall be renewed, changed or
extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued
therefor by the Zoning Officer. The certificate of zoning compliance shall
state specifically wherein the nonconforming use differs from the provisions
of this chapter.



   (C)   A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by
the Zoning Officer at his or her sole discretion for periods not exceeding
six months during alteration or partial occupancy of a structure pending its
completion; provided, that such temporary certificate may require such
conditions and safeguard as will protect the safety of the occupants and the
public.



   (D)   The Zoning Officer shall maintain a record of all certificates
of zoning compliance issued and copies shall be furnished to any person upon
request and upon receipt of a reasonable fee.



   (E)   Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be
a violation of this chapter and punishable under § 316.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 312  EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMITS.



   (A)   If the work or use described in any building permit has not
begun within six months from the date of issuance thereof, such permit shall
automatically become invalid.



   (B)   If the work described in any building permit issued as a
result of a zoning variance or special use permit has not been completed
within two years of the date of issuance thereof, such permit shall
automatically become invalid; provided, that the Zoning Board may, upon
application thereof and for cause shown, grant an extension provided that not
more than one such extension for a period of one year be granted.



   (C)   In the event of expiration, written notice thereof shall be
given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as
described in the expired permit shall not proceed unless a new building
permit has been issued.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 313  COMPLETION OF WORK AUTHORIZED PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS
CHAPTER.



   Nothing in this chapter shall require changes in the plans,
construction or designated use of a structure or portion thereof for which a
permit has been heretofore issued. Construction must begin within 90 days
after this chapter becomes effective. The entire structure must be complete,
as authorized, within two years thereafter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 314  CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS,
PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.



   Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the
basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Officer authorize only
the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement
or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed in violation
of this chapter, and punishable as provided by § 316.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 315  COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.



   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating
fully the cause and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning Officer,
who shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate and take
action thereon as provided by this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 316  PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS; RECOURSE OF TOWN AND DUTY OF TOWN SOLICITOR
UPON VIOLATION.



   (A)   Any person, corporation, or other entity, whether as
principal, agent, employee, subcontractor or the like, who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500
for each offense. Each day of the existence of any violation shall be deemed
a separate offense.



   (B)   The erection, construction, enlargement, conversion, moving or
maintenance of any building or structure and the use of any land or building
which is continued, operated or maintained contrary to any of the provisions
of this chapter is hereby declared to be a violation of this chapter and
unlawful. At the request of the Zoning Officer, the Town Solicitor,
immediately upon any such violation having been called to his or her
attention, shall institute injunction, abatement or any other appropriate
action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such violation.



   (C)   The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 317  APPEALS.



   (A)   An appeal to the Zoning Board of Review from a decision of any
other zoning enforcement agency or officer may be taken by an aggrieved
party. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the date of the recording
of the decision by the Zoning Officer or agency by filing with the Zoning
Officer and with the Zoning Board of Review a notice of appeal specifying the
ground of the appeal. The Board may extend such period to 60 days in cases of
failure to prosecute such appeal by reason of accident, mistake or any other
good cause. The officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken shall
immediately transmit to the Zoning Board of Review all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Notice
of the appeal shall also be transmitted to the Planning Board.



   (B)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the Zoning Officer or agency from whom the
appeal is taken certifies to the Board, after an appeal has been filed, that
by reason of facts slated in the certificate a stay would in the officer's or
agency's opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may
be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction on application and upon
notice to the officer or agency from whom the appeal was taken on due cause
shown.



   (C)   The Zoning Board of Review shall hear and decide appeals
within 65 days of the date of the filing of the appeal where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by an administrative officer or agency in the enforcement or interpretation
of this  chapter, or of any ordinance adopted pursuant hereto, and shall
give public notice, at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town. Notice of the hearing, which
shall include the street address of the subject property, shall be sent by
first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant and to those requiring
notice under R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-24-53. All decisions and records of the
Zoning Board of Review respecting appeals shall be consistent with the
requirements set forth in R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-24-61. Upon the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The cost of any notice
required for the hearing shall be borne by the applicant.



   (D)   Participation in a zoning hearing or other proceeding by a
party is not a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not in
good faith, intentional misconduct, a knowing violation of law, transactions
where there is improper personal benefit, or malicious, wanton or willful
misconduct.



   (E)   In exercising its powers the Zoning Board may, in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, and
may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and may make any orders, requirements, decisions or determinations that ought
to be made and to that end has the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
was taken. All decisions and records of the Zoning Board of Review respecting
appeals shall conform to the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-24-61.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2018-1, passed 2-20-18)



§ 318  SPECIAL USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES.



   Applications for special use permits and variances shall be filed
directly with the Board.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 319  APPEAL OF PLANNING BOARD DECISION.



   (A)   An appeal from any decision of the Planning Board or
Administrative Officer charged in the Planning Board's rules and regulations
with enforcement of any provisions, may be taken to the Zoning Board, sitting
as a Planning Board of Appeal, by an aggrieved party. An appeal from a
decision of the Board of Appeal may be taken by the aggrieved party to the
Superior Court.



   (B)   The process of appeal shall be as required by R.I. Gen. Laws
§ 45-23-67.



   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action being appealed.



   (D)   The public hearing on an appeal shall be as required by R.I.
Gen. Laws § 45-23-69.



   (E)   The standards of review for a Planning Board appeal shall be
as required by R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-23-70.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 320  PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   Subject to the provisions of division (D), no actions shall be taken by
the Zoning Board of Review on the matter of an appeal, special use permit or
variance, or any other matter upon which the Board is authorized to pass,
without first holding a public hearing thereon. At such public hearing
opportunity shall be given to all persons interested in being heard on the
matter of the appeal, special use permit or variance.



   (A)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an
appeal or application for a special use permit or variance; shall publish
public notice thereof at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Middletown prior to the date
of such hearing.



   The Board shall give due notice by first class mail at least 14 days in
advance to the applicant, all owners of real property located in or within
not less than 200 feet of the perimeter of the subject area and other parties
of interest. The notice shall include the street address of the subject
property, or if no street address is available, other information which will
assist interested parties to identify the property geographically.



   (B)   The Board may:



      (1)   Request that the Planning Board, other town commissions
or town departments review the application and report findings and
recommendations, including a statement on the general consistency of the
application with the goals and purposes of the comprehensive plan. Such
requests shall be acted upon and returned to the Board within 30 days of
receipt.



      (2)   Require that a supplemental notice, when an application
for a variance is under consideration, be posted at the location in question.
The posting shall be for information purposes only and does not constitute
required notice of a public hearing.



   (C)   The Board shall hear and decide appeals, special use requests
and variances within a reasonable time. Any party may appear at the hearing
in person, by agent authorized in writing or by attorney. Notice of granting
of an appeal. Special use permit or variance shall be sent to the Zoning
Officer and  Planning Board within ten days after final action.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 321  SUMMARY HEARINGS.



   The public hearing, in the case of an application for a dimensional
variance, may be a full hearing or a summary hearing, as determined by the
following procedure:



      (1)   A petition for a variance requesting relief of a single
setback where said relief is less than or equal to 50% of the required
setback as set forth in § 603, may be considered as a summary petition at
the discretion of the Zoning Board.



      (2)   At the commencement of a hearing of the Board of Review,
the chairperson shall read aloud the name of each applicant who is applying
for a single dimensional variance of less than or equal to 50% of the
required setback as set forth in § 603, in the order in which such
applications appear on the docket, and shall ask after reading each name,
whether any member of the Board or any person attending the hearing has any
objection to the application or for any other reason objects to a summary
hearing on that application.



      (3)   If no objection is made known to the chairperson, the
application shall be marked for a summary hearing. If any person objects for
any reason, the application shall be marked for a full hearing.



      (4)   After all eligible applications have been thus announced
and opportunity for objection has been given, a summary of each application
marked for a summary hearing, including the name of the applicant, the
location of the property involved, and the nature of the relief sought, shall
be read aloud and the chairperson shall again ask if there are any objections
to the application. If no objections are heard, the Board shall immediately
vote to approve or disapprove the application. If, prior to the vote, an
objection is raised, the application shall be held for later consideration on
a full hearing, together with all other applications receiving a full hearing.



      (5)   Following the disposition of all applications marked for
a summary hearing, the Board shall proceed with full hearings of all other
matters on the docket.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 322  DECISIONS AND RECORDS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW.



   Procedures and timeframes for keeping Zoning Board of Review meeting
records and minutes, rendering and recording decisions, and for providing
notice and copies of decisions to applicants, objectors and others shall be
consistent with the requirements set forth in R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-24-61.



(Ord. 2018-2, passed 2-20-18)



ARTICLE 4  DEFINITIONS.



§ 400  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The word PERSON includes a group of persons, firm,
association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well
as an individual.



   (B)   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.



   (C)   The word SHALL is mandatory; the word  MAY is permissive.



   (D)   Citations included in definitions refer to Rhode Island
General Law (R.I. Gen. Laws).



   (E)   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      ABUTTER.  One whose property abuts, that is, adjoins at a
border, boundary, or point with no intervening land.



      ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT STRUCTURE.  An unstaffed building, box, cage
or other structure used to house and protect equipment necessary for
processing wireless telecommunications signals. Associate equipment may
include air conditioning and emergency generators.



      ACCESSORY FAMILY DWELLING UNIT. An accessory dwelling unit for
the sole use of one or more members of the family of the occupant or
occupants of the principal residence, but not needing to have a separate
means of ingress and egress.



      ACCESSORY USE. A use of land or a building, or portion thereof,
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building. An accessory use may be restricted to the same lot as the principal
use. An accessory use shall not be permitted without the principal use to
which it is related.



      AGGRIEVED PARTY. An aggrieved party, for purposes of this
chapter, shall be:



         (a)   Any person(s) or entity or entities who can
demonstrate that their property will be injured by a decision of any officer
or agency responsible for administering the zoning ordinance of a city or
town; or



         (b)   Anyone requiring notice pursuant to this chapter.



      AGRICULTURAL AWARENESS PROGRAM.  An educational or recreational
program, which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the primary
agricultural use, that enables non-farm residents, including children, to
reconnect to the rural character of the land. Such programs may include farm
or garden tours, seminars and lectures; petting zoos or children's farms; hay
rides; corn mazes; and similar activities.



      AGRICULTURAL LAND. As defined in R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-22.2-4,
land suitable for agriculture by reason of suitability of soil or other
natural characteristics or past use for agricultural purposes. AGRICULTURAL
LAND includes that defined as prime farm land or additional farm land of
statewide importance for Rhode Island by the Soil Conservation Service of the
United States Department of Agriculture.



      AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS.  Cultivated or raised plant and animal
life that has been harvested or processed for consumption, including feed and
forage; floriculture and nursery products; grains; herbs; vegetables; fruits
and nuts; viticulture; honey; eggs; dairy; cattle; sheep; poultry; game and
game birds; and fiber for clothing.



      AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. Any area of land or water upon which an
airport hazard might be established as provided in R.I. Gen. Laws § 1-3-2.



      ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a communications tower or other structure and used in communications that
radiate or capture electromagnetic wave, digital signals, analog signals,
radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals.



      ANTENNA, POLE-MOUNTED. An antenna attached to or upon an electric
transmission or distribution pole of 12 kVolts or greater, a street light, a
traffic signal or similar facility located within the public right-or-way or
a utility easement. A pole-mounted antenna shall not be considered a
communications tower.



      APPLICANT.  An owner or authorized agent of the owner(s)
submitting an application or appealing an action of any official, board or
agency.



      APPLICATION.  The completed form or forms and all accompanying
documents, exhibits, and fees required of an applicant by an approving
authority for development review, approval, or permitting purposes.



      BASIC NUMBER OF LOTS/UNITS.  The number of lots or units to be
allowed in a proposed conservation subdivision/land development project,
equal to the maximum number of lots which could reasonably be expected to be
developed upon the parcel in a conventional subdivision.



      BUFFER. Land which is maintained in either a natural or
landscaped state and is used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of
development on surrounding areas, properties or rights-of-way.



      BUILDABLE AREA. That portion of a lot bounded by the required
front, side and rear yards, within which principal structures may be sited.



      BUILDING.  Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.



      BUILDING ENVELOPE. The three-dimensional space within which a
structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by
regulations governing building setbacks, maximum height and bulk; by other
regulations; and/or any combination thereof.



      BUILDING HEIGHT.  For a vacant parcel of land, building height
shall be measured from the average existing grade elevation where the
foundation of the structure is proposed. For an existing structure, building
height shall be measured from average grade taken from the outermost four
corners of the existing foundation. In all cases, building height shall be
measured to the top of the highest point of the existing or proposed roof or
structure. This distance shall exclude spires, chimneys, flag poles, and the
like. For any property or structure located in a special flood hazard area,
as shown on the official FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), where
freeboard as defined in this section, is being utilized or proposed, such
freeboard area, not to exceed five feet, shall be excluded from the building
height calculation.



      BUILDING-MOUNTED FACILITY. A wireless telecommunications facility
that:



         (a)   Is located in or on an existing building;



         (b)   Utilized one or more antennas and/or accessory
equipment mounted on the roof or exterior of the building; and



         (c)   Does not qualify as a disguised facility.



      BULK MATERIALS.  Unpackaged, inorganic and organic solid matter,
capable of releasing visible fugitive dust, including sand, gravel, stone,
soil, aggregate, seashells, wood chips, mulch, reclaimed concrete, asphalt or
road materials, or other like material.



      CAMPGROUNDS.  One or more lots used for seasonal, overnight
residential occupancy in permanent or semi-permanent structures, such as
cabins, tents with tent platforms, or similar shelters; and further provided
that a campground may include any necessary permanent structures accessory to
the principal use.



      CEMETERY. A burial ground, memorial park and/or site where human
remains are buried or entombed.



      CLEANING AND DYEING PLANT. An industrial facility which uses
cleaning or other chemical processes to clean clothing or other materials. 
Such facilities may include processes which change the color of the materials.



      CLUB (NONPROFIT). A corporation subject to the provisions of R.I.
Gen. Laws, Title 7, Chapter 6, owning, hiring or leasing of a building or
space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable accommodation of its members, and
whose affairs are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or
other similar body chosen by the members, offices, agents or employees profit
from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club or to
its guests beyond the amount of such reasonable salary or wages as may be
fixed and voted each year by the directors or other governing body.



      CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A site planning technique that concentrates
buildings in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be
used for recreation, common open space, and/or preservation of
environmentally, historically, culturally, or other sensitive features and/or
structures. The techniques used to concentrate buildings and may include, but
are not limited to, reduction in lot areas, setback requirements, and/or bulk
requirements, with the resultant open land being devoted by deed restrictions
for one or more uses. Under cluster development, there is no increase in the
number of lots permitted under conventional development, except as provided,
including incentive bonuses for certain types or conditions of development.



      CO-LOCATION.  The erection of more than one antenna, for
different wireless telecommunications providers, on a single communications
tower or on an existing structure which already supports one or more antennas.



      COLUMBARIUM. A structure with recesses for cremation remains urns.



      COMMON OWNERSHIP.  Either:



         (a)   Ownership by one or more individuals or entities
in any form of ownership of two or more contiguous lots; or



         (b)   Ownership by any association. Such ownership may
also include a municipality of one or more lots under specific development
techniques.



      COMMUNICATIONS TOWER(S). A structure designed and used only to
support one or more antennas and related equipment for the reception and/or
transmission of electromagnetic waves. A tower used solely for amateur radio
communications by a licensed amateur radio operator shall not be subject to
this chapter.



      COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A home or residential facility where
children and/or adults reside in a family setting and may or may not receive
supervised care. This shall not include halfway houses or substance abuse
treatment facilities. This shall include, but not be limited to the following:



         (a)   Whenever six or fewer children or adults with
retardation reside in any type of residence in the community, as licensed by
the state pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws Title 40.1, Chapter 24. All requirements
pertaining to local zoning are waived for these community residences;



         (b)   A group home providing care or supervision, or
both, to not more than eight persons with disabilities, and licensed by the
state pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws Title 40.1, Chapter 24;



         (c)   A residence for children providing care or
supervision, or both, to not more than eight children including those of the
care giver and licensed by the state pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws Title 42,
Chapter 72.1;



         (d)   A community transitional residence providing care
or assistance, or both, to no more than six unrelated persons or no more than
three families, not to exceed a total of eight persons, requiring temporary
financial assistance, and/or to persons who are victims of crimes, abuse, or
neglect, and who are expected to reside in that residence not less than 60
days nor more than two years. Residents will have access to and use of all
common areas, including eating areas and living rooms, and will receive
appropriate social services for the purpose of fostering independence,
self-sufficiency, and eventual transition to a permanent living situation.



      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The plan adopted and approved pursuant to
R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-22-2 and to which any zoning adopted pursuant to this
chapter shall be in compliance.



      CONGREGATE HOUSING. Housing which includes common use areas and
may include common dining and recreational areas. CONGREGATE HOUSING includes
nursing homes, assisted living facilities and other similar facilities with
common dining and recreational areas.



      CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT.  A site planning technique which bases
the layout of building lots on the natural characteristics of the land and
reduces lot sizes so that the remaining land can be used for recreation,
common open space, and/or preservation of environmentally, historically and
culturally sensitive features and/or structures.  The number of lots
permitted is equal to what is allowed under conventional development.



      CRYPT, LAWN. A mausoleum structure wholly under ground.



      DAY CARE CENTER.  Any other day care center which is not a
family day care home.



      DAY CARE, FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. Any home, other than the
individual's home, in which day care in lieu of parental care or supervision
is offered at the same time to six or fewer individuals who are not relatives
of the care giver, but may not contain more than a total of eight individuals
receiving day care.



      DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL.  The number of dwelling units per unit of
land.



      DEVELOPABLE LAND AREA.  For the purpose of calculating the
minimum lot size required by district dimensional regulations, or of
calculating the maximum number of units, maximum lot coverage, or maximum
density permitted in accordance with any development standards contained in
the chapter, the terms LAND, LAND AREA, LOT SIZE, and LOT AREA or any such
similar term shall mean DEVELOPABLE LAND AREA, which is defined as follows.
DEVELOPABLE LAND AREA is the total gross land area of the parcel proposed for
development LESS the total of the following.



         (a)   Freshwater wetlands as defined in R.I. Gen. Laws
Title 2, Chapter 1, as amended, and in any rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto. Provided, however, that any setback requirement from the
edge of a wetland, as so defined in R.I. Gen. Laws Title 2, Chapter 1, shall
not be included in the calculation of wetland area.



         (b)   The floodway of a stream or flood plain of any
other body of water as calculated on the basis of a 100-year frequency storm.



         (c)   Coastal shoreline systems as defined by Section
120.0-2A.1. of the Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Program, as
amended February, 1982, or subsequent amendments thereto, as follows:



            1.   Beaches and barrier beaches;



            2.   Cliffs, ledges and bluffs;



            3.   Coastal wetlands;



            4.   Sand dunes; and



            5.   All directly associated contiguous areas
which are necessary to preserve the integrity of such features.



         (d)   Any public or private street or street
right-of-way.



         (e)   Existing water surfaces.



         (f)   Areas required for stormwater retention/detention
under drainage, of this chapter.



         (g)   Areas required for utility easements of public
utilities.



      DEVELOPMENT. The construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any
mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; any change in use, or
alteration or extension of the use, of land.



      DEVELOPMENT, PLANNED. A land development project, as defined
herein, developed according to plan as a single entity containing one or more
structures and/or uses with appurtenant common areas.



      DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW. The process whereby authorized local
officials review the site plans, maps, and other documentation of a
development to determine the compliance with the stated purposes and
standards of this chapter.



      DISGUISED FACILITY. A wireless telecommunications facility that
is so designed, constructed and located that it and all associated equipment
are completely screened from public view. Disguised facilities may be located
in or on existing structures, such as clock towers, belfries, steeples, and
the like, or may be new structures designed to closely resemble trees or
permitted freestanding structures, such as flag poles or light standards.
When located on an existing building in a GB, OB, LI, or OP district, a
wireless telecommunications facility shall be considered a disguised facility
even though it has:



         (a)   One or more antennas not greater than four inches
in diameter and extending above the roof not more than six feet; or



         (b)   One or more sectionized panel antennas mounted on
the side of a building and camouflaged by color, size and/or shape to blend
in with the building as much as possible.



      DISTRICT.  See ZONING USE DISTRICT.



      DORMITORY, INSTITUTIONAL. A structure used for housing purposes
by persons generally unrelated to each other by blood or marriage but
associated by reason or participation in the activities of a medical,
religious, commercial or educational organization. Such institutional
dormitories are characterized by the provision of sleeping accommodations and
may or may not contain common kitchen, dining or recreation facilities.



      DRAINAGE SYSTEM. A system for the removal of water from land by
drains, grading, or other appropriate means. These techniques may include
runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after
construction or development, the means for preserving surface and
groundwater, and the prevention and/or alleviation of flooding.



      DRIVE-UP RESTAURANT.  A permanent structure, licensed for the
preparation, service and consumption of food and beverages, where patrons may
be served in their vehicles or at outside seating facilities.



      DRIVE-UP WINDOW.  See § 717.



      DWELLING. Any building, or part thereof, that is used or occupied
for human habitation, including dwelling premises, opportunities and
facilities belonging to the dwelling or usually enjoyed therewith.



      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building used exclusively for
occupancy by one  family.



      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building used exclusively for occupancy
by two families living independently of each other.



      DWELLING UNIT. A structure or portion thereof providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, and
containing a separate means of ingress and egress.



      EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY.  The extraction of minerals, including:
solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases,
such as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation;
milling, such as crushing, screening, washing, and floatation; and other
preparation customarily done at the extraction site or as a part of the
extractive activity.



      FALL ZONE. The calculated area of the land surrounding a
communications tower or any of its attachments which may be affected by
debris should the tower structure collapse.



      FAMILY. A person or persons related by blood, marriage, or other
legal means. (Also see HOUSEHOLD).



      FARM GUEST HOUSE. An owner-occupied single-family dwelling
offering guest rooms without kitchen facilities for rent on a daily or weekly
basis, provided the dwelling is located on a parcel of at least two acres
primarily devoted to an agricultural use permitted under § 602.



      FARM-PROMOTION ACCESSORY USE. An accessory use which is not
customarily incidental to a use permitted as an agricultural use under § 602
but which tends to preserve and/or promote the use of land for farming and is
clearly incidental and subordinate to the primary agricultural use.
Farm-promotion accessory uses include: equipment and trade fairs, farmers'
markets, farm guest houses, livestock sales and auctions, and, when conducted
in a farm setting, arts and crafts shows, banquets, corporate functions, and
weddings.



      FARM-RELATED ACCESSORY USE, TRADITIONAL. An accessory use
customarily incidental to a use permitted as an agricultural use under §
602, regardless of whether it is located on the same lot as the principal use.



      FARMER'S MARKET.  An area, which may include a structure, used
by growers or producers of agricultural products to display and sell their
products.



      FLOATING ZONE.  An unmapped zoning district adopted within the
ordinance which is established on the zoning map only when an application for
development, meeting the zone requirements, is approved.



      FLOODPLAINS or FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  As defined in R.I. Gen. Laws
§ 45-22.2-4, an area that has a 1% or greater chance of inundation in any
given year, as delineated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency pursuant
to the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended P.L. 90-448. 42
U.S.C. 4011 et seq.



      FREEBOARD. A factor of safety expressed in feet above the base
flood elevation of a flood hazard area for purposes of floodplain management.
Freeboard compensates for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological
effect of urbanization of the watershed.



      GARAGE.  A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building, used for the storage of self-propelled vehicles.



      GAS STATION/MINI-MART. Use of a property for the dispensing of
gasoline or other fuels from one or more pump islands, covered by a canopy
either detached from, or attached to, the principal building which may be
used for the sale of food, beverages, dairy products and related items, with
no seating on the premises.



      GASOLINE SERVICE STATION (MINOR REPAIRS ONLY).  A building or
premises, or portion thereof, arranged, intended or designed to be used for
the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle, airplane or motorboat fuel, oils
and accessories for the use of motor vehicles, and the rendering of services
such as lubrication, washing and minor repairs including the sale of food and
beverages where such service facilities are incidental to such principal
filling station uses, but not including body or fender work or major repairs.



      GRAVE, CREMATION. A grave or crypt containing cremation remains
for a single person.



      GRAVE, DOUBLE.  Two single crypts side by side.



      GRAVE, TRADITIONAL.  An internment right for a single person's
human remains.



      GRAVEL PROCESSING.  Any processing of more than ten cubic yards
per day of soil, loam, sand, gravel, stone, clay, shale, or other earth
material, and which utilizes mechanical equipment used for processing,
screening, or washing of gravel or earth materials. GRAVEL PROCESSING shall
include, without limitation, the reprocessing of concrete, asphalt, road
materials, and other reclaimed or previously processed materials in order to
use or reuse such materials. GRAVEL PROCESSING does not include the
manufacturing or chemical processing of materials into finished goods.



      GREENHOUSE. A building with a roof and sides largely made of
glass or other clear material, in which the temperature and humidity can be
regulated for the cultivation of plants.



      GROSS LEASABLE AREA/GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA (GLFA).  The total
floor area of a commercial or industrial building designed for occupancy and
exclusive use by a tenant, including mezzanines and upper floors, if any, and
excluding stairs, elevator shafts, air shafts, public toilets, utility and
mechanical equipment areas which are used solely for the maintenance of the
building.



      GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION.  A solar
photovoltaic system, consisting of panels, support structures, and other
equipment which is structurally mounted on the ground and is not
roof-mounted, and is used to convert solar energy to electricity, including
but not limited to supplying electricity to the local grid or directly to a
commercial or residential  consumer(s).



      GROUNDWATER. Groundwater and associated terms, as defined in R.I.
Gen. Laws § 46-13.1-3.



      HALFWAY HOUSE. A residential facility for adults or children who
have been institutionalized for criminal conduct and who require a group
setting to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society.



      HARDSHIP.  See Article 9 and R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-24-41.



      HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC SITE. As defined in R.I. Gen. Laws
§ 45-22.2-4, HISTORIC DISTRICT means one or more historic sites and
intervening or surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by
the quality and character of the historic site or sites, and has been
registered, or is deemed eligible to be included on the State Register of
Historical Places pursuant to  R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-45-5. HISTORIC SITE
means any real property, man-made structure, natural object, or
configuration, or any portion or group of the foregoing which has been
registered, or is deemed eligible to be included, on the state register of
historic places pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 42-45-5.



      HOME OCCUPATION. Any activity customarily carried out for gain by
a resident, conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit,
subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   The activity is carried on by a member of the
family residing in the dwelling unit;



         (b)   The activity is clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes; and



         (c)   Conforms to the following conditions:



            1.   No person who is not a resident member of the
family shall be employed in the home occupation;



            2.   There shall be no exterior display, no
exterior sign, no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior
indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character
of the principal building;



            3.   No vibration, dust, odors, heat or glare or
offensive noise shall be produced;



            4.   No traffic shall be generated by such home
occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected from a single
dwelling unit in a residential neighborhood; and



            5.   Any parking required for the conduct of such
home occupation shall be provided off the street.



      HOTEL.  Any structure containing ten or more separate rooms for
sleeping, offered to the public for compensation, in which ingress and egress
to and from all rooms, made through an inside lobby but not including
hospitals, convalescent homes or other charitable or religious institutions.



      HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY. A hotel or motel which has as its primary
clientele, guests who stay for a week or more and which offers facilities to
facilitate extended stays.



      HOUSEHOLD. One or more persons living together in a single
dwelling unit with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating
areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food
within the dwelling unit.  HOUSEHOLD UNIT shall be synonymous with the term
DWELLING UNIT for determining the number of such units allowed within any
structure on any lot in a zoning district. An individual household shall
consist of any one of the following:



         (a)   A family, which may also include servants and
employees living with the family; or



         (b)   A person or group of unrelated persons living
together not to exceed four.



      INCENTIVE ZONING. The process whereby the town may grant
additional development capacity in exchange for the developers provision of a
public benefit or amenity as specified in local ordinances.



      INDOOR ROLLERBLADE AND SKATEBOARDING FACILITIES.  Interior
building areas of between 5,000 and 20,000 square feet in size, where
rollerblading, indoor performance bicycling and skateboarding are allowed on
courses with ramps, pools and similar areas. Such uses are not permitted in
any Office Business (OB) District.



      INFRASTRUCTURE. Facilities and services needed to sustain
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and other activities.



      LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. A project in which one or more lots,
tracts or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a coordinated
site for a single use, complex of uses, units or structures including, but
not limited to, planned and/or cluster development for residential,
commercial, institutional, recreational, open space and/or mixed uses, as may
be provided for in this chapter.



      LINE, STREET.  A lot line separating a lot from an adjacent
street.



      LIVESTOCK FARM.  A farm of at least two acres substantially
devoted to breeding and raising animals such as dairy cows, poultry, game and
game birds, beef cattle, sheep, horses and bees.



      LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets.



      LOT, EITHER:



         (a)   The basic development unit for determination of
lot area, depth, and other dimensional regulations; or



         (b)   A parcel of land whose boundaries have been
established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or recorded map
and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer
of title.



      LOT, THROUGH. A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets or
which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the
lot.



      LOT AREA. The total area within the boundaries of a lot,
excluding any street right-of-way, usually reported in acres or square feet.



      LOT BUILDING COVERAGE.  That portion of the lot that is or may
be covered by buildings and accessory buildings.



      LOT DEPTH.  The distance measured from the front lot line to the
rear lot line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel,
the lot depth is an average of the depth.



      LOT FRONTAGE. That portion of a lot abutting a street.



      LOT LINE.  A line of record bounding a lot, which divides one
lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public
or private space and shall include:



         (a)   Front:  The lot line separating a lot from a
street right-of-way;



         (b)   Rear: The lot line opposite and most distant from
the front lot line, or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly
shaped lots, an assumed line at least ten feet in length entirely within the
lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line; and



         (c)   Side: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot
line. On a corner lot, a side lot line may be a street lot line.



      LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land lawfully recorded in the office
of the Town Clerk of the Town of Middletown.



      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a
lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to
the front lot line at the minimum front setback line.



      MAUSOLEUM.  Aboveground entombment sites which contain concrete
or stone crypts in which caskets are stored.



      MEMORIAL PARK. A burial ground or cemetery which allows only flat
grave markers.



      MERE INCONVENIENCE. See R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-24-41 and Article 9.



      MIXED RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL USES.  The use of any structure
or group of structures on a single lot of record for both residential and
commercial purposes, provided, however, this definition shall not include
accessory uses, customary home occupation or an office for use by a resident
of the premises. The commercial use so mixed must be a use either permitted
in the zone in which the lot is situated, authorized by the Zoning Board of
Review or granted by the Town Council. Commercial uses as used in this
definition are all uses listed in § 602 under the following general
classifications: Retail Commercial, Personal Services, Business Services,
Professional Services.



      MIXED USE.  A mixture of land uses within a single development,
building or tract.



      MOBILE HOME PARK.  A lot upon which two or more mobile homes,
occupied for residential, non-transient purposes, are located.



      MODIFICATION.  Permission granted and administered by the Zoning
Officer of the town and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, contained
herein, to grant a dimensional variance other than lot area requirements from
this chapter to a limited degree as determined by this chapter but not to
exceed 25% of each of the applicable dimensional requirements.



      MOTEL. A series of attached, semidetached or detached one- or
two-story units containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space where each unit
has an individual entrance from outside the building to serve each such unit
and are designed primarily for transient automobile and vehicular travelers.



      MOTEL, EXTENDED STAY. A motel which has, as its primary
clientele, guests who stay for a week or more and which offers facilities to
facilitate extended stays.



      MULTIFAMILY DWELLING PROJECT. A large-scale complex of two or
more multifamily dwelling structures, or three of more single-family or
two-family buildings containing a total of more than five dwelling units,
upon a single lot, which are planned, developed and managed as a unit, with
required open space and accessory uses.  Permitted accessory uses include
storage, laundry and drying facilities, refuse collection, recreation
facilities, off-street parking and related accessory uses which are intended
primarily for the use of residents of the building and their guests. 
Residential use may be for rental apartments, condominiums or time-share
estates.



      MULTIFAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURE. A multifamily dwelling in a
single principal building upon a single lot, used principally for residential
purposes and housing three or more dwelling units. Permitted accessory uses
include storage, laundry and drying facilities, refuse collection, recreation
facilities, off-street parking and related accessory uses which are intended
primarily for the use of residents of the building and their guests.



      NONCONFORMANCE. A building, structure, or parcel of land, or use
thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter and
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter or  amendment.
Nonconformance shall be of only two  types:



         (a)   Nonconforming by use. A lawfully established use
of land, building or structure which is not a permitted use in that zoning
district. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are
permitted by the use regulations of a zoning ordinance shall be nonconforming
by use; or



         (b)   Nonconforming by dimension. A building, structure
or parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of this
chapter. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of this chapter
other than those pertaining to the permitted uses. A building or structure
containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of a
zoning ordinance shall be nonconforming by use; a building or structure
containing a permitted number of dwelling units by the use regulations of
this chapter, but not meeting the lot area per dwelling unit regulations, is
nonconforming by dimension.



      OFFICE (FOR USE BY A RESIDENT OF THE PREMISES).  The use as a
professional office in a building in which the proprietor, manager, owner or
tenant maintains a full-time residence and which employs no more than one
person or associate not a resident of the premises.



      OFFICE, GENERAL PROFESSIONAL.  A commercial establishment in
which the principal use is a personal or professional service. Included
without limitation in this definition of office are medical, insurance,
finance, law, real estate, engineering or similar professional services.
Specifically excluded from this definition is the sale of products stored on
the premises at wholesale or retail, warehousing operations or service and/or
repair activities.



      OUTDOOR STORAGE OF BULK MATERIALS.  Open storage of bulk
materials with a height of five feet or more and a total surface area of 600
or more square feet for more than 24 hours; excluding the temporary storage
of construction materials reasonably required for construction work on the
premises pursuant to a valid building permit. OUTDOOR STORAGE OF BULK
MATERIALS shall not be permitted as a principal use in any zoning district,
but only as an accessory use as set forth in § 602.



      OVERLAY DISTRICT. A district established in a zoning ordinance
that is superimposed on one or more districts or parts of districts that
imposes specified requirements in addition to, but not less than, those
otherwise applicable for the underlying zone.



      PARK. An open space set aside for the purpose of passive
recreation including those open space areas permitted within cluster and
condominium developments.



      PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.  A set of criteria or limits relating to
elements which a particular use or process either must meet or may not exceed.



      PERMITTED USE.  A use by right which is specifically authorized
in a particular zoning district.



      PLANNING BOARD. The official planning agency of the municipality
whether designated as the plan commission, planning commission, plan board or
as otherwise known.



      PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE. A review meeting of a proposed
development held between applicants and reviewing agencies, as permitted by
law and municipal ordinance, before formal submission of an application for a
permit or for development approval.



      PRINCIPAL or MAIN USE.  The specific primary purpose for which a
lot of land or structure is used.



      PRODUCT STAND. A stand or structure for the display and sale of
agricultural products.



      RESIDENTIAL CARE AND ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. 



         (a)   A facility that provides personal assistance,
lodging and meals excluding, however, any establishment or facility licensed
pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws Title 23, Chapter 17 and those facilities licensed
by, or under the jurisdiction of, the Department of Mental Health,
Retardation and Hospitals, or the Department of Children, Youth and Families.



         (b)   Residential care and assisted living facilities
include Alzheimer Special Care Units (ASCU) which are residential care and
assisted living facilities that lock, secure, segregate or provide a special
program or a special unit for residents with a diagnosis of probable
Alzheimer's or related disorder, to prevent or limit access by a resident
outside the designated or separated area and that advertises or markets the
facility as providing specialized Alzheimer's and/or dementia care services.



         (c)   All residential care and assisted living
facilities shall make available to residents daily meals in a communal
setting, housekeeping services, 24-hour personal assistance, recreational
facilities and transportation services. All residential care and assisted
living facilities shall be licensed under R.I. Gen, Laws Title 23, Chapter
17.4.



      REST, RETIREMENT, CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME.  A structure
used for provision of medical care or supervision of residents of the
premises and further subject to the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws Title 5,
Chapter 45.



      RIDING ACADEMY OR SCHOOL. A structure or premises used to:



         (a)   Board and care for horses;



         (b)   Give instruction or training in riding, jumping
and/or showing horses; and



         (c)   Rent horses for riding.



      ROOMING HOUSE. A single-family dwelling in which the principal
resident rents not more than two rooms, without kitchen facilities and with
or without provision of meals, to not more than two persons per room.



      SENIOR INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITIES. A form of residential
development consisting of townhouse style dwelling units, and significant
on-site facilities and services designed to meet the physical and social
needs of persons 55 years of age or older, and to provide housing for persons
55 years of age or older. Occupancy of the dwelling units must be restricted
such that at least 80% of the units are occupied by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit within the development. Senior independent
living facilities shall be developed in accordance with the provisions of
Article 22, and shall not be subject to the provisions of Article 15 or
Article 19.



      SETBACK LINE OR LINES. A line or lines parallel to a lot line at
the minimum distance of the required setback for the zoning district in which
the lot is located that establishes the area within which the principal
structure must be erected or placed.



      SHOPPING CENTER, LARGE SCALE. 



         (a)   A grouping of three or more commercial
establishments, primarily retail in nature, planned, developed and managed as
a unit, located on a single lot or contiguous lots and containing a total of
20,000 square feet or more of gross leasable floor area; or any single
commercial establishment that is primarily retail in nature and meets the
requirements of this definition for location and size.



         (b)   A large scale shopping center may be developed
either for rental of individual units or for sale of condominium units or a
combination of both.



      SHOPPING CENTER, SMALL SCALE.



         (a)   A grouping of three or more commercial
establishments primarily retail in nature, planned, developed and managed as
a unit, located on a single lot or contiguous lots and containing less than
20,000 square feet total of gross leasable floor area (GLFA).



         (b)   A small scale shopping center may be developed for
rental of individual units or for sale of condominium units or a combination
of both.



      SIGN. See § 1202 for definitions for signs.



      SITE PLAN.  The development plan for one or more lots on which
is shown the existing and/or the proposed conditions of the lot.



      SOLID WASTE COMPACTION AND TRANSFER STATION. A facility where
solid waste materials are collected and compacted for transfer and disposal
to a site or sites beyond the boundaries of the town.



      SPECIAL USE. A regulated use, which is permitted pursuant to the
special use permit issued by the authorized governmental entity, pursuant to
R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-24-42, formerly referred to as a special exception.



      STREET. A public way established or maintained under public
authority, a private way open for public uses and a private way platted or
laid out for ultimate public use whether or not constructed.



      STRUCTURE.  A combination of materials to form a construction
for use, occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below,
the surface of land or water.



      SUBSTANDARD LOT OF RECORD.  Any lot lawfully existing at the
time of adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance not in conformance with
the dimensional and/or area provisions of that ordinance.



      SUPERMARKET. A retail business providing primarily food, along
with other products, and containing 5,000 square feet or more of gross
leasable floor area.



      TOWER. See COMMUNICATIONS TOWER.



      TOWNHOUSE. A type of multifamily dwelling containing not less
than three nor more than six dwelling units, each having a completely
separate entrance at ground level.



      USE.  The purpose or activity for which land or buildings is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which land or buildings is occupied or
maintained.



      VARIANCE.  Permission to depart from the literal requirements of
a zoning ordinance. An authorization for the construction or maintenance of a
building or structure, or for the establishment or maintenance of a use of
land which is prohibited by a zoning ordinance. There shall be only two
categories of variance:



         (a)   Use variance.  Permission to depart from the use
requirements of a zoning ordinance where the applicant for the requested
variance has shown by evidence upon the record that the subject land or
structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is to conform to the
provisions of that zoning ordinance.



         (b)   Dimensional variance.  Permission to depart from
the dimensional requirements of a zoning ordinance, where the applicant for
the requested relief has shown, by evidence upon the record, that there is no
other reasonable alternative way to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use
of the subject property unless granted the requested relief from the
dimensional regulations. However, the fact that a use may be more profitable
or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall
not be grounds for relief. (Also known as a REGULATORY VARIANCE).



      WATERS.  As defined in R.I. Gen. Laws § 46-12-1(b).



      WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT. A district superimposed over any
other zoning district established by this chapter. The Watershed Protection
District is established to protect, preserve and maintain the quality and
quantity of surface and ground water utilized by the town.



      WETLAND, COASTAL. As defined in R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-22.2-4. A
salt marsh bordering on the tidal waters of the state and contiguous uplands
extending no more than 50 yards inland.



      WETLAND, FRESHWATER.  A marsh, swamp, bog, pond, river, river or
stream flood plain or back area subject to flooding or storm flowage;
emergent or submergent plant community in any body of fresh water; or area
within 50 feet of the edge of a bog, marsh, swamp, or pond, as defined in
R.I. Gen. Laws § 2-1-20.



      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. Licensed wireless
telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication
services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized
mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar service that are marketed to the
general public.



      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A communications tower
and/or antenna, together with related equipment used to provide wireless
telecommunications services.



      YARD. A space on the same lot with a main building, open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from the ground to the
sky, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



      YARD, FRONT. The area between a street line and a line parallel
thereto drawn through the nearest point of a main structure, extending
between side lot lines.



      YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot
between the rearmost main building and the rear lot line, the depth of which
shall be the least distance between the rear lot line and the rear of such
main building.



      YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard or front lot line where no front yard is
required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard shall be
measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot line toward the
nearest part of the main building.



      YIELD PLAN.  Plan of a conventional subdivision or land
development used to demonstrate development potential, including the basic
number of lots to be allowed in a conservation subdivision plan, based on the
zoning and development requirements of the underlying zoning district.



      ZONING CERTIFICATE. A document signed by the Zoning Officer, as
required in this chapter, which acknowledges that a use, structure, building
or lot either complies with or is legally nonconforming to the provisions of
this chapter or is an authorized variance or modification therefrom.



      ZONING MAP.  The map or maps which are a part of this chapter
and which delineate the boundaries of all mapped zoning districts within the
physical boundary of the town.



      ZONING ORDINANCE. An ordinance enacted by the legislative body of
the town pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-24 and in the manner providing for
the adoption of ordinances in the town's home rule charter, which sets forth
regulations and standards relating to the nature and extent of uses of land
and structures, which is consistent with the comprehensive plan of the town
as defined in R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-22.2, which includes a zoning map and
which complies with the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-24.



      ZONING USE DISTRICTS.  The basic unit in zoning, either mapped
or unmapped, to which a uniform set of regulations applies, or a uniform set
of regulations for a specified use. The districts include, but are not
limited to: agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional, open space
and residential. Each district may include sub-districts. Districts may be
combined.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08; Am. Ord. passed
8-3-09; Am. Ord. passed 8-3-09; Am. Ord. 2012-4, passed 5-21-12; Am. Ord.
2012-16, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2018-7, passed 3-19-18; Am. Ord. 2018-15,
passed 9-4-18)



ARTICLE 5  ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP



§ 500  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.



   To achieve the purposes of this chapter, the Town of Middletown is
hereby divided into the following zoning districts:



 


List of Authorized Zoning Districts



District
 
Symbol
 
Description




Residential
 
R-60
 
Low density residential


Residential
 
R-40
 
Low density residential


Residential
 
R-30
 
Medium density residential


Residential
 
R-20
 
Medium density residential


Residential
 
R-10
 
High density residential


Residential
 
RM
 
Residential multifamily


Residential
 
MT
 
Mobile home/transient trailer





Commercial
 
GB
 
General business


Commercial
 
LB
 
Limited business


Commercial
 
OB
 
Office business


Commercial
 
OP
 
Office park





Industrial
 
LI
See § 724
 
Light industry





Open space
 
OS
 
Open space





Public
 
P
 
Public




 



 


List of Authorized Zoning Districts (Cont'd)



District
 
Symbol
 
Description




Traffic Sensitive Residential
 
R-60A
 
Traffic sensitive low density residential


Traffic Sensitive Residential
 
R-40A
 
Traffic sensitive low density residential


Traffic Sensitive Residential
 
R-30A
 
Traffic sensitive medium density residential


Traffic Sensitive Residential
 
R-20A
 
Traffic sensitive medium density residential


Traffic Sensitive Residential
 
R-10A
 
Traffic sensitive high density residential


Traffic Sensitive Residential
 
RMA
 
Traffic sensitive residential multifamily


Traffic Sensitive Residential
 
MTA
 
Traffic sensitive mobile home/transient trailer


Traffic Sensitive Commercial
 
GBA
 
Traffic sensitive general business


Traffic Sensitive Commercial
 
LBA
 
Traffic sensitive limited business


Traffic Sensitive Commercial
 
OBA
 
Traffic sensitive office business


Traffic Sensitive Industrial
 
LIA
 
Traffic sensitive light industry


Traffic Sensitive Open Space
 
OSA
 
Traffic sensitive open space


Traffic Sensitive Public
 
PA
 
Traffic sensitive public




 



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 501  PURPOSES OF THE VARIOUS ZONING DISTRICTS.



   In addition to furthering the purposes of this chapter, as stated in
Article 1, each of the foregoing listed districts is created with specific
intent as follows:



   (A)   Low Density Residential (R-60). This district is established
to provide low density residential areas, areas for agricultural use and
where future community expansion is likely to occur.



   (B)   Low Density Residential (R-40).  This district is established
to provide residential areas which are suited for large lot single-family
development, agricultural and certain other uses.



   (C)   Medium Density Residential (R-30).  This district is
established to provide residential areas which are located in rural areas of
town or where environmental conditions preclude smaller single-family lot
sizes, and where agricultural and certain other uses may be established.



   (D)   Medium Density Residential (R-20).  This district is
established to provide residential areas suitable for development but where
intensive non-residential uses are restricted.



   (E)   High Density Residential (R-10). This district is established
to provide a wide range of urban housing types within the central built-up
areas of town where water and sewer service is provided.



   (F)   Residential Multifamily (RM). This district is established to
provide areas for multifamily housing, including apartments and condominiums,
meeting certain design and site planning requirements; and where
complementary non-residential uses may be allowed.



   (G)   Mobile Home/Transient Trailer (MT).  This district is
established to provide areas for mobile home parks and transient trailer
parks.



   (H)   General Business (GB). This district is established to provide
areas for most retail, wholesale, and service businesses, serving both local
as well as regional markets. Within the GB District, mixed-use development
projects are also allowed as an option to provide for village- style
development of a mix of uses, including multi-family residential, small-scale
retail, office, and public uses, while preserving open space, and to limit
commercial sprawl.



   (I)   Limited Business (LB). This district is established to provide
areas for day-to-day localized shopping needs, convenience shopping services
to neighborhood areas, and to provide limited specialized business uses in
certain parts of town. Within the LB District, mixed-use development projects
are also allowed as an option to provide for village-style development of a
mix of uses, including multi- family residential, small-scale retail, office,
and public uses, while preserving open space, and to limit commercial sprawl.



   (J)   Office Business (OB). This district is established to provide
areas for planned office parks, light industrial and research centers and
professional office buildings.



   (K)   Light Industry (LI). This district is established to provide
for light industry and non-manufacturing businesses, heavy commercial uses,
automotive and mechanical services and outdoor storage uses and is explained
in § 724.



   (L)   Office Park (OP).  This district is established to provide a
park-like setting for office uses, certain industrial uses, and miscellaneous
compatible uses.



   (M)   Open Space (OS).  This district is established to reserve
certain areas for conservation of natural resources and open recreational and
institutional uses.



   (N)   Public (P). This district is established to provide for major
public lands owned by federal, state or municipal governments. The purpose of
this district is to relate the zoning map to major elements of actual land
use and to the Comprehensive Community Plan, and to provide zoning controls
if the public use is abandoned or the land is sold for private use.



   (O)   Traffic Sensitive Districts. These districts are designated by
the letter "A" and identify districts where special regulations regarding lot
width/frontage shall apply. They are intended to provide for adequate and
safe access onto major thoroughfares within the town.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



§ 502  OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   (A)   The boundaries of the foregoing zoning districts are hereby
established as shown on the Town of Middletown Official Zoning Map, dated
October 1, 1985, consisting of plat maps, and filed in the Office of the Town
Clerk. The Town of Middletown Official Zoning Map, as may hereafter be
amended from time to time, is hereby made a part of this code, is hereinafter
sometimes referred to as the "zoning map" and is hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter.



   (B)   The zoning map, consisting of 45 plat maps, shall be
identified by the following: Town of Middletown Official Zoning Map, dated
October 1, 1985, the signature of the Town Council President, attested by the
Town Clerk, and bearing the seal of the town.



   (C)   Regardless of the existence of copies of the zoning map, which
may be periodically made or published, the zoning map herein described, which
shall be located in the office of the Town Clerk, shall be the Town of
Middletown Official Zoning Map. It shall be the final authority as to the
current zoning status of land and water areas; buildings, and other
structures in the Town of Middletown.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 503  RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of zoning districts as shown
on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:



   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets, railroads or utility rights-of-way shall be construed
to follow such centerlines;



   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;



   (C)   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be
construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore
line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line. Boundaries
indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers,
ponds or other bodies or water shall be construed to follow such centerlines;



   (D)   Land created by the filling of a stream or water body shall be
considered to be within the district of the land from which such fill was
extended;



   (E)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following town limits
shall be construed as following town limits;



   (F)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in divisions (A) through (E) hereof shall be so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined by
the scale of the zoning map;



   (G)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground
differ from those shown on the zoning map or in other circumstances not
covered by divisions (A) through (F) hereof, the Zoning Officer shall
interpret the zoning district boundaries.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 6  APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 600  REGULATION OF STRUCTURES AND LAND.



   Regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or type of structure or
land, except as hereinafter provided:



   (A)   No structure or land shall hereinafter be used or occupied,
and no structure, including signs, or parts thereof shall be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.



   (B)   No structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to be:



      (1)   Greater in height or bulk;



      (2)   Accommodate or house a greater number of families;



      (3)   Occupy a greater percentage of lot area;



      (4)   Have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side
yards, frontage or other open spaces; than herein provided, or in any other
manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   No yard or lot legally existing at the time of passage of this
chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.



   (D)   No required yard or open space provided around any building
for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall again
be used as a yard or open space for any other building.



   (E)   This section shall not apply to tents erected under a tent
license issued for 30 days or less under Chapter 101 of Title IX: General
Regulations, except that tents on nonresidential property must comply with
the setback requirements applicable to accessory buildings in § 603.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 09-18, passed 11-2-09)



§ 601  SPECIAL PROVISIONS REGARDING LOT WIDTH/FRONTAGE.



   (A)   Within any zoning district designated by the letter "A" as
shown on the official zoning map, all the applicable regulations of this
chapter for the zoning district to which the letter "A" has been added shall
apply, with the single exception of provisions for minimum lot width/frontage
as provided in § 603.



   (B)   Lot width/frontage shall be as provided in § 701. For the
purposes of this chapter, wherever a provision other than lot width/frontage
is made herein which is applicable to a zoning district, it shall be
construed to be applicable to any corresponding zoning district to which the
letter "A" has been added. For example, all provisions of this chapter which
are applicable to a Residential R-60 zone are also applicable to a Traffic
Sensitive Residential R-60A zone (except minimum lot width/frontage).



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 602  SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS - USES AND DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The following uses are permitted only in the zoning district
marked with a "Y". Uses permitted in the zoning district as a special use
under the provisions of uses requiring a variance or special use permit or
Article 9 are marked with an "S". Where the letter "N" appears, the use is
prohibited.



   (B)   Any use which is not specifically included in the use
provisions herein is prohibited everywhere in the Town of Middletown, unless
the Zoning Officer makes an interpretation that such use is included in any
of the sub-classifications set forth herein. Uses not specified in this
chapter may be permitted only if the Zoning Officer makes an interpretation
that they are included in a use sub-classification permitted in the zoning
district and if such use would be consistent with the purposes and intent of
this chapter.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


AGRICULTURAL


Field crop farms or horticultural nurseries, including wholesale sales on the
same lot
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N


Livestock farms, excluding raising swine
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
S
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N


Offices of veterinarians and animal hospitals
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Offices of veterinarians and animal hospitals, including the boarding of
dogs, cats and other fur bearing animals. Indoor facility
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Licensed kennels for the raising, boarding and care of dogs, cats or other
fur-bearing animals
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Wind turbine for generation of electricity, limited to location on properties
for which the principal use is field crop farms, horticultural nurseries or
livestock farms3
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N


RESIDENTIAL - Conventional Development


Single-family dwellings
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Two-family dwellings
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
Y
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Multifamily dwelling structure (3 - 6 dwelling units per lot)
See §§ 1500 - 1508
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Multifamily dwelling project, including condominiums
See §§ 1500 - 1508
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



RESIDENTIAL - Conventional Development (Cont'd)


Mobile home parks
See §§ 2300 - 2314
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S


Transient trailer parks
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S


Motel or hotel
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Rooming houses
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Single mobile home or transient trailer on a lot
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S


Institutional dormitory as a principal or accessory use
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Cluster development
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Family day care home
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Community residence
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Senior independent living facilities
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Time share unit within a multifamily dwelling structure or project, except
with a cluster development
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Time share unit within a motel or hotel
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


RESIDENTIAL - Conventional Development (Cont'd)


Mixed residential and commercial uses in a single building

See § 719
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Mixed Use Development Projects

See §§ 27A00 - 27A07
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Congregate housing
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


RESIDENTIAL - Conservation Development


Single-family
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Two-family
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Multifamily project, including only townhouse style condominiums
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


EXTRACTIVE AND INDUSTRIAL NON-MANUFACTURING


Earth removal, quarries, sand and gravel lots
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Construction general contractors, including storage of materials and
equipment, but excluding outdoor storage of bulk materials
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Storage of bottled gas, oil or other liquid petroleum products
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Cleaning and dyeing plant
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Parking or outdoor storage of more than one commercial vehicle over 1½-ton
capacity
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT




 
R60
 
R40
 
R30
 
R20
 
R10
 
RM
 
GB
 
LB
 
OB
 
LI1
 
LI2
 
OP
 
OS
 
P
 
MT




NOTES:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


EXTRACTIVE AND INDUSTRIAL NON-MANUFACTURING (Cont'd)


Miscellaneous special trade contractors, with outdoor storage, but excluding
outdoor storage of bulk materials
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Miscellaneous special trade contractors with outdoor storage, including
outdoor storage of bulk materials
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Other extractive and industrial non-manufacturing not elsewhere classified
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Salvage yard operation
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Construction general contractors, including storage of materials and
equipment, including outdoor storage of bulk materials
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


MANUFACTURING


Food and related products including meat products, dairy products or
bakeries; canning, preserving and miscellaneous food processing
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics and similar materials
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Lumber and wood products including furniture and fixtures
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Plastics molding, extrusion and/or assembly of plastic parts
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Printing, publishing and allied industries
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N


Rubber, leather, stone, clay or glass products
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Concrete plant
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


MANUFACTURING (Cont'd)


Fabricated metals products, including heavy machinery, transportation
equipment, engines etc.
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Fabricated metals products, excluding heavy machinery, transportation
equipment, engines etc.
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Boat building and repairing, including storage
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Engineering, computers, scientific and research instruments, small motors and
associated equipment
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N


Gravel processing, with or without outdoor storage of bulk materials
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION AND UTILITIES


Ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S


Highway and transportation services, including terminals, storage yards, etc.
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Airports and heliports
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
Y
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N


Commercial dock or pier
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N


Warehousing, self-storage, public and private
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Commercial off-street parking
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N


Electric power substation
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N


High voltage electric transmission towers
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N


Telephone exchange
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION AND UTILITIES (Cont'd)


Sewage treatment plant
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N


Solid waste transfer station
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N


Wind turbine for generation of electricity
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES


Building-mounted facilities
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
N


Communication tower
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
N


Disguised facilities
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Pole-mounted antennas
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


WHOLESALE COMMERCIAL


Wholesale distribution establishments (no retail sales)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Wholesale distribution establishments (no retail sales), with outdoor storage
of bulk materials
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


RETAIL COMMERCIAL


Lumber, building materials, heavy equipment, plumbing, electrical supply and
service
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Lumber, building materials, heavy equipment, plumbing, electrical supply and
service, with outdoor storage of bulk materials
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


General merchandise retailing activities, including department stores
(storage areas not to exceed 30% of gross floor area)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



RETAIL COMMERCIAL (Cont'd)


Small-scale shopping center
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Large-scale shopping center
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Auto dealers, trailers (new and used), tire, battery, access, dealers
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Gasoline service station (minor repairs only)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Gasoline station with convenience store
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Boat sales, including trailers
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Supermarkets
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Convenience stores, delicatessens, fish markets, fruit and vegetable markets,
bakeries, dairy products stores
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Commercial greenhouse
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Lunchroom or restaurant (no alcoholic beverages)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Lunchroom or restaurant (alcoholic beverages)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Tavern, café, club bar or cocktail lounge (alcoholic beverages)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



RETAIL COMMERCIAL (Cont'd)


Packaged liquor store
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Retail outlet for wholesale, storage or manufacturing use (provided that
floor area devoted to such retail selling shall not exceed 1,000 sq. ft.)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


PERSONAL SERVICES


Laundry or dry cleaners, pick up only (no plant), or self-service laundromat
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Beauty or barber shop
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Mortuary or funeral home without cremation services
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Crematorium
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Therapeutic massage and physical therapy services
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Miscellaneous personal services not otherwise classified
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



BUSINESS SERVICES


Automotive repair, service and garages, vehicle body shop and welding
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Catering and food packaging
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N


Miscellaneous repair shops and related services (non-vehicle)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Vehicle washing establishment
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Vehicle or equipment rentals
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Duplicating, printing or photocopying services
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Miscellaneous business services not otherwise classified
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


PROFESSIONAL SERVICES


General professional offices
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N


Bank or financial institution
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N


Research or development offices
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N


Office - customary home occupation (for use by a resident of the premises up
to one employee or associate)
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
S


Temporary real estate sales office located on the premises being sold
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.





 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



PROFESSIONAL SERVICES (Cont'd)


Sales and service offices for fuel oil and bottled gas dealers including
parts and repairs but excluding storage and distribution of the product on
the premises
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Miscellaneous professional services not otherwise classified
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


INDOOR COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENT SERVICES


Motion picture theaters
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Video and amusement arcades
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Bowling alleys and billiard and pool parlors
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Exercise center, gymnasium, sauna or court games
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Skating rinks
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Indoor roller blade and skateboarding facility
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENTAL, EDUCATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ON PRIVATELY OWNED LAND


Church or other place of worship
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Library or museum
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
Y
 
N
 
N


Private college or university, preparatory school, elementary or secondary
school, including dormitories and other accessory buildings
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
Y
 
N


Professional or musical schools
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Day nursery school, kindergarten or other agency giving day care
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Trade school, private vocational school teaching industrial skills using
heavy machinery or industrial processes
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Cemeteries
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N


Clubs, lodges, social and community centers (non-profit only)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Membership athletic clubs (non-profit only)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Hospital/medical center or clinic
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
Y
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Emergency counseling service or drop-in center
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENTAL, EDUCATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ON PRIVATELY OWNED LAND (Cont'd)


Rest, retirement, convalescent or nursing homes
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


Residential care and assisted living facility
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N


COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION


Amusement parks
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Miniature golf, driving range, pitch and putt, etc.
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Campgrounds
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N


Riding academies and schools
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N


Golf courses
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
N
 
N


Drive-in theater
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Tennis/other outdoor court games
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Swimming pools, water slides, other water-based amusements
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Boat liveries (small boat rentals)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Stadia and fairgrounds
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION (Cont'd)


Conservation lands, bird sanctuaries, wildlife preserves
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y


Public and private parks
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y


Bathing beaches, public or non-profit ownership
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y


ACCESSORY USES


Accessory use customarily incidental to a use permitted in the district and
located on the same lot as the principal use
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y


Accessory use customarily incidental to a use permitted as a special use
exception in the district and located on the same lot as the principal use
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Agricultural awareness programs
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N


Farm-promotion accessory uses
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N


Product stands for sale of fruit and vegetable produce raised on the
premises, including nursery stock (maximum 150 sq. ft. permanent structure)
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



 


ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES






 

Y = Permitted      S = Special Use      N = Not Permitted




PRINCIPAL USE

 

ZONING DISTRICT






 

R60

 

R40

 

R30

 

R20

 

R10

 

RM

 

GB

 

LB

 

OB

 

LI1

 

LI2

 

OP

 

OS

 

P

 

MT





NOTES:
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



ACCESSORY USES (Cont'd)


Product stands for sale of fruit and vegetable produce raised on the
premises, nursery stock,  plants and seedlings raised on/off the premises;
farm supplies and associated products (permanent structure exceeding 150 sq.
ft.)
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
N
 
S
 
S
 
N


Traditional farm-related accessory uses other than product stands
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
Y
 
Y
 
N


Home occupation
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
S
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
Y




 



1   Refer to § 725 and Article 23 of this chapter for use and design
restrictions and performance standards applicable to uses in light industrial
districts.



2   (Abutting Residential) Light industrial (adjacent to residential) is
not a separate zoning district.  It is a subset of light industry and is
shown here for clarity only.



3   Refer to Article 25A of this chapter for use restrictions, design
standards and application procedures for wind turbines.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-16, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, As
Amended, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08; Am. Ord. 08-06,
passed 6-2-08; Am. Ord. 08-08, passed 8-4-08; Am. Ord. passed 1-20-09; Am.
Ord. 2012-4, passed 5-21-12; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord.
2012-16, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2018-15, passed 9-4-18; Am. Ord. 2018-16,
passed 9-4-18)



Click here to view the above table in a PDF document.



§ 603  DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.



   The following schedule sets forth the minimum and/or maximum
dimensional regulations for uses permitted in the various zoning districts.



 


ZONING DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS




Zoning District and Use

 

Minimum Lot Size

 

Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied

 

Maximum Height of Building

 

Minimum Yard Dimension

 

Accessory Buildings
Minimum Distance in Feet to




Area (S.F.)

 

Width/ Frontage
(Ft.)

 

Principal and Accessory Buildings

 

Principal
(Ft.)

 

Accessory
(Ft.)

 

Front
(Ft.)

 

Side
(Ft.)

 

Rear
(Ft.)

 

Side Lot Lines

 

Rear Lot Lines





R60 Residence District


Single-family dwelling
 
60,000
 

200

 

15%

 

35

 

25

 

40

 

30

 

60

 

30

 

15



Livestock farm or animal husbandry services
 
100,000
 

250

 

10%

 

35

 

25

 

50

 

30

 

60

 

30

 

15



Private college or university, preparatory school, elementary or secondary
school
 
5 acres
 

300

 

20%

 

40

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

60



Other permitted uses
 
60,000
 

200

 

15%

 

35

 

25

 

40

 

30

 

60

 

30

 

15



R40 Residence District


Single-family dwelling
 
40,000
 

150

 

15%

 

35

 

25

 

40

 

30

 

60

 

30

 

15



Livestock farm or animal husbandry services
 
100,000
 

250

 

10%

 

35

 

25

 

50

 

30

 

60

 

30

 

15



Private college or university, preparatory school, elementary or secondary
school
 
5 acres
 

300

 

20%

 

40

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

40

 

40

 

60



Other permitted uses
 
40,000
 

150

 

15%

 

35

 

25

 

40

 

30

 

60

 

30

 

15





 



NOTE:   Any accessory structure housing livestock requires a rear lot
setback of 60 feet.  This setback applies to building and accessory
structures only.



 


ZONING DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS




Zoning District and Use

 

Minimum Lot Size

 

Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied

 

Maximum Height of Building

 

Minimum Yard Dimension

 

Accessory Buildings
Minimum Distance in Feet to




Area (S.F.)

 

Width/ Frontage
(Ft.)

 

Principal and Accessory Buildings

 

Principal
(Ft.)

 

Accessory
(Ft.)

 

Front
(Ft.)

 

Side
(Ft.)

 

Rear
(Ft.)

 

Side Lot Lines

 

Rear Lot Lines





R30 Residence District
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Single-family dwelling
 
30,000
 

130

 

20%

 

35

 

20

 

40

 

20

 

50

 

20

 

15



Livestock farm or animal husbandry services
 
100,000
 

250

 

10%

 

35

 

25

 

50

 

30

 

60

 

30

 

15



Private college or university, preparatory school, elementary of secondary
school
 
5 acres
 

300

 

20%

 

40

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

60



Other permitted uses
 
30,000
 

130

 

20%

 

35

 

20

 

40

 

20

 

50

 

20

 

15



R20 Residence District


Single-family dwelling
 
20,000
 

120

 

20%

 

35

 

20

 

40

 

20

 

50

 

20

 

15



Two-family dwelling
 
40,000
 

150

 

20%

 

35

 

20

 

40

 

30

 

50

 

30

 

15



Livestock farm or animal husbandry services
 
100,000
 

250

 

10%

 

35

 

25

 

50

 

30

 

60

 

30

 

15



Private college or university, preparatory school, elementary of secondary
school
 
5 acres
 

300

 

20%

 

40

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

60



Other permitted uses
 
20,000
 

120

 

20%

 

35

 

35

 

40

 

20

 

50

 

20

 

15





 



NOTE:   Any accessory structure housing livestock requires a rear lot
setback of 60 feet.  This setback applies to building and accessory
structures only.



 


ZONING DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS




Zoning District and Use

 

Minimum Lot Size

 

Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied

 

Maximum Height of Building

 

Minimum Yard Dimension

 

Accessory Buildings
Minimum Distance in Feet to




Area (S.F.)

 

Width/ Frontage
(Ft.)

 

Principal and Accessory Buildings

 

Principal
(Ft.)

 

Accessory
(Ft.)

 

Front
(Ft.)

 

Side
(Ft.)

 

Rear
(Ft.)

 

Side Lot Lines

 

Rear Lot Lines





R10 Residence District


Single-family dwelling
 
10,000
 

100

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

25

 

15

 

30

 

15

 

10



Two-family dwelling
 
15,000
 

120

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

25

 

20

 

30

 

20

 

10



Private college or university, preparatory school, elementary of secondary
school
 
5 acres
 

300

 

20%

 

40

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

60



Other permitted uses
 
10,000
 

100

 

25%

 

35

 

35

 

25

 

10

 

30

 

10

 

5



RM Residential District


Single-family dwelling
 
10,000
 

100

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

25

 

15

 

30

 

15

 

10



Two-family dwelling
 
15,000
 

120

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

25

 

20

 

30

 

20

 

10



Multifamily dwelling structure
 
40,000
 

150

 

30%

 

35

 

20

 

40

 

25

 

40

 

25

 

10



Multifamily dwelling project
 
5 acres
 

200

 

35%

 

35

 

25

 

100

 

60

 

60

 

40

 

40





 



NOTE:   Any accessory structure housing livestock requires a rear lot
setback of 60 feet.  This setback applies to building and accessory
structures only.



 


ZONING DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS




Zoning District and Use

 

Minimum Lot Size

 

Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied

 

Maximum Height of Building

 

Minimum Yard Dimension

 

Accessory Buildings
Minimum Distance in Feet to




Area (S.F.)

 

Width/ Frontage
(Ft.)

 

Principal and Accessory Buildings

 

Principal
(Ft.)

 

Accessory
(Ft.)

 

Front
(Ft.)

 

Side
(Ft.)

 

Rear
(Ft.)

 

Side Lot Lines

 

Rear Lot Lines





GB Business District


Private college or university, preparatory school, elementary of secondary
school
 
5 acres
 

300

 

20%

 

40

 

40

 

20

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

60



Large-scale shopping center
 
80,000
 

200

 

25%

 

40

 

20

 

10

 

50

 

50

 

20

 

15



Small-scale shopping center
 
20,000
 

120

 

25%

 

40

 

20

 

10

 

20

 

50

 

25

 

5



Other permitted uses
 
12,000
 

100

 

25%

 

40

 

20

 

10

 

10

 

20

 

20

 

5



LB Business District


Single-family dwelling
 
10,000
 

100

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

10

 

15

 

30

 

20

 

10



Two-family dwelling
 
15,000
 

120

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

10

 

20

 

30

 

20

 

10



Multifamily dwelling structure
 
40,000
 

150

 

30%

 

35

 

20

 

10

 

25

 

40

 

25

 

10



Miniature golf, driving range, pitch and putt, etc.
 
80,000
 

200

 

20%

 

40

 

20

 

10

 

30

 

50

 

25

 

5



Small-scale shopping center
 
20,000
 

120

 

25%

 

40

 

20

 

10

 

20

 

50

 

25

 

5



Other permitted uses 1
 
20,000
 

120

 

25%

 

40

 

20

 

10

 

20

 

50

 

25

 

5





 



1   See § 27A for dimensional requirements specific to Mixed-Use
Development Projects.



NOTE:   Any accessory structure housing livestock requires a rear lot
setback of 60 feet.  This setback applies to building and accessory
structures only.



 


ZONING DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS




Zoning District and Use

 

Minimum Lot Size

 

Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied

 

Maximum Height of Building

 

Minimum Yard Dimension

 

Accessory Buildings
Minimum Distance in Feet to




Area (S.F.)

 

Width/ Frontage
(Ft.)

 

Principal and Accessory Buildings

 

Principal
(Ft.)

 

Accessory
(Ft.)

 

Front
(Ft.)

 

Side
(Ft.)

 

Rear
(Ft.)

 

Side Lot Lines

 

Rear Lot Lines





OB Business District


Single-family dwelling
 
20,000
 

120

 

20%

 

35

 

15

 

10

 

20

 

50

 

20

 

10



Two-family dwelling
 
40,000
 

150

 

20%

 

35

 

25

 

10

 

30

 

50

 

30

 

10



Other permitted uses
 
40,000
 

150

 

35%

 

35

 

25

 

10

 

35

 

50

 

25

 

15



Multifamily dwelling structure
 
40,000
 

150

 

30%

 

35

 

20

 

10

 

25

 

40

 

25

 

10



Multifamily dwelling project
 
5 acres
 

200

 

35%

 

35

 

25

 

10

 

60

 

60

 

40

 

40



LI Industrial District


Any permitted use
 
40,000
 

150

 

35%

 

40

 

20

 

10

 

35

 

40

 

25

 

10



OP Office Park


Any permitted use
 
40,000
 

150

 

35%

 

40

 

20

 

10

 

35

 

40

 

25

 

10



OS Open Space District


Any permitted use
 
100,000
 

250

 

10%

 

30

 

20

 

50

 

50

 

50

 

30

 

10



P Public District


Any permitted use (See §§ 2600, 2601)
 





 



NOTE:   Any accessory structure housing livestock requires a rear lot
setback of 60 feet.  This setback applies to building and accessory
structures only.



 


ZONING DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS




Zoning District and Use

 

Minimum Lot Size

 

Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied

 

Maximum Height of Building

 

Minimum Yard Dimension

 

Accessory Buildings
Minimum Distance in Feet to




Area (S.F.)

 

Width/ Frontage
(Ft.)

 

Principal and Accessory Buildings

 

Principal
(Ft.)

 

Accessory
(Ft.)

 

Front
(Ft.)

 

Side
(Ft.)

 

Rear
(Ft.)

 

Side Lot Lines

 

Rear Lot Lines



MT Mobile Home/Transient Trailer District


Mobile home park
 
10 acres
 

50

 

20%

 

35

 

15

 

See 1

 



 



 



 





Transient trailer park
 
10 acres
 

50

 

20%

 

35

 

15

 

See 2

 



 



 



 






 



NOTE:   Any accessory structure housing livestock requires a rear lot
setback of 60 feet.  This setback applies to building and accessory
structures only.



1   See Article 23.



2   See Article 24.



Click here to view the above table in a PDF document.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed
5-19-08; Am. Ord. 2011-12, passed 11-21-11; Am. Ord. 2018-10, passed 4-17-18;
Am. Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



§ 604  CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.



   The following schedule sets forth the minimum and maximum dimensional
regulations for uses permitted in the various zoning districts under Article
19.



 


CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS - SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY
DWELLINGS



Zoning District and Use
 

Minimum Lot Size

 

Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied

 

Maximum Height of Building

 

Minimum Yard Dimension

 
Accessory Buildings
Minimum Distance in Feet to



Area (S.F.)

 
Width/
Frontage
(Ft.)
 

Principal and Accessory Buildings

 
Principal
(Ft.)
 
Accessory
(Ft.)
 
Front
(Ft.)
 
Side
(Ft.)
 
Rear
(Ft.)
 

Side Lot Lines

 

Rear Lot Lines






R60 Residence District



Single-family dwelling/two-family


(1)  CSD without public sewer and water
 
30,000
 

120

 

20%

 

35

 

25

 

30

 

20

 

50

 

20

 

15



(2)  CSD with water and/or sewer
 
20,000
 

120

 

20%

 

35

 

25

 

30

 

20

 

50

 

20

 

15



R40 Residence District


Single-family dwelling/two-family


(1)  CSD without public sewer and water
 
20,000
 

120

 

20%

 

35

 

25

 

30

 

20

 

50

 

20

 

15



(2)  CSD with public water and/or sewer
 
15,000
 

100

 

20%

 

35

 

25

 

30

 

20

 

50

 

20

 

15



R30 Residence District


Single-family dwelling/two-family


(1)  CSD without public sewer and water
 
20,000
 

120

 

20%

 

35

 

15

 

30

 

20

 

50

 

20

 

15



(2)  CSD with public water or sewer
 
15,000
 

100

 

20%

 

35

 

15

 

30

 

20

 

50

 

15

 

10



(3)  CSD with public water and sewer
 
10,000
 

100

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

25

 

15

 

30

 

15

 

10



R20 Residence District


Single-family dwelling


(1)  CSD without public water and sewer
 
N/A
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



(2)  CSD with public water or sewer
 
15,000
 

100

 

20%

 

35

 

15

 

25

 

15

 

30

 

15

 

10



(3)  CSD with public water and sewer
 
7,000
 

80

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

25

 

15

 

30

 

15

 

10



Two-family dwelling


(1)  CSD without public water and sewer
 
N/A
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



(2)CSD with public water or sewer
 
15,000
 

100

 

20%

 

35

 

15

 

25

 

15

 

30

 

15

 

10



(3)CSD with public water and sewer
 
10,000
 

100

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

25

 

20

 

50

 

15

 

10




R10 Residence District



Single-family dwelling


(1)  CSD without public water and sewer
 
N/A
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



(2)  CSD with public water or sewer
 
N/A
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



(3)  CSD with public water and sewer
 
5,000
 

60

 

30%

 

35

 

15

 

20

 

15

 

30

 

15

 

10



Two-family dwelling


(1)  CSD without public water and sewer
 
N/A
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



(2)CSD with public water or sewer
 
N/A
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



(3)CSD with public water and sewer
 
10,000
 

80

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

20

 

20

 

30

 

15

 

10



GB, LB, OB, LI, OP


Single-family/two-family


(1)  CSD with public water and sewer
 
10,000
 

80

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

20

 

20

 

30

 

15

 

10





 



 


CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS - MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS




Zoning District and Use

 
Minimum Lot Size
 
Maximum Percentage of Lot to be Occupied
 
Maximum Height of Building
 

Minimum Setback in Feet to



Public Street
 
Property Line


Width/
Frontage (Ft.)
 

Building

 
Imperv.
 
Principal (Ft.)
 
Accessory (Ft.)
 
Principal
 
Accessory
 
Principal
 
Accessory


R-30 Residence District
 

50

 

20%

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

100

 

100

 

80

 

20



R-20 Residence District
 

50

 

20%

 

25%

 

35

 

15

 

100

 

80

 

80

 

20



R-10 Residence District
 

50

 

25%

 

40%

 

35

 

15

 

100

 

80

 

60

 

20




 



(Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08; Am. Ord. 2018-8, passed 3-19-18)



Click here to view the above table in a PDF document.



§ 605  MAXIMUM BUILDING FOOTPRINT.



   (A)   All uses permitted by right or by special use permit in Zones
GB, LB, OB, OP, RM, MT and LI shall only be conducted in buildings which
comply with the maximum building footprint requirements of division (B)
below. Any variance from this provision shall require a use variance as set
forth in § 903. Provided however, that buildings which existed as of April
4, 2016 shall be exempt from this requirement.



   (B)   The maximum footprint of any single building shall be limited
as follows:



 


Maximum Building Footprint




Zoning District

 

Use

 

Maximum Building Footprint in Square Feet





RM, MT1
 
Any use
 

35,000



GB, LB1
 
Any use
 

35,000



OB, OP1
 
Any use except office and industrial
 

35,000



OB, OP
 
Office and industrial use
 

100,000



LI1
 
Any use except industrial use
 

35,000



LI
 
Industrial use
 

100,000



OS
 
Any use
 

10,000



P
 
Any use
 

35,000



1   Buildings in GB, LB, OB, OP, RM, MT and non-industrial uses in L1
districts, which existed as of April 4, 2016, may exceed 35,000 sq. ft. if a
special use permit is granted by the Zoning Board of Review, provided that
the property on which such building is located complies with the lot coverage
requirements of § 603.




 



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08; Am. Ord. 2011-12,
passed 11-21-11; Am. Ord. 2016-2, passed 4-4-16)



ARTICLE 7  SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS



§ 700  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of supplementary regulations is to set specific conditions
for various uses, classification of uses or areas where special regulations
apply.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 701  YARD REGULATIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   The front, side and rear yards as required by district dimensional
regulations, shall be unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures,
except as provided as follows:



   (A)   Ordinary projections of window sills, cornices, eaves and
other structural features may extend not more than 12 inches into the space
above required yards;



   (B)   Required and ordinary projections for stairs, landings,
bulkhead entrances and chimneys;



   (C)   Signs, as permitted in Article 12;



   (D)   Driveways and walkways;



   (E)   Fences, as permitted in § 705;



   (F)   Accessory uses and structure as permitted in § 703.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 702  NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS OR PRINCIPAL BUILDING PER LOT.



   (A)   Residential zoning districts. In any residential zoning
district other than Residential Multifamily (RM) and Mobile Home/Transient
Trailer (MT), not more than one dwelling unit or principal building shall be
permitted on a lot, except in the case of motels or hotels, and multifamily
dwelling projects in conservation developments, as further provided in this
chapter.



   (B)   Commercial and industrial districts (GB, OB, LB, LI).  In
these districts, more than one  principal building per lot shall be
permitted if used for commercial, office or industrial purposes.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 703  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (F) and (G), an
accessory use which is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal
permitted use of the premises or structure shall be allowed; provided that
such accessory use shall be located on the same lot to which it applies.



   (B)   No accessory buildings or structures shall be located nearer
than ten feet to a principal building unless such accessory buildings or
structure are structurally attached to the principal building.



   (C)   Regardless of the provisions of Table of Zoning District
Dimensional Regulations concerning Accessory Buildings - Minimum Distance in
Feet to Side Lot Lines and Rear Lot Line, § 603, any accessory structure,
having 150 square feet or less floor area with a maximum height of 15 feet
shall be permitted to be placed no closer than five feet to any lot line in
the required rear yard. Provided, however, that no accessory structure, pen
or enclosure used for keeping animals shall be permitted closer to a property
line than the distance permitted for accessory buildings in the Table.



   (D)   No accessory building or structure, except signs as allowed by
Article 12, and satellite dish antennas and communication towers as allowed
by Article 25 shall be located in any required front yard.



   (E)   Vending machines, newsstands, soft drink machines, etc., shall
be considered to be accessory structures and shall not be placed within the
right-of-way of streets, attached to a utility pole, or located within any
required off-street parking and loading facility. Such structures are
permitted only if attached to or abutting a building, upon a sidewalk or
exterior mall adjacent to a building, or within pedestrian areas associated
with a building.



   (F)   Farm-promotion accessory uses are allowed by obtaining a
special use permit from the Board of Review. Such uses are subject to
applicable requirements and conditions of farm-promotion accessory uses, as
well as to any conditions imposed by the Board under conditions on variances
and special use permits.



   (G)   A tent erected and maintained for not more than 30 days, or
for up to nine months under successive licenses issued by the building
official under the tent chapter (Town Code, Chapter 101), shall be considered
an accessory structure and shall be allowed as a matter of right in all
districts. All other tents exceeding 120 square feet in area shall require a
special-use permit from the Zoning Board of Review, which is expressly
authorized, after considering the requirements for special-use permits under
§ 902, to allow the tent to be located on the lot containing the principal
use or on an undeveloped lot.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 09-18, passed 11-2-09)



§ 704  HEIGHT AND YARD MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The following structures, or parts of structures, when
accessory to a permitted or special principal use may be permitted above the
maximum height limitations set forth in § 603, provided they meet all other
rear, side, and front lot requirements of this chapter: flagpoles, chimneys,
radio masts, television antennas and water tanks.



   (B)   Structures other than those listed in height and yard
modifications above, may exceed the height limitation provided in § 603,
only upon the granting of a variance by the Zoning Board of Review.



   (C)   Structures permitted above the maximum height requirements by
the Zoning Board of Review shall be set back from any lot line one additional
foot by which the height of each structure exceeds the maximum height limit
for the district.



   (D)   For the purpose of side yard regulations, duplex dwellings and
townhouse dwellings with common party walls shall be considered as one 
building occupying one lot: duplex dwellings and townhouse dwellings.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 705  FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the
materials, location, height, and maintenance of fencing, hedges, and walls in
order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare
of the public. In all zoning districts, fences, hedges, and walls are
permitted only in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Fences and walls of any composition, including hedges, on all
or part of the perimeter of any parcel of land in Middletown are subject to
the requirements of this section.



   (C)   Hedge defined. A hedge is a line of closely spaced shrubs and
bushes or trees, planted and trained in such a way as to form a barrier or to
mark the boundary of an area.



   (D)   Permit requirement.  With the exception of work associated
with restoration or repair of an existing fence or wall, before a fence or
wall is constructed or replaced, a permit application must be obtained from
the Zoning Officer, completed and signed by the property owner, and submitted
to the Zoning Officer with a fee in an amount established by the Town
Council. An accurate site plan,  satisfactory to the Building Inspector,
showing the location of the fence or wall in relation to all property lines
must be submitted with the application.



   (E)   Location. No fence, wall or hedge shall be located so as to
encroach on any public right of-way or interfere with existing utilities or
drainage patterns.



   (F)   Height limitation.



      (1)   Fences and walls may be permitted in any required yard
or along the edge of any yard as follows, not to exceed the maximum height as
listed:



 


Location

 

Maximum Height



Front and side yards
 

6 feet



Rear yard in Residential Districts
 

6 feet



Rear yard in Light Industry and Business Districts
 

10 feet




 



      (2)   Hedges are permitted at any height.



   (G)   Materials.  Chain link fences shall be erected so that the
knuckle edges are on top and the twists (barbed ends) are on the bottom.
Barbed wire fences are prohibited in residential districts, and prohibited in
other districts unless they are in full compliance with  R.I. Gen. Laws
Title 34, Chapter 10, §§ 2 - 5.



   (H)   Maintenance. All fences and walls shall be maintained in good
repair. Hedges shall be maintained so as to not encroach on the public way,
to provide adequate visual clearance for motorists and to not impede
pedestrians.



   (I)   Nonconformities. Consistent with the provisions of § 803,
nonconforming fences and walls may be altered provided that the alteration
diminishes the extent of the nonconformity.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord., As Amended, passed 8-3-09)



§ 706  VISION CLEARANCE AT STREET INTERSECTIONS.



   At street intersections, no structure shall be erected and no
vegetation shall be planted or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct
vision between the heights of three feet and ten feet above the triangle
formed by the two street lines and a third line joining points on the street
lines 15 feet from the intersection.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 707  SETBACK FROM WETLANDS OR RIVERS.



   No disposal trench, disposal bed, cesspool, seepage pit, septic tank,
septic field or other facility designed to leach liquid wastes into the soil
shall be located:



   (A)   Within 100 feet of a fresh water wetland, as defined in R.I.
Gen. Laws Title 2, Chapter 1, as amended, excluding from such definitions:



      (1)   That area of land within 50 feet of the edge of any bog,
marsh, swamp or pond; and



      (2)   That area of land within 200 feet of the edge of any
flowing body of water having a width of  ten feet or more; and



      (3)   That area of land within 100 feet of the edge of any
flowing body of water having a width of less than ten feet during normal
flow; and



      (4)   That area defined as a floodplain in R.I. Gen. Laws
Title 2, Chapter 1.



   (B)   Within 100 feet of a river as defined in R.I. Gen. Laws Title
2, Chapter 1.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 708  CONVERSION OF DWELLING TO MORE UNITS.



   A residence may not be converted to accommodate an increased number of
dwelling units unless:



   (A)   A multiple unit dwelling is specifically allowed in that
district;



   (B)   Yard dimensions and lot area equals the prescribed dimensions
and area requirements for new multiple unit dwelling structures in that
district; and



   (C)   The Building Inspector has received an approval permit from
the state for sewage disposal facilities or from the Town Council to
accommodate a large number of dwellings on the town sanitary sewer system.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 709  PARKING, STORAGE AND USE OF MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT IN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   The parking or storage of major recreational equipment, which includes
travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent
trailers, boats and boat trailers but does not include mobile homes, in
residential districts, shall comply with the following regulations.



   (A)   Not more than one travel trailer, pick-up camper or coach,
motorized dwelling, or tent trailer may be parked or stored out-of-doors;
provided that such equipment is not more than 15 feet in height.



   (B)   Not more than one boat and/or boat trailer may be stored
out-of-doors; provided, that such equipment is not more than 15 feet in
height; and provided that such equipment shall not be parked or stored on or
within 24 feet of the paved surface of a public road, except that in the R-10
Zoning District, such equipment shall not be parked or stored on or within 12
feet of the paved surface of a public road.



   (C)   No major recreational equipment, while parked or stored, shall
be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.



   (D)   No major recreational equipment shall be stored out-of-doors
in residential districts unless it is in condition for safe and effective
performance of the function for which it was intended or can be made so in a
six-month period.



   (E)   No major recreational equipment, not owned or operated by a
person residing on the premises, shall be parked or stored on a lot in a
residential zone for a period longer than seven days in a calendar year.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2018-18, passed 10-15-18)



§ 710  PARKING AND STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   Unserviceable or junked vehicles, etc.  No unregistered,
unserviceable, discarded, worn-out or junked automobiles or trailer of any
kind or type or bodies, engines, tires, parts or accessories thereof, shall
be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in a
completely enclosed building.



   (B)   Commercial vehicles in a residential district. In any
residential district, the parking or storage of more than one commercial
vehicle of over one and one-half ton weight capacity shall not be permitted
except where such parking or storage is directly related to and is accessory
to a permitted use of legal nonconforming use on the premises.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 711  MINIMUM RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA.



   (A)   No single or two-family dwelling shall be erected or
single-family dwelling converted to a two-family dwelling in such a manner so
as to provide living space per family of less than:



      (1)   Seven hundred-twenty square feet on one floor in a
single family one-story structure;



      (2)   One thousand square feet on two floors in a
single-family, two or more story structure;



      (3)   Seven hundred twenty square feet per family in a
two-family structure;



      (4)   Seven hundred twenty square feet per family in
townhouses with a minimum of  450 square feet on the first floor.



   (B)   No multifamily dwelling shall be erected or conversion made
from a single- or two-family dwelling, in such a manner as to provide space
per dwelling unit less than required in the following schedule:



 


Multifamily Unit Living Space per Dwelling Unit




Number of Bedrooms Per Dwelling Unit

 

Living Space in Sq. Ft. Per Dwelling Unit



Efficiency
 

350



One
 

500



Two
 

620



Three
 

740




 



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 712  REMOVAL OF EARTH PRODUCTS.



   (A)   The removal from any premises of more than three cubic yards
of sod, clay, loam, sand, gravel or rock in any one year shall be prohibited
except as authorized by the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance.
Nothing herein or in Article 6 shall prevent the continuation of a use of
premises for rock quarrying operations existing as of December 3, 1968.



   (B)   The opening of new earth removal pits may be authorized in
zoning districts permitted in § 602, by a special use permit from the Zoning
Board of Review with such restrictions and limitations as the Board may
impose; provided, that such pits or excavations shall not be harmful or
detrimental, in any way, to neighboring property. Upon the completion of any
earth removal from premises existing prior to December 3, 1968, or authorized
by this chapter or the Zoning Board of Review, such premises shall be graded
with top soil and seeded in such a manner so as to prevent erosion, the
blowing of soil or other harmful or detrimental conditions. Removal of soil
or other earth products, other than as specifically permitted in this
chapter, shall be classified as stripping and is hereby prohibited.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 713  AIRPORT HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS; "AIRPORT APPROACH PLAN FOR NEWPORT
STATE AIRPORT".



   In any district, the height of any structure or growing thing,
hereafter erected or permitted to grow in the vicinity of the Newport State
Airport shall not exceed the heights indicated on the map entitled "Airport
Approach Plan for Newport State Airport" as filed in the Office of the Town
Clerk, and as it may be revised from time to lime under the provisions of
R.I. Gen. Laws § 1-3-4, as amended, which map, as amended, is hereby
incorporated in, and made a part of this section.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 714  SWIMMING POOLS.



   Private or public swimming pools, capable of containing water to a
depth of at least 24 inches or having a surface area of 250 square feet or
more, shall be enclosed by an adequate enclosure having a height of at least
four feet, surrounding either the property or the pool area. Such enclosure
shall be of such construction, including gates, to make the pool inaccessible
from the outside to small children.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 715  DRAINAGE.



   (A)   An applicant for a building permit shall provide plans for
adequate management of stormwater runoff. This shall be accomplished through
compliance with Chapter 153 of this code. No building permit shall be issued
for development until the Stormwater Management Plan has been approved, with
the exception of additions or modification to existing single-family
residential structures if grading, as a maintenance measure or for
landscaping, on contiguous area of developed land, parcels and lots, does not
exceed 5,000 square feet in aggregate.



   (B)   Any required stormwater best management practice(s) (BMP(s))
shall be installed prior to construction of any buildings or the surfacing of
any areas.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 716  YARD REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The minimum front yard requirements provided in § 603, shall
be measured perpendicular to the street line and minimum side and rear yard
requirements shall be measured perpendicular from side and rear lot lines,
respectively. In the instance of a curved lot line, yard measurement shall be
taken along a radial.



   (B)   (1)   Lot frontage shall be measured along the street line
between the side lot lines and shall not be less than the minimum lot width,
as specified in § 603.  Provided, however, the Planning Board may, in
approving a subdivision, reduce the minimum lot frontage for a lot on a
cul-de-sac to no less than 50 feet as provided in the Middletown Rules and
Regulations Regarding the Subdivision and Development of Land.



      (2)   In the case of a corner lot, the minimum required lot
frontage shall be provided on at least one  abutting street but the total
street frontages shall not be combined to calculate required lot frontage.



   (C)   Lot depth shall be measured from the mid-point of the lot
frontage to the midpoint of the rear lot line. In the event of curved
frontage, depth shall be measured from the midpoint of the lot frontage. In
the case of a corner lot, depth shall be measured from the mid-point of the
combined lot frontage of all streets. For lots where the front and rear lines
are not parallel, the lot depth is an average of the depth.



   (D)   Lot width shall be the horizontal distance between the side
lines of a lot measured at right angles to the lot depth line along a
straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum front setback
line.



   (E)   Rear lot width shall be measured along the line opposite and
most distant from the front lot line, or in cases of a triangular or
otherwise irregularly shaped lot, an assumed line at least ten feet in
length, entirely within the lot, parallel to, and at a maximum distance from,
the front lot line.



   (F)   Except in the case of a corner lot, as provided above,
wherever a rear yard as defined herein is not possible, one side yard as
designated may be considered as rear yard and conform with rear yard
regulations as required in § 603.



   (G)   Where the location of a lot width or lot depth line or a
front, side or rear yard is otherwise uncertain, the Zoning Officer shall
determine their position in a manner complying as closely as possible with
the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 717  DRIVE-UP WINDOWS.



   The sale or dispensing of food or beverages, or the conducting of any
retail, commercial or personal business or professional service from an
exterior booth, window or other opening in a building, for patrons on foot or
in automobiles, shall be required to receive a special use permit from the
Zoning Board of Review. Such drive-up facilities shall be permitted only as
accessory uses to a lawful principal use.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 718  APPLICATION TO SUBDIVISIONS ("GRANDFATHERING").



   Any land which, at the time of the enactment of this chapter, is part
of a subdivision which has received final approval from the Planning Board
pursuant to the statutes or ordinances of the town, or to the Middletown
Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision and Development of Land, but
which, by the adoption of this chapter, is in a zoning district requiring
larger dimensional regulations under the provisions of § 603, than were
required at the time such final approval was granted, may continue to be
developed in accordance with the dimensional regulations in effect at the
time such final approval was granted. In all other respects, the lots in such
subdivisions shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 719  MIXED USES WITHIN A BUILDING.



   (A)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or prohibit the use
of a single building or structure for multiple uses, provided each individual
use is a permitted use within the zoning district in which it is located; or
a special use for which a special use permit has been granted by the Zoning
Board; or a legal nonconforming use. All such uses shall be required to
provide off-street parking and loading space for each individual use on a
cumulative basis, where applicable. Signs for such mixed uses shall be
incorporated into a single sign, or as provided for in Article 12.



   (B)   Mixed residential and commercial uses as defined in Article 4
shall be permitted only where allowed by § 602, by the granting of a special
use permit by the Zoning Board of Review; provided, however, that a
special-use permit shall not be required for mixed uses in a mixed-use
development project approved by the Planning Board under the provisions of
Article 27A Mixed-Use Development Projects.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



§ 720  TRAFFIC SENSITIVE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Traffic sensitive districts, as shown on the official zoning
map are established for the following purposes:



      (1)   To facilitate the movement of traffic along major roads
in the town in a safe and orderly manner;



      (2)   To reduce the number and increase the spacing of
driveways which may disrupt traffic flow;



      (3)   To reduce infringement on the rights of the public to
travel roadways in a safe manner, while at the same time providing for
adequate ingress and egress to properties; and



      (4)   To protect public safety along major thoroughfares in
the town where accidents have frequently occurred.



   (B)   In any traffic sensitive district, the minimum lot
width/frontage per lot, specified in § 603, shall be 300 feet. All other
provisions contained in § 603 regarding district dimensional regulations and
all other applicable provisions of this chapter shall be required for the
corresponding zoning district to which the letter "A" has been added.



   (C)   On any lot existing on the effective date of this chapter (the
original lot), the lot width/frontage may be reduced to the provisions of §
603, provided:



      (1)   Only one driveway or curb opening onto streets listed in
division (E) below shall be created to serve the original lot; or



      (2)   Future subdivisions or lots created from the original
lot shall be served by a single common driveway or curb opening onto the
streets listed in  division (E) below; or



      (3)   A public street or street system approved by the
Planning Board under the provisions of the Rules and Regulations Regarding
the Subdivision and Development of Land shall be created to serve all
subsequent lots created from the original lot.



   (D)   Common driveways, rights-of-way or other common means of
access to adjacent streets listed in division (E) below shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board before any building permit shall be issued for
lots created from the original lot.



   (E)   The frontage/lot width requirements of this section shall be
applicable only to lots having frontage on the following streets:



      (1)   East Main Road (Route 138);



      (2)   West Main Road (Route 114);



      (3)   Valley Road (Route 214); and



      (4)   Aquidneck Avenue (Route 138A).



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 721  WASTE RECEPTACLE ENCLOSURES.



   Each commercial building shall be provided with an enclosed waste
receptacle of sufficient size to accommodate all trash and waste stored on
the premises.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 722  FARM-PROMOTION ACCESSORY USES.



   The purpose of farm-promotion accessory uses is to preserve viable
agriculture and the rural character of the town by allowing farmers to
conduct supplemental income-producing activities at a scale or intensity that
will not unduly change the character of the area. All farm-promotion
accessory uses must comply with any conditions imposed by the Board of Review
under § 904; in addition, the uses specified below must satisfy the
following requirements:



   (A)   Farm guest house.



      (1)   No kitchen facilities in guest rooms;



      (2)   Not more than one guest room per acre of land, to a
maximum of nine rooms;



      (3)   No guest room shall have less than 70 square feet of
floor area;



      (4)   Guestrooms shall not be equipped for or rented to more
than two individual guests, except that children 12 or under may accompany
their parents in a room;



      (5)   Parking shall be provided according to the following
formula:



         (a)   One parking space per room;



         (b)   Two parking spaces for the principal residential
use;



         (c)   No RV parking or facilities;



      (6)   Where public sewer is not provided, the adequacy of the
existing/proposed ISDS and its location in relation to fresh water or coastal
wetlands, rivers, streams and other waterways shall be reviewed by the
Conservation Commission and an advisory opinion shall be forwarded to the
Zoning Board of Review prior to its consideration.



   (B)   Product stands. One product stand for the sale of agricultural
products may be operated on each lot or parcel devoted to an agricultural use
permitted under § 602.



      (1)   Substantially all of the products sold, or the
ingredients in the products sold, must be grown or raised on the premises;



      (2)   Nonagricultural products may not be sold without a
permit from the Town Council;



      (3)   Product stands must have a front wall area that is at
least 50% open;



      (4)   Product stands shall be set back at least ten feet from
the nearest public way;



      (5)   Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one
parking space for each non-resident employee and four spaces for customer
parking plus one additional space for each 50 square feet of building size
above 150 square feet. Parking for product stands shall comply with the
requirements of § 1301, except that the parking area need not be paved and
may be located closer than ten feet to the street line.



   (C)   Farmers' markets. A farmer's market may be conducted on a lot
or parcel of five or more acres devoted to an agricultural use permitted
under § 602.



      (1)   The products sold must be grown, raised or processed in
Newport County;



      (2)   Non-agricultural products, or agricultural products not
grown, raised or processed in Newport County, may not be sold without a
permit from the Town Council.



      (3)   A structure used for a farmers' market, if enclosed,
must have a front wall area that is at least 50% open;



      (4)   A farmers' market shall operate only during daylight
hours;



      (5)   Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one
parking space for each person selling products plus three spaces per seller
for customer parking. Parking for a farmers' market shall comply with the
requirements of § 1301, except that the parking area need not be paved and
may be located closer than ten feet to the street line.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 723  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   All landscaping required by this chapter or imposed by the
Board of Review or Planning Board as a condition of the grant of any special
use permit, variance or approval of any land development project, shall be
installed prior to the issuance of any certificate of use and occupancy.



   (B)   Prior to issuance of the certificate of use and occupancy, the
Building Official shall inspect the development and determine if the approved
or required landscape plan has been installed in a satisfactory manner. The
Building Official shall consult with, and request a report by, the Middletown
Tree Commission in making this determination.



   (C)   If for any reason, the required or approved landscape
improvements are not fully installed at the time of issuance of the
certificate of occupancy, the owner or the owner's agent shall provide an
improvement guarantee to secure the satisfaction of all landscape
requirements.



      (1)   The amount of the improvement guarantee shall be 150% of
the estimated cost of completion of all landscaping and associated finish
grading, shall be based on actual cost estimates for all required landscape
improvements and shall be reviewed and approved by the Building Official.



      (2)   The Building Official shall deliver any such cost
estimates, which serve as a basis for improvement guarantee, to the
Middletown Tree Commission for their review and comment.



      (3)   The improvement guarantee shall be a security instrument
in a form acceptable to the Finance Director which enables the town to gain
timely access to the secured funds for cause, and which contains such
conditions as are necessary to secure for the town the complete installation
of all required landscaping.



      (4)   The improvement guarantee shall set forth a definite
time by which the required landscape improvements shall be completed.



   (D)   If the Building Official determines that the landscape
improvements have been installed in a satisfactory manner, in the time
prescribed, he shall authorize release of the improvement guarantee.



      (1)   Prior to the release of the improvement guarantee, the
owner or owner's agent shall post a maintenance guarantee. The maintenance
guarantee shall be equal to 50% of the cost for all landscaping improvements
as evidenced by actual invoices, or alternatively, actual cost estimates as
referenced in divisions (C)(1) and (2) above. The maintenance guarantee shall
guarantee the durability of the landscape improvements for a period of one
year from the release of the improvement guarantee.



      (2)   If the required landscaping has been installed prior to
the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy, and no improvement
guarantee is required, the owner or owner's agent shall post a maintenance
guarantee prior to issuance of the certificate of use and occupancy. The
maintenance guarantee shall be equal to 50% of the cost of all landscaping
improvements as evidenced by actual invoices or in the alternative, actual
cost estimates as referenced in divisions (C)(1) and (2) above. The
maintenance guarantee shall guarantee the durability of the landscape
improvements for a period of one year from the issuance of the certificate of
use and occupancy.



      (3)   At the conclusion of the one year maintenance period the
Building Official shall inspect the landscape improvements and shall request
the Middletown Tree Commission to review and comment upon improvements. If
the Building Official finds the improvements to be acceptable he shall so
certify in writing to the Finance Director to release the maintenance
guarantee. If at the conclusion of the one year maintenance period the
Building Official determines the improvements to be in an unacceptable
condition, he/she may grant an extension of time for the owner or agent to
bring those improvements to an acceptable condition.



   (E)   The town shall hold the owner or agent in default of the
improvement or maintenance guarantee should any one or more of the following
conditions occur:



      (1)   Failure to complete the required landscape improvements
in the time prescribed;



      (2)   Failure of the landscape improvements to survive for the
one year maintenance period, or failure to protect improvements or repair
damage to improvements occurring during the development or the one year
maintenance period.



   (F)   Should any of the conditions set forth in division (E) above
be found to exist, the Building Official shall certify in writing to the
Finance Director that the owner is in default and the extent of any
noncompliance.



   (G)   Upon receipt of such certification the Finance Director shall
execute such portion of the improvement or maintenance guarantee, as may be
necessary, to correct any deficiency for which the owner was held in default.



   (H)   For the purposes of this section, the terms LANDSCAPE PLAN,
LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENT or LANDSCAPING, shall mean and include the planting,
location and/or installation of all trees, shrubs, grass, turf, other
plantings, fencing, stone walls and aesthetic barriers, and completion of
finish grading associated therewith and, where applicable, the maintenance
and preservation of existing vegetation.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 724  LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   Property and buildings shall be so designed and laid out
as to minimize disturbance to adjacent property by such features as buffers,
fences, planting, suitably located points of traffic ingress and egress, and
areas for loading and parking. It is the intent of this section to also
provide the necessary protection for industry from other neighboring uses and
to provide assurances of continued legal operation to industrial uses.



      (2)   All uses in the light industrial (LI) district shall
conform with the use table in § 602, and the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Site design requirements.



      (1)   A landscaped buffer of no less than ten feet in width
shall be required along all lot lines.



      (2)   Where a light industrial district abuts a residential
district or use, a vegetated buffer of no less than 25 feet in width shall be
required along such lot line. Within the buffer, opaque screening in the form
of densely planted non-deciduous vegetation, earthen berms, fences, or walls,
or any combination of these, shall be provided. Said screening shall be no
less than six feet in height at the time of installation, and shall be
designed to provide maximum protection from the visual and noise impacts of
industrial use.



      (3)   All site design, parking, landscaping, and other
applicable requirements of this chapter, including Article 27, shall be
addressed. Where there are conflicting standards contained in this chapter,
the more restrictive standards shall prevail.



      (4)   Where a light industrial district abuts a residential
district or use, all buildings shall maintain a minimum 50-foot setback from
property lines abutting the residential district or use.



      (5)   Where a light industrial district abuts a residential
district or use, all dumpsters and other trash receptacles shall maintain a
minimum 50-foot setback from property lines abutting the residential district
or use.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 725  GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Any Zoning District. A ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation in any zoning district shall comply with the following:



      (1)   A ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall
be subject to Development Plan Review as described in § 305.



      (2)   No individual panel within a ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation shall exceed 12 feet in height, as measured from
pre-development lot grade at the location of the panel.



      (3)   All panels and other equipment and structures that are
part to the installation shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from all
property lines.



      (4)   A ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall
not be subject to the maximum percentage of lot to be occupied by buildings
as applied in § 603.



      (5)   A ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall
be designed to prevent unauthorized access, including, but not necessarily
limited to protective fencing.



   (B)   Additional requirements in residential districts. A
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation located in any residential
zoning district shall comply with the following additional requirements:



      (1)   In lieu of the building lot coverage requirements of §
603, the total surface area of solar panels installed in residential
districts shall not exceed 25% of lot area.



      (2)   The installation shall be surrounded by visual
screening, consisting of fencing, dense vegetation, or a combination of both,
that is a minimum of six feet in height at the time of installation.



      (3)   Electrical lines and connections shall be installed
underground.



   (C)   An abandoned ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
and all associated structures and components, shall be physically removed
from the site within 90 days from cessation of operation, and the property
shall be restored to predevelopment condition. If the owner fails to remove
the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section, the
town shall have the authority to enter the property and physically remove the
installation and restore the property. In that case, the owner of the
property shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the town, and the
obligation shall be recorded in the Land Evidence Records as a lien against
the property.



(Ord. 2012-4, passed 5-21-12; Am. Ord. 2012-16, passed 9-17-12)



§ 726  COLLECTION BOXES.



   (A)   Legislative findings and intent.



      (1)   The town has experienced an increase in the number of
collection boxes, some of which have been placed in required parking spaces,
required setbacks and landscaped areas, and residential zoning districts,
often without the property owner's permission. The proliferation of these
containers contributes to visual clutter and blight. Collection containers
have contributed to blight due to graffiti and poor maintenance, and the
accumulation of debris and excess items outside of the collection containers.



      (2)   The Town Council intends, by the enactment of this
section, to promote the health, safety, and/or welfare of the public and
protect the rights of property owners by imposing restrictions and conditions
on all collection boxes in the town so that they are, and remain, clean,
safe, do not create hazards to pedestrians and to vehicular traffic and do
not contribute to visual clutter and blight.



   (B)   Definitions. As used in this section:



      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official of the Town of
Middletown or his/her designee.



      COLLECTION BOX. Any metal container, receptacle, or similar
device that is located on any real property within the town and that is used
for soliciting and collecting clothing, household items, or other salvageable
personal property. This term does not include recycle bins provided by the
town or licensed waste haulers for the collection of recyclable materials as
defined in § 50.01 of the Middletown Code, any rubbish or garbage receptacle
or any collection box located within an enclosed building.



      DEPARTMENT.  The Building Department of the Town of Middletown.



      OPERATOR.  A person who owns, operates or otherwise is in
control of collection boxes to solicit collections of salvageable personal
property.



      PERMIT.  A permit to place, operate and maintain a collection
box within the town issued pursuant to this chapter.



      PERMITTEE.  A person over 18 years of age or an entity who is
issued a permit authorizing placement of collection box(es) on real property.



      TOWN. The Town of Middletown.



   (C)   Collection box permit. No later than 60 days from the
effective date of this section, no person shall place, operate, maintain or
allow any collection box on any real property within the town without first
obtaining an annual permit issued by the Department. Placement, operation,
maintenance or use of a collection box without a valid permit, or in a manner
not consistent with the requirements for such permit, shall be a violation of
this Code, shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be subject to the
penalties and remedies provided for in this Code.



   (D)   Application for a permit.



      (1)   Any person desiring to secure a permit shall file an
application with the Department. A permit shall be obtained for each
collection box proposed to be located within the town.



      (2)   The application for a permit shall be upon a form
provided by the Department and be signed by an individual who is an officer,
member or manager of an entity applicant. The applicant shall submit the
following:



         (a)   The name, address, email and telephone number of a
contact person for all matters relating to the collection box.



         (b)   The physical address of the real property where
the collection box is proposed to be located.



         (c)   A scaled drawing sufficient to illustrate the
proposed location of the collection box on the real property, the dimensions
of the proposed collection box and that the location complies with the
requirements of this chapter.



         (d)   If not the owner of the real property, an
affidavit from the property owner or property manager providing written
permission to place the collection box on the property, as well as an
acknowledgment from the property owner or property manager of receipt of a
copy of this section shall be provided on a form provided by the Building
Department. For purposes of this division, the affidavit and acknowledgment
may be executed by an individual who is an officer, member or manager of an
entity owning the property.



         (e)   A non-refundable application fee in the amount of
$100.



         (f)   Proof of general liability insurance no less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence.



      (3)   Within 20 days of receiving an application for a permit,
the Building Official shall notify the applicant whether the permit is
granted or denied. The Building Official shall grant a permit if the
application is complete and contains no false information, the fee has been
paid and the collection box and its proposed location as described in the
application meets the requirements of this section and §§ 603 and 703. If
the Building Official denies an application, the Building Official shall
state in writing the specific reasons for denial.



      (4)   No person to whom a permit has been issued shall
transfer, assign or convey such permit to another person or legal entity.



   (E)   Requirements for a permit.



      (1)   A permittee shall operate and maintain, or cause to be
operated and maintained, all collection boxes located in the town for which
the permittee has been granted a permit as follows:



         (a)   Collection boxes shall be metal and be maintained
in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes, peeling
paint, or visible rust and shall be kept free of graffiti.



         (b)   Collection boxes shall be locked or otherwise
secured in such a manner that the contents cannot be accessed by anyone other
than those responsible for the retrieval of the contents.



         (c)   Collection boxes shall be equipped with a safety
chute to limit the public's access to the box.



         (d)   Collection boxes shall have the name, address,
email address, website and phone number of the operator in minimum ½-inch
type viewable on the front of the collection box and a valid annual permit
sticker issued by the town shall be displayed adjacent to such information.



         (e)   Collection boxes shall be serviced and emptied as
needed, but no less frequently than once per week.



         (f)   The permittee and property owner shall maintain,
or cause to be maintained, the area surrounding the collection boxes, free
from any junk, debris or other material. The property owner shall be
responsible to the extent provided by law for the town's cost to abate any
nuisance, in accordance with Chapter 92 of the Middletown Code.



         (g)   Collection boxes shall:



            1.   Be permitted in only the GB, GBA, LB, LBA,
LI, LIA, OB and OBA zoning districts;



            2.   Not be permitted on any unimproved parcel,
nor where the principal use of the land has been closed or unoccupied for
more than 30 days;



            3.   Not be less than 1,000 feet from another
collection box as measured along a straight line from one box to the other.
Notwithstanding this separation requirement, no more than two collection
boxes may be located within the same shopping center from the same collection
box owner or operator;



            4.   Not exceed 7.0 feet in height, 6.0 feet in
width and 6.0 feet in depth;



            5.   Not cause a visual obstruction to vehicular
or pedestrian traffic;



            6.   Comply with the applicable setback
requirements of §§ 603 and 703; provided however, that no collection box
shall be placed closer than 150 feet from any residential zoning district or
from a residential use within any zoning district;



            7.   Not cause safety hazards regarding any
designated fire lane or building exit;



            8.   Not:



               a.    Interfere with an access drive,
off-street parking lot maneuvering lane and/or required off-street parking
space to an extent which would cause safety hazards and/or unnecessary
inconvenience to vehicular or pedestrian traffic;



               b.    Encroach upon an access drive,
off-street parking lot maneuvering lane and/or required off-street parking
space; and



            9.   Be placed on a level, hard (asphalt or
concrete pavers) paved, dust-free surface.



   (F)   Term of permit and renewal of permit.



      (1)   The permit year shall begin on July 1 in each year and
shall terminate on June 30 of the following calendar year.



      (2)   A collection box permit shall be renewed annually. The
application for renewal must be filed not later than 30 days before the
permit expires, otherwise a new permit application must be submitted. The
application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the Building
Official.



      (3)   The Building Official shall either approve or deny the
renewal of a permit within 20 days of receipt of the complete renewal
application and payment of the renewal fee. The Building Official shall grant
a permit if the application is complete and contains no false information,
the fee has been paid and the collection box and its proposed location as
described in the application meets the requirements of this section and the
applicable setback requirements of §§ 603 and 703; provided, however, that
the Building Official may also deny an application for renewal if the
applicant is in violation of the requirements of this section. If the
Building Official denies an application, the Building Official shall state in
writing the specific reasons for denial.



      (4)   A permit renewal fee of $100 shall be submitted with the
application for renewal.



      (5)   Prior to expiration of the permit, the permittee may
voluntarily cancel the permit by notifying the Building Official in writing
of the intent to cancel the permit. The permit shall become void upon the
Building Official's receipt of a written notice of intent to cancel the
permit.



      (6)   The Building Official shall approve the renewal of a
ermit if the Building Official finds that no circumstances existed during the
term of the permit which would cause a violation of this chapter to exist,
and that at the time of submission of the application for renewal, or at any
time during the renewal of the application for renewal, there were not
circumstances inconsistent with any finding required for approval of a new
permit. Any permittee whose permit has been revoked shall be denied renewal
of the permit for the subsequent calendar year.



      (7)   If the permit expires and is not renewed, the collection
box must be removed from the real property within a maximum of ten days after
expiration of the permit.



   (G)   Revocation of permit, removal of collection boxes and
liability.



      (1)   The Building Official shall have the right to revoke any
permit issued hereunder for a violation of this of the provisions of this
section. Any of the grounds upon which the Building Official may refuse to
issue an initial permit shall also constitute grounds for such revocation. In
addition, the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of this
section or other provisions of this Code or other law shall also constitute
grounds for revocation of the permit. The Building Official shall provide a
written notification to the permittee and property owner stating the specific
grounds for a revocation and a demand for correction and abatement. The
notice shall allow a maximum of ten days from mailing of the notice to
correct or abate the violation. Upon failure to make the correction or
abatement, the permit shall be revoked by the Building Official and,
thereafter, the permittee shall not be eligible for a permit on the property
for the subsequent calendar year.



      (2)   Upon revocation, or if appealed, at the conclusion of
the appeal, the collection box shall be removed from the real property within
ten days and, if not so removed within the time period, the town may remove,
store or dispose of the collection box at the expense of the permittee and/or
real property owner. All costs associated with the removal of the collection
box incurred by the town, or the town's contractor, shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.



   (H)   Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision rendered by the
Building Official in granting or denying any application for a permit under
this section or in revoking a permit issued hereunder, may appeal the
decision to the Zoning Board of Review pursuant to § 317.



   (I)   Penalty and remedies.



      (1)   In addition to revocation of permit, violations of this
section shall be enforceable through issuance of citations by either the
Police Department or the Zoning Officer. Violations shall be dealt with at
the next municipal court session following the violation. Any person
violating the provisions of this section may be subject to the issuance of
administrative citations,  fines or nuisance abatement, as described in this
Code.



      (2)   Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of up to $500 per day for each day the violation continues.



      (3)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the Town from
pursuing any other remedy provided by law in conjunction with or in lieu of
prosecuting persons under this section for violation of this section.



      (4)   The real property owner and permittee shall be jointly
and severally liable for each violation and for payment of any fine and costs
of abatement.



      (5)   No fines shall be imposed for a violation of this
section until 90 days after its effective date. All collection boxes existing
at the effective date of the section shall apply for a permit as required
herein within 30 days of the effective date and shall conform to all
requirements of this chapter within  90 days of the effective date. Any
collection boxes not applying for permits within 30 days shall be subject to
all remedies for violation as provided herein.



(Ord. 2017-10, passed 6-19-17)



ARTICLE 8  NONCONFORMING USES



§ 800  CONTINUANCE OF A  NONCONFORMING USE.



   Any legal nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue in the
manner and extent existing as of the effective date of enactment or amendment
of this chapter, subject to the provisions of this chapter regarding
discontinuance, destruction or demolition, change of use and extension or
alteration.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 801 DISCONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMING USE.



   (A)   A legal nonconforming use of any land, premises, structure or
combination thereof, which has been abandoned or discontinued for more than
six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period (except
when government action impedes access to the land or premises) shall not
thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located.



   (B)   Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of some overt
act or failure to act which would lead one to believe that the owner of the
nonconforming use neither claims nor retains any interest in continuing the
nonconforming use unless the owner can demonstrate an intent not to abandon
the use. An involuntary interruption of nonconforming use, such as by fire
and natural catastrophe, does not establish the intent to abandon the
nonconforming use. However, if any nonconforming use is halted for a period
of six months, or 18 months in three years, the owner of the nonconforming
use will be presumed to have abandoned the nonconforming use, unless that
presumption is rebutted by the presentation of sufficient evidence of intent
not to abandon the use.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 802  DESTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Should a legal nonconforming structure or nonconforming
portion of a structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than
75% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, as determined by the
Zoning Officer, the property owner shall be given six months in which action
must be taken to rebuild, repair or replace the damaged structure. If such
action is not taken within such six-month period, then it shall not be
rebuilt, repaired or replaced except in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   Should a legal nonconforming structure or portion of a
structure be demolished at the direction of the owner or by governmental
action, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   In rebuilding, repairing or replacing a structure or portion
of a structure as provided in division (A) above, the previously existing
degree of nonconformity shall in no way be enlarged or extended except as
provided in § 803; however, this does not preclude the use of modern
construction materials and methods.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 803  EXTENSION OR ALTERATION.



   (A)   A legal nonconforming use may not be added to, extended or
enlarged without first receiving a special use permit from the Zoning Board
of Review in accordance with Article 9.



   (B)   A legal nonconforming use may be altered in whole or in part
in a way which diminishes the extent of its nonconformity without first
receiving a special use permit as required in division (A) above; provided,
however, that once a nonconforming use is made less nonconforming for a
period of one  year, or for 18 months during any three-year period, it shall
not be permitted to resume the previous extent of its nonconformity.



   (C)   Any addition, extension or enlargement of a nonconforming use
shall conform to all other applicable district regulations and district
dimensional regulations required by this chapter for "other permitted uses"
and for the zoning district in which such use or structure is located.



   (D)   Nothing herein shall prevent a legal nonconforming use from
adding yard, off-street parking or off-street loading space to conform to the
yard, parking or loading space requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in
whole or in part unless such building or structure is made to conform to all
of the regulations of the zone in which it is to be located.



   (F)   A legal nonconforming single-family or two-family dwelling
shall not be subject to the provisions of this subchapter and may be altered,
added to, changed or moved; provided, that the dwelling be subject to the
requirements of the nearest residential district as measured from the
property line.



   (G)   If a nonconforming structure, other than a sign can be
extended or enlarged in any lawful manner without increasing the extent of
its nonconformity, then any extension or enlargement thereof shall only be
permitted in accordance with the district dimensional regulations; otherwise
variance relief from the Zoning Board shall be required.



   (H)   A nonconforming sign may be altered in whole or in part in a
way which diminishes the extent of its nonconformity.



   (I)   Nonconforming signs shall also be governed by § 1207.



   (J)   A use established by variance or special use permit shall not
acquire the rights of this section.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07)



§ 804  CHANGE OF USE.



   A legal nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming
use but may be changed to a use conforming to the provisions of this chapter.
A legal nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, may not hereafter
be changed back to a nonconforming use.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 805  NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD.



   (A)   An unimproved lot or parcel having a lot width or lot area
which is less than required by district dimensional regulations, may be
considered buildable for a use permitted as a matter of right or by special
use permit under § 602, regardless of the lot width or area, provided such
lot or parcel of land was shown on a plat or on a deed duly recorded prior to
December 18, 1985, except that in the case of two-family dwelling development
where the standards of § 603 are not met, a special use permit shall be
required.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt a
nonconforming lot of record from complying with the maximum percentage of lot
coverage of principal and accessory buildings, as contained in district
dimensional regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 806  EFFECT OF ENACTMENT OF AMENDMENT OF CHAPTER ON BUILDING PERMITS
VALID AS OF TIME OF SUCH ENACTMENT OR AMENDMENT.



   Any building permit for a nonconforming use, which was legally issued
prior to the enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter, will expire
if not activated within six months from the date of such enactment or
amendment.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 9  APPEALS, SPECIAL USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES



§ 900  POWER OF THE ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW.



   The Zoning Board of Review shall have the power to:



   (A)   Hear and decide appeals as authorized;



   (B)   Grant special use permits as authorized;



   (C)   Grant variances as authorized.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 901  APPEALS.



   (A)   The Zoning Board of Review shall:



      (1)   Hear and decide appeals in a timely fashion as
authorized by Article 3;



      (2)   Act as a Planning Board of Appeals to hear and decide
any appeal from an action taken by the Planning Board as authorized by
Article 3;



      (3)   Act as a Building Code Board of Appeals.



   (B)   In using this power, the Zoning Board may affirm, reverse, or
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and
may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made and to that end shall have all the powers of the Zoning Officer or
Planning Board from whom the appeal was taken.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 902  SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   The Zoning Board shall hear and decide requests for special use permits
in accordance with the terms of this chapter, according to the following
provisions:



   (A)   A use, categorized as a special use in Article 6 and elsewhere
in this chapter, shall be permitted by the Zoning Board following a public
hearing if, in the opinion of the Board, such use in its proposed location
meets the following requirements:



      (1)   It will not result in a significant diminution of
properly values in the surrounding area of the district;



      (2)   It will not create a nuisance in the neighborhood;



      (3)   It will be compatible with the Comprehensive Community
Plan of the Town of Middletown;



      (4)   That the granting of such special use permit will not be
detrimental to or substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of
property in the surrounding area or district;



      (5)   That the granting of such special use permit will not
result in hazardous conditions or conditions inimical to the public health,
safety or welfare.



   (B)   In granting a special use permit, the Zoning Board of Review
may grant one or more dimensional variances under § 903.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 903  VARIANCES.



   (A)   In granting a variance, the Zoning Board of Review shall
require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be
entered into the record of the proceedings:



      (1)   That the hardship from which the applicant seeks relief
is due to the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure and not
to the general characteristics of the surrounding area and is not primarily
due to a physical or economic disability of the applicant;



      (2)   That the hardship is not the result of any prior action
of the applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the
applicant to realize greater financial gain;



      (3)   That the granting of the requested variance will not
alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or
purpose of this chapter or the Comprehensive Plan upon which this chapter is
based; and



      (4)   That the relief to be granted is the least relief
necessary.



      (5)   The Zoning Board of Review shall, in addition to the
above standards, require that evidence be entered into the record of the
proceedings showing that:



         (a)   In granting a use variance the subject land or
structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is required to conform to the
provisions of this chapter. Nonconforming use of neighboring land or
structures in the same district and permitted use of lands or structures in
an adjacent district shall not be considered in granting a use variance; and



         (b)   In granting a dimensional variance, that the
hardship which will be suffered by the owner of the subject property if the
dimensional variance is not granted shall amount to more than a mere
inconvenience. The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure
may be more valuable after the relief is fronted shall not be grounds for
relief.



         (c)   Dimensional variances granted in conjunction with
a special use permit shall be supported by independent evidence on the record
satisfying each of the requirements for a dimensional variance, and the Board
shall vote on each dimensional variance before voting on the special use
permit.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 904  CONDITIONS ON VARIANCES AND SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   In granting a variance under § 903, or in granting a special use
permit under § 902, the Zoning Board of Review may apply such special
conditions to the grant that may, in the opinion of the Board, be required to
promote the intent and purposes of the Comprehensive Plan and this chapter.
Failure to abide by any special condition attached to a grant shall
constitute a zoning violation. Those special conditions shall be based on
competent credible evidence on the record, be incorporated into the decision
and may include, but not be limited to provisions for:



   (A)   Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon other land,
including the type, intensity and performance of activities;



   (B)   Controlling the sequence of development, including when it
must be commenced and completed;



   (C)   Controlling the duration of use or development and the time
within which any temporary structure must be removed;



   (D)   Assuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required
improvements;



   (E)   Designating the exact location and nature of development;



   (F)   Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings, maps,
plats or specifications; and



   (G)   Providing standards of site planning for proper circulation of
traffic, stormwater drainage, landscaping or buffering, outdoor lighting,
utilities, waste disposal, and/or signage.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 905  EXPIRATION AND EXTENSIONS.



   A special use permit or variance shall expire one  year from the date
of granting by the Zoning Board unless the applicant exercises the permission
granted or receives a building permit to do so and commences construction and
diligently prosecutes the construction until completed. The Board may, upon
application therefor, for good cause shown, and following a public hearing
thereon, grant an extension for an additional one-year period. Nothing herein
contained shall limit the number of successive one-year extensions which the
Board may grant, provided that the Board may only grant a single one-year
extension following any one public hearing.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 10  FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



§ 1000  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to ensure public safety; minimize
hazards to persons and property from flooding, to protect watercourses from
encroachment, and to maintain the capability of floodplains to retain and
carry off floodwaters. The Town of Middletown elects to comply with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as
amended).



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2013-10,
passed 8-19-13)



§ 1001  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Special flood hazard areas.  The special flood hazard areas
are herein established as a floodplain overlay district.  The district
includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Middletown
designated as Zone A, AE, V, or VE on the Newport County Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) and Digital FIRM issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program.  The
map panels of the Newport County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the
Town of Middletown are panel numbers 44005C0092H, 44005C0094H dated April 5,
2010; and 44005C0083J, 44005C0087J, 44005C0089J, 44005C0091J, 44005C0093J,
44005C0113J, 44005C0181J, 44005C0182J, 44005C0201J dated September 4, 2013. 
The exact boundaries of the district may be defined by the 100-year base
flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Newport County
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated September 4, 2013.  The office of
Building/Zoning is responsible for floodplain management.  The FIRM and FIS
report and any revisions thereto are incorporated herein by reference and are
on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Department, Building Official, and
Conservation Commission.



   (B)   Administrative provisions.



      (1)   Building permit.



         (a)   All proposed construction or other development
within a special flood hazard area shall require a permit.



         (b)   The National Flood Insurance Program special flood
hazard area requires permits for all projects that meet the definition of
development, not just “building” projects.  Development projects include
any filling, grading, excavation, mining, drilling, storage of materials,
temporary stream crossings.  If the construction or other development within
a special flood hazard area is not covered by a building permit, all other
non-structural activities shall be permitted by either the Rhode Island
Coastal Resources Management Council and/or the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management as applicable.  Therefore, if another state agency
issues a permit, the local building official must have the opportunity for
input and keep a copy of the respective permit in their files.



         (c)   Prior to the issuance of a building or development
permit, the applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary permits and
approvals have been received from all government agencies from which approval
is required by federal or state law.  A permit fee (based on the cost of the
construction) may be required to be paid to the town and a copy of a receipt
for the same shall accompany the application.  An additional fee may be
charged if the code enforcement officer and/or board of appeals needs the
assistance of a professional engineer.



      (2)   Disclaimer of liability.  The degree of flood
protection required by this article is considered reasonable but does not
imply total flood protection.



      (3)   Severability.  If any section, provision, or portion of
this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the
remainder of the article shall not be affected.



      (4)   Abrogation and greater restriction.  This article shall
not in any way impair/remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, and the like.  Where this article
imposes a greater restriction, the provisions of this article shall control.



      (5)   Enforcement.  The building official shall enforce all
provisions as applicable in reference to R.I. Gen. Laws § 23-27.3-108.1.



      (6)   Penalties.  Every person who shall violate any
provision of this article shall be subject to penalties put forth in R.I.
Gen. Laws § 23-27.3-122.3.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-19-13)



§ 1002  NOTIFICATION OF WATERCOURSE ALTERATION.



   (A)   In a riverine situation, the Floodplain Manager shall notify
the following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse:



      (1)   Adjacent communities



      (2)   NFIP State Coordinator
         Rhode Island Emergency Management Agency
         645 New London Avenue
         Cranston, RI 02920



      (3)   Risk Analysis Branch
         Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
         99 High Street, 6th Floor
         Boston, MA 02110



   (B)   The carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse
shall be maintained.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-19-13)



§ 1003  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Reference to existing regulations.



      (1)   The special flood hazard areas are established as a
floodplain overlay district.  All development in the district, including
structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by
variance, special use permit, or otherwise, must be in compliance with the
following:



         Rhode Island State Building Code (as established under R.I.
Gen. Laws § 23-27.3);



         Coastal Resources Management Act, Rhode Island Coastal
Resources Management Council (R.I. Gen. Laws § 46-23)



         Endangered Species Act, Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (R.I. Gen. Laws § 20-1-2)



         Freshwater Wetlands Act, Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (R.I. Gen. Laws § 46-23-6)



         Minimum Standards Related to Individual Sewage Disposal
Systems, Department of Environmental Management (R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 42-17.1
and 42-17.6 and 46-12)



      (2)   Any variances from the provisions and requirements of
the above referenced state regulations may only be granted in accordance with
the required variance procedures of these state regulations.



   (B)   Other use regulations.



      (1)   In Zones A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that have a
regulatory floodway designated on the Newport County FIRM, encroachments are
prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.



      (2)   All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure
that:



         (a)   Such proposals minimize flood damage;



         (b)   All public utilities and facilities are located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and



         (c)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.



      (3)   Detached accessory structures in Zones A, AE, A1-30
(i.e., garages, sheds) do not have to meet the elevation or dry
flood-proofing requirement if the following standards are met:



         (a)   The structure has a value less than $1,000.



         (b)   The structure has unfinished interiors and must
not be used for human habitation.  An apartment, office or other finished
space over a detached garage is considered human habitation and would require
the structure to be elevated.



         (c)   The structure is not in the floodway.



         (d)   The structure is not used for storage of hazardous
materials.



         (e)   The structure is used solely for parking of
vehicles and/or limited storage.



         (f)   The accessory must be wet floodproofed and
designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood water.



         (g)   The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



         (h)   Service facilities such as electrical, mechanical
and heating equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the base
flood elevation.



         (i)   The structure must not increase the flood levels
in the floodway.



      (4)   Existing contour intervals of site and elevations of
existing structures must be included on plan proposal.



      (5)   No person shall change from business/commercial to
residential use of any structure or property located in the floodway of a
special flood hazard area so as to result in a use or expansion that could
increase the risk to the occupants.



      (6)   The space below the lowest floor:



         (a)   Free of obstructions as described in FEMA
Technical Bulletin 5 “Free of Obstruction Requirements for Buildings
Located in Coastal High Hazard Area in Accordance with the National Flood
Insurance Program”; or



         (b)   Constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect
screening intended to collapse under wind and water without causing collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting piles or columns; or



         (c)   Designed with an enclosed area less than 300
square feet that is constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls that have
a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten or more than 20 pounds
per square foot.



   (C)   Base flood elevation and floodway data.



      (1)   Floodway data. In Zones A, A1-30, and AE, along
watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best
available federal, state, local, or other floodway data shall be used to
prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.



      (2)   Base flood elevation data. Base flood elevation data is
required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots
or five acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones.



      (3)   Base flood elevations in A Zones. In the absence of FEMA
BFE data and floodway data, the best available federal, state, local, or
other BFE or floodway data shall be used as the basis for elevating
residential and non-residential structures to or above the base flood level
and for floodproofing non-residential structures to or above the base flood
level.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-19-13)



§ 1004  [RESERVED].



§ 1005  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this
article pertaining to floodplain management have the same meaning as they
have in common usage and should be interpreted to give this article its most
reasonable application.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See definition for “special flood
hazard area.”



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the crest of the base
flood or 100-year flood. The height, as established in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum where specified), in
relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base
flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.



   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING. See definition for “structure”.



   COASTAL A ZONE.  Area within a special flood hazard area, landward of
a V Zone or landward of an open coast without mapped V Zones.  The principal
source of flooding must be astronomical tides, storm surges, seiches, or
tsunamis, not riverine flooding.  During the base flood conditions, the
potential for breaking wave heights shall be greater than or equal to 1.5
feet.



   COST. As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other
improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written
contractor’s estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to
the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements,
utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment
and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters;
labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to
damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor’s
overhead; contractor’s profit; and grand total.  Items to be excluded are
the cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, costs to
correct code violations subsequent to a violation notice, outside
improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping,
sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures
such as garages, sheds, and gazebos.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or EXISTING
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing
homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads).



   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The federal agency that
administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of
inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  The official map of a community on
which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to a community.  A
FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a “Digital Flood
Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official study of a community in which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted a technical
engineering evaluation and determination of local flood hazards, flood
profiles and water surface elevations.  The Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones and
base flood elevations, and may provide the regulatory floodway limits.



   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODWAY.   The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.  For the purposes of these regulations, the term “regulatory
floodway” is synonymous in meaning with the term “floodway”.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE or FACILITY. A use that cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water.  The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG).  The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states
without approved programs.



   LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA).  An advisory line indicating
the limit of the 1.5-foot wave height during the base flood.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; Provided, that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of § 60.3.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel or
contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.



   MARKET VALUE. Market value is the price of a structure that a willing
buyer and seller agree upon.  This can be determined by an independent
appraisal by a professional appraiser; the property’s tax assessment, minus
land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation of the structure; or the
structure’s actual cash value.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December
31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.  For floodplain management purposes, new construction means
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of
floodplain regulations adopted by the community.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. See definition for “floodway”.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication
of the flood insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO,
AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE
or V.  For purposes of these regulations, the term Special Flood Hazard Area
is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard”.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erections of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.  For insurance purposes, means:



      (1)   A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a
fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site;



      (2)   A manufactured home (“a manufactured home”, also
known as a mobile home, is a structure; built on permanent chassis,
transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent
foundation); or



      (3)   A travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and
affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community’s
floodplain management and building ordinances or laws.



For the latter purpose, “structure” does not mean recreational vehicle or
a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in paragraph (3)
of this definition, or a gas or liquid storage tank.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, additions
or other improvements to a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction”
of the improvement.  This term includes structures that have incurred
“substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
The term does not, however, include either:



      (1)   Any project to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as a “historic structure”.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management ordinance that allows construction in a manner
otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management ordinance. 
Construction or other development without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2013-10,
passed 8-19-13)



§ 1006  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector shall:



   (A)   Review all applications for a building permit for construction
or development within an area of special flood hazard to determine that the
permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



   (B)   Issue a permit when a review of the proposed development has
determined that the proposed development is consistent with all applicable
standards and requirements contained in this section and in compliance with
this chapter.



   (C)   Require that all necessary permits are obtained from those
federal, state and local government agencies from which approval is required
prior to commencing construction of the development;



   (D)   Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all building
permits issued under the provisions of this section, and data of elevation
and flood-proofing levels for new construction and/or substantial
improvements.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06, Am. Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2013-10,
passed 8-19-13)



ARTICLE 11  WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT



§ 1100  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Watershed Protection District (WPD) is:



   (A)   To protect, preserve and maintain the quality and supply of
groundwater and surface water upon which the residents of the town and others
depend;



   (B)   To protect the quality and supply of water by regulating the
use and development of land adjoining water courses or primary water recharge
areas and to prevent uses of land detrimental thereto; and



   (C)   To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the
public.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1101  DEFINITION OF DISTRICT.



   The Watershed Protection District is superimposed over any other zoning
district established by this chapter. The regulations imposed by the WPD
shall be considered to supersede the regulations of the underlying district.
The Watershed Protection District is subdivided into two  subdistricts,
designated Zone 1 and Zone 2.



   (A)   Zone 1 is an area which is critical to the protection of
surface and sub-surface water supplies and requires a high degree of
protection from incompatible land uses.



   (B)   Zone 2 is the watershed area which is contributory to surface
water runoff to the primary water bodies contained in Zone 1, and which
drains into Zone 1 areas either though surface water runoff or groundwater
movement.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1102  AREAS WITHIN ZONE 1.



   (A)   Areas within Zone l of the WPD are as follows:



      (1)   Areas shown on the official zoning map as that area
within 200 feet from the centerline of a watercourse or the edge or bank of a
surface water body or as otherwise shown on the official zoning map; and



      (2)   Those areas of Stissing silt loam (Se) as generally
designated on Soil Survey of Rhode Island, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, issued July 1981, the provision of which are
incorporated herein by reference thereto; and



      (3)   Those areas of Mansfield mucky silt loam (Ma) as
generally designated on said Soil Survey of Rhode Island, referenced in
division (A)(2) above.



   (B)   NOTE: Recognizing that the standards employed in making said
Soil Survey of Rhode Island allow for inclusion of small areas of contrasting
soils, said soil survey map may be superseded provided the applicant provides
adequate soil description information to the Zoning Board of Review. Such
detailed soils information should be prepared by a qualified soil scientist
and be presented using the descriptive terminology defined in the National
Cooperative Soil Survey.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1103  USES PERMITTED IN ZONE 1.



   (A)   Buildings, structures and land in Zone 1 may be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Conservation of soil, water, plants, and wildlife;



      (2)   Water supply facilities and accessory uses and
structures;



      (3)   Public water and/or sewer transmission pipelines or
related facilities;



      (4)   Public streets or highways;



      (5)   Public or private parks;



      (6)   Uses customarily accessory to residential uses;



      (7)   Stormwater detention and/or retention areas or systems.



   (B)   Uses listed in divisions (A)(1) through (7) above are
permitted in Zone 1 areas by right. All other uses otherwise permitted by
right (Y) or by special use (S) in § 602, on lands within Zone 1 of the
Watershed Protection District shall be permitted only by the granting of a
special use permit by the Zoning Board of Review in accordance with the
provisions of Article 9 and § 1106.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1104  AREAS WITHIN ZONE 2.



   Areas within Zone 2 of the WPD are shown on the official zoning map.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1105  USES PERMITTED IN ZONE 2.



   Any use permitted in the underlying zoning district by right (Y) or by
special use permit (S) in § 602, with the exception of the following uses:



   (A)   Outdoor lot storage and wrecking of junk or salvage materials;
automobile junk yards;



   (B)   Outdoor lot storage of flammable or explosive material,
including petroleum products;



   (C)   Sewage treatment plant;



   (D)   Incinerator;



   (E)   Sanitary landfill;



   (F)   Solid waste transfer station;



   (G)   Storage of bottled gas oil or other liquid petroleum products;



   (H)   Vehicle washing establishment;



   (I)   Manufacturing uses which discharge wastewater other than
surface water runoff into surface or sub-surface disposal systems other than
a public sewer system;



   (J)   Accessory uses to the principal use which involve any of the
following practices:



      (1)   Road salt or de-icing chemical storage;



      (2)   Storage or disposal of hazardous wastes as defined by
Rules and Regulations for Hazardous Waste Generation, Transportation,
Treatment, Storage and Disposal, R.I. Department of Environmental Management,
July 18, 1984;



      (3)   Placement of an individual sewage disposal system (ISDS)
within 150 feet of a fresh water wetland as defined in § 502;



      (4)   Aboveground or underground (buried) storage of liquid
fuel in excess of 300 gallons for any use; except uses subject to the
provisions of Regulations for Underground Storage Facilities Used for
Petroleum Products and Hazardous Materials, State of Rhode Island, Department
of Environmental Management, April 18, 1985, and subsequent amendments
thereto;



   (K)   Bulk storage of fuel oil in tank trucks greater than 250
gallons;



   (L)   Chemical and bacteriological laboratories;



   (M)   Commercial electroplating and etching.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1106  PROCEDURE OF SPECIAL USE PERMITS IN ZONE 1 OR ZONE 2.



   (A)   This section is applicable to the following uses:



      (1)   Uses within Zone l otherwise permitted in the underlying
zoning district (S or Y) pursuant to § 602.  Uses listed in § 1103(A)(1)
through (7) are permitted by right and are not governed by the provisions of
this section.



      (2)   Uses in Zone 2 listed in § 1105(A) through (J)(4).



   (B)   Special use permits for these uses shall be granted by the
Zoning Board of Review only if the Board determines that said proposed use
would not be inimical to the public health, safety and welfare and that such
use would not conflict with the purposes for which the WPD has been
established. The Zoning Board of Review shall not act upon the granting of a
special use permit until the question has been referred to, and an advisory
report has been received from, the Planning Board and the Conservation
Commission. Said advisory report shall be submitted by the Planning Board and
Conservation Commission to the Zoning Board within 45 days of receipt of
plans. The Zoning Board shall then hold a public hearing on the application
for a special use permit. Where the decision of the Zoning Board of Review
differs from the recommendations of the Planning Board or Conservation
Commission, the reasons therefor shall be clearly stated in writing.



   (C)   Applications for special use permits in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall meet all applicable requirements of Article
9, plus the requirements of § 1107.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1107  SPECIAL USE PERMIT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.



   The following, where applicable, shall be submitted to the Zoning Board
of Review in applying for a special use permit for uses in Zone l and/or Zone
2 as required by § 1106:



   (A)   A complete list of all chemicals, fuels and other potentially
toxic or hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises in
quantities greater than those associated with normal household use;



   (B)   Soil survey data with water table and soil percolation tests
prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer;



   (C)   A topographical survey of the property with two-foot contour
intervals;



   (D)   Water quality analysis of the property, to include ambient
(existing) water quality measurements of both groundwater and surface water
(if applicable) in the vicinity of the proposed project or construction. A
report outlining detailed sampling and testing methods and procedures as
required by this section shall be submitted, including information on the
qualifications of the firm, individual or laboratory performing said sampling
or testing. Analysis shall be based upon sampling and testing performed
within one  year of the submission of the application to the Zoning Board of
Review.



      (1)   Groundwater samples shall be tested for the presence of
the following components or other such components as may be required by the
Zoning Board of Review:



         (a)   Arsenic;



         (b)   Lead;



         (c)   Chromium;



         (d)   Mercury;



         (e)   Zinc;



         (f)   Copper;



         (g)   Ph;



         (h)   Oil and grease;



         (i)   Nitrogen (nitrate);



         (j)   Nitrogen (nitrite);



         (k)   Chloride;



         (l)   Phosphorus;



         (m)   Sodium.



      (2)   Surface water samples shall be tested for the presence
of the following:



         (a)   Dissolved oxygen;



         (b)   Fecal coliform;



         (c)   Total coliform;



         (d)   pH;



         (e)   Water quality as set forth in Table I, Water
Quality Regulations for Water Pollution Control, State of Rhode Island, Dept.
of Environmental Management, Division of Water Resources, December 20, 1984,
and subsequent amendments thereto;



   (E)   Primary data on the rate and direction of groundwater movement
on the property, or in the vicinity of the proposed construction or use, with
detailed description of the methods and procedures used;



   (F)   A detailed narrative report by a hydrologist, geologist,
agronomist or related soil/hydrology scientist regarding present water
quality conditions and the potential impact to groundwater and surface water
supplies as a result of the proposed special use, including cumulative
impacts over an extended period of time. Such report shall address mitigation
measures to alleviate any potential sources of pollution, and shall also
address alternatives to the proposed construction or use;



   (G)   Any other pertinent data requested by the Zoning Board of
Review which the Board deems necessary to properly assess impacts upon water
quality and to ensure compatibility of the special use with the purposes and
intent of the Watershed Protection District.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1108  DEVELOPMENT PLAN DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The following site design standards shall be required for all permitted
uses by special use permit or otherwise, in the Watershed Protection District:



   (A)   Surface water runoff shall, to the degree feasible, be
directed towards areas covered with vegetation for surface infiltration; and



   (B)   Where the premises are partially outside of the WPD, site
design shall, to the degree feasible, locate such potential pollution sources
as individual sewage disposal systems outside of the district; and



   (C)   Surface water runoff shall be directed, to the degree
feasible, towards the lesser restricted district where the premises is
located within two or more districts.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 12  SIGNS



§ 1200  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is as follows:



   (A)   To promote the public health, safety and welfare of those who
use the town's streets, roads, and highways;



   (B)   To reduce distractions and obstructions from signs, to prevent
signs from adversely affecting traffic safety, and to alleviate hazards
caused by signs projecting over or encroaching upon public ways;



   (C)   To discourage excessive visual competition in signage and to
ensure that signs aid orientation and adequately identify uses and activities
to the public; and



   (D)   To preserve or enhance town character by requiring new and
replacement signs which are:



      (1)   Compatible with the surroundings;



      (2)   Appropriate to the activities, goods or services they
promote; and



      (3)   Appropriately sized in their context.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07)



§ 1201  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter applies to all signs, as that term is defined in §
1202.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07)



§ 1202  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A-FRAME SIGN. A temporary sign normally supported by its own frame in a
manner that usually forms an "A" when in use; also referred to as a SANDWICH
or TENT SIGN.



   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign that pertains to a use, time or event which no
longer exists or when the purpose for which the permit for the sign was
approved has been fulfilled or no longer exists.



   ACCESSORY SIGN. Signs pertaining to the general use of a premises, such
as signs prohibiting patrons without shirts or shoes, trespassing, hunting or
swimming, unleashed dogs, and the like.



   ADDRESS SIGN. A type of sign displaying only one or more of the
following:



      (1)   The name or names of any occupant;



      (2)   The street number and name; and



      (3)   Identification of a use or activity conducted on the
premises.



   AWNING SIGN. A style of sign that is painted on, printed on, or
attached flat against and parallel to the surface of an awning.



   BACKLIT SIGN. A sign with individual translucent back-lit letters
silhouetted against an opaque surface.



   BOX SIGN.  A sign consisting of an enclosed box or cabinet with copy
on one or more sides which encloses an integrated light source that can shine
through the sides or face of the sign, which consists of a single transparent
or translucent material such as a Plexiglas or lexan.



   BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGNS.  A method of display in which a sign is
mounted on the vertical surface of a building, includes wall, projecting, and
awning signs.



   CABINET SIGN. See BOX SIGN.



   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face of the sign.



   CHANNEL LETTER SIGN.  A sign consisting of individual letters with
translucent faces, containing soft lighting elements inside each letter.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary on-premises sign identifying the
name/nature of a project and the name and/or address of one or more of the
following: contractor, subcontractor, architect, landscape architect, and
engineer. Logos or illustrations may also be displayed.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. An on-premises sign indicating the direction of
vehicle or pedestrian traffic or the location of parking, buildings, offices,
entrances, activities or amenities, such as restrooms and public telephones.
There are two types of directional signs:



      (1)   INTERNAL DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A directional sign designed
to be read by a person already on the premises and used only to identify and
locate an office, entrance, exit, telephone or similar place, service or
route. Such signs may bear advertising.



      (2)   PERIMETER DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A directional sign designed
to be read from the public right-of-way. Such signs may not bear any
advertising.



   DIRECTORY SIGN. An on-premise sign in an office, research, or
industrial park that identifies the names and locations of businesses within
the park. Signs may include the name of the park or project, the name and
location of each business and/or a map of the park. The primary purpose of
such signs shall be to indicate the route to be followed to a specific
business or place within the office, research, or industrial park.



   ENTRY SIGN. A sign located at the ingress/egress of a development such
as an industrial, office, or research park, multifamily dwelling project, or
residential subdivision. Such signs may display only the name and address of
the development.



   EXEMPT SIGN. A sign which, under this subchapter, is expressly allowed
to be displayed without issuance of a sign permit.



   FLASHING SIGN.  An illuminated sign which exhibits changes or
variations in light intensity, color, direction, or animation. Excluded from
this definition are illuminated signs on which the only variations in light
intensity, color, direction, or animation are to display the date, time,
and/or temperature.



   FOR SALE/RENT/LEASE SIGN. A sign advertising the availability of all or
a portion of the premises for sale, rent or lease.



   FREE-STANDING SIGN.  A self-supporting sign not attached to any
building, wall, or fence, but in a fixed location.



   GOVERNMENT SIGN.  Signs of every kind and nature erected by or on
behalf of the United States of America, the State of Rhode Island and the
Town of Middletown, relating to governmental regulatory activities or
governmental activities conducted on the premises on which such sign is
located, and including traffic controls, railroad crossing signs and legal
notices and other such signs required by law.



   GRAND OPENING SIGN. A temporary sign announcing the opening or
re-opening of a business.



   HALO-LIT SIGN.  See BACKLIT SIGN.



   INCIDENTAL SIGN.  Signs indicating hours of operation, credit cards,
business or professional affiliations.



   MEMORIAL SIGN. A memorial sign or tablet, or a sign indicating the name
of a building or the date of its erection, which is not used for commercial
or business advertisement.



   MONUMENT SIGN. A freestanding sign, the bottom of which is mounted
directly on the ground or on an enclosed structural base with no visible
poles supporting the structure.



   NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A sign lawfully existing when the sign ordinance
was adopted or amended.



   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign not on the premises of the business or
activity to which it relates.



   PAINTED WALL SIGN (MURAL). A work of art or painting that is applied to
and made an integral part of an exterior wall. A mural shall be considered a
wall sign if it contains words, logos, trademarks or graphic representations
of any person, product or service that identify or advertise a business.



   PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign permanently affixed to a building or the
ground that relates directly to the use of the building or lot.



   PLAZA SIGN. A group of signs clustered together in a single structure
or compositional unit used to advertise multiple occupants of the same
building or building complex. Such signs are generally designed and
constructed with provision to allow changes of occupancy without major
alterations of the entire sign.



   POLE SIGN. A sign which is supported by one or more poles, uprights or
braces in or upon the ground, which are not a part of a building.



   POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign announcing candidates seeking public
office, a political issue, or a sign containing other election information.



   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign capable of being readily moved or relocated,
including signs mounted on a chassis and wheels, or supported by legs.
Examples of portable signs are A-frame signs, gasoline price-per-gallon
signs, trailer signs, and temporary announcement signs.



   POST SIGN. A pole sign which is supported by two poles, one on each
side of the sign.



   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign affixed to a structure or other thing which
extends more than six inches beyond the surface to which it is affixed
perpendicular to a wall surface.



   READERBOARD.  See CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN.



   ROOF-MOUNTED SIGN. A sign placed upon the roof of any building, or
erected on a framework supported by the roof of a building, except such signs
which are an integral part of the construction or architecture of a building.



   SEASONAL SIGN.  A sign promoting a business for a single season during
a calendar year, such as summer or the winter holidays. Such sign shall be
installed on the parcel on which the business is located, and in accordance
with the provisions of § 1211.



   SIGN.  Any permanent or temporary display of one or more letters,
words, pictures, graphics, logos, colors, or lights visible from public ways
or places, whether freestanding or attached to or displayed upon a structure
or any other thing, which is intended to convey a message, except for:



      (1)   Pavement markings or driveway directional arrows painted
on the ground which contain no advertising; and



      (2)   Window displays, including price tags, product
descriptions and other information which, in view of their scale and
position, are primarily directed to pedestrians and not to vehicle occupants.



   SPECIAL EVENT SIGN.  A sign advertising a special event as defined in
Middletown Code § 100.02, or directing patrons to a parking site for such an
event.



   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign which is intended to be displayed for a limited
or finite period of time and which is not permanently installed or erected.



   TRAILER SIGN. A sign which is mounted or placed on a vehicle, including
self-propelled and towed vehicles, that is principally used for advertising
purposes. The principal use of the vehicle shall be deemed to be for
advertising purposes if it is so placed or used as to be observable by the
public for substantial periods of time on a regular basis while not engaged
in any non-advertising function.



   WALL-MOUNTED SIGN (WALL SIGN). A sign erected against, displayed upon
or attached parallel to the wall of any structure or to a fence, screen or
freestanding wall.



   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign visible from the exterior of a building which is
painted on, affixed to, or suspended immediately in front of or behind or on
a window.



   YARD or GARAGE SALE SIGN. A temporary sign announcing a yard or garage
sale.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord.
2012-1, passed 4-2-12)



§ 1203  ADMINISTRATION.



   Except for nonconforming signs and exempt signs, no sign shall be
displayed until a sign permit has been issued.



   (A)   Sign permit.



      (1)   Permits shall be issued only if the Sign Officer
determines that the sign will comply with all applicable provisions of this
subchapter and the State Building Code, or has received any required relief
from the Zoning Board of Review.



      (2)   No permit for a temporary sign may be extended or
renewed.



      (3)   In the event that the roads within an industrial,
research or office park are public roads, or in any case where entry or
directory signs are



proposed to be placed on town or state property, approval by the appropriate
agency of the sign design and placement must be demonstrated prior to the
issuance of the sign permit(s).



   (B)   Application for permit.



      (1)   Applications for sign permits shall be on forms
prescribed by the Sign Officer and may be submitted by the owner of the land
or building, or by any person who has the authority to erect the proposed
sign. Applications for signs not submitted by the property owner must contain
the written permission of such owner, or be accompanied by other evidence
reasonably demonstrating the existence of such permission.



      (2)   As a part of the application, applicants must submit a
scale drawing of the proposed sign specifying its dimensions, materials,
illumination, letter sizes, colors, mounting methods, support systems, and
location with all relevant measurements. At the discretion of the Sign
Officer, one or more requirements of this division may be waived for
temporary signs.



      (3)   Applications shall be submitted with the proper fee as
established by the Town Council in Chapter 36 of this code  and, for
illuminated signs, any required electrical permit.



      (4)   The Sign Officer shall approve or disapprove
applications within 30 days of receiving a completed application together
with the required fee.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord.
2012-1, passed 4-2-12)



§ 1204  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Sign Officer, who shall be designated by the Town Council, is
hereby authorized to enforce this subchapter. The Sign Officer may order the
repair or removal of any sign and its supporting structure which is judged
dangerous, or in disrepair, or which is erected or maintained contrary to
this subchapter.



   (A)   Any sign which has been ordered removed by the Sign Officer,
or is abandoned or discontinued, shall be removed by the person, firm,
property owner, or corporation responsible for the sign within 30 days of
written notice to remove.



   (B)   Violation of any provision of this subchapter or any lawful
order of the Sign Officer shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100
per offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.



   (C)   Any sign installed or placed on public property or within the
public right-of-way, except as expressly permitted in this subchapter, shall
be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07)



§ 1205  CALCULATIONS.



   Subject to divisions (A) and (B), the area of a sign shall be measured
as the total area within a line circumscribing all surfaces used for the
design, including slates and panels.



   (A)   Sign area.



      (1)   For a sign which is painted on or otherwise directly
applied to the surface of a structure or any other thing, the area shall be
considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other geometric shape
which encompasses all of the letters, symbols and other elements of the sign.
If the sign has a background of a different color than the natural color or
finish material of the structure or thing, then the area of the sign shall be
the area of such background.



      (2)   When a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces
shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except where two faces
are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from each
other. In this case, the sign area shall be the area of either face, and if
the faces are unequal, the area shall be that of the larger face.



      (3)   The total area of a three-dimensional projecting sign
shall be determined by enclosing the largest cross-section of the sign in a
rectangle or other geometric shape and computing its area.



   (B)   Number of signs.  In determining the number of signs, a sign
shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device
containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where
matter is displayed randomly without organized relationship of elements, or
where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each
element shall be considered to be a single sign.



   (C)   Height. The height of a sign shall be measured as the vertical
distance measured from the natural level of the ground at the base of the
sign to the highest point of any portion of the sign or supporting structure.



   (D)   Setbacks. The setback for a freestanding sign shall be
measured from the lot line to the nearest point on the sign or its supporting
structure, whichever is closer to the lot line.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07)



§ 1206  MAINTENANCE AND SAFETY.



   Signs must be maintained in a secure and safe condition. If the Sign
Officer is of the opinion that a sign is not secure, safe, or in a good state
of repair, a written notice describing the defect shall be given to the
person responsible for the maintenance of the sign. If the defect is not
corrected within 30 days from receipt of the notice, the Sign Officer shall
issue a citation of violation. No sign may be displayed if it:



   (A)   Is structurally unsafe;



   (B)   Constitutes a hazard to public safety or health because it is
dilapidated, abandoned or inadequately maintained, or because it is located
so as to interfere with drivers' vision of traffic signals or directional
signs or of traffic on intersecting streets;



   (C)   Obstructs free entrance to or exit from a door, window, or
fire escape;



   (D)   Obstructs light or air or interferes with proper functioning
of a building; or



   (E)   Is capable of causing electrical shock.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07)



§ 1207  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   Nonconforming signs may continue but may not be enlarged or
replaced except in conformity with the requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   A nonconforming sign may be altered in whole or in part in a
way which diminishes the extent of its nonconformity.



   (C)   Any sign which has deteriorated to such an extent that the
cost of restoration would exceed 50% of the replacement cost, shall not be
repaired, rebuilt or altered except to conform to the requirements of this
subchapter.



   (D)   Prohibited signs may not be enlarged or replaced.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07)



§ 1208  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs are prohibited in all districts, unless otherwise
expressly permitted under this chapter.



   (A)   Off premises signs;



   (B)   Special event sign not meeting the definition contained in §
1202 and the limitations of § 1209.



   (C)   Temporary or seasonal sign which does not identify or
advertise a business and displays only a product logo or trademark.



   (D)   Streamers, pennants, ribbons, banners, inflatable objects in
excess of two cubic feet, strings of lights, spinners and the like, except
when displayed to commemorate a holiday or as components of a grand opening
sign;



   (E)   Flashing signs;



   (F)   Roof-mounted signs;



   (G)   Signs containing moving parts or reflective elements which
sparkle or twinkle in the light;



   (H)   Sign identifying or advertising a business or organization
which is either defunct or no longer located on the premises, except for
landmark signs which are properly maintained;



   (I)   Signs resembling or depicting official traffic signs or
signals;



   (J)   Portable signs and trailer signs;



   (K)   Illuminated window signs, including neon, LED, and any other
method of illumination;



   (L)   Internally illuminated changeable copy signs with dark-colored
letters.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord.
2012-1, passed 4-2-12)



§ 1209  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   The following signs may be displayed as long as they meet the
requirements in the  Requirements for Exempt Signs table set forth below. A
sign permit is NOT REQUIRED to display signs which are in conformance with
this section, and such signs shall not be counted when calculating the number
of signs permitted per property.



 


Requirements for Exempt Signs




Type

 

Criteria for Display





Accessory Sign
 
2 square feet maximum each area.


Address Sign
 
1 per address. 1.5 square feet maximum area. Must be attached to the building
or mounted on a spot not more than 4 feet high which is setback at least 3
feet from the public right-of-way.


Charitable/Civic Signs
 



   Announcement/bulletin board
 
1 per property. 12 square feet maximum area.


   Temporary event
 
6 square feet maximum area. Must be removed within 48 hours after the end of
the event.


Construction Signs
 
1 per project. Setback at least 10 feet from the street lot line, or one-half
the building setback distance, whichever is less. Shall not be erected prior
to 48 hours before start of construction, and shall be removed within 48
hours after completion of the construction project.


   One single-family or duplex
 
16 square feet maximum area.


   Other use or project
 
32 square feet maximum area.


Directional Sign
 



   Perimeter
 
2 per curb cut permitted. No advertising. May be illuminated.


   Internal
 
Number to be determined by Sign Officer or through development plan review.


For Sale/Rent/Lease
 
2 per property. Shall be removed within 48 hours after sale/rent/lease of
property.


   Residential use
 
6 square feet maximum area.


   Other - frontage 0 - 100 ft.
 
20 square feet maximum area.


   Other - frontage 100+ ft.
 
50 square feet maximum area.


Government Sign
 
Any sign required by any federal, state, or local law or agency may be
displayed without any other agency approval.


Home Occupation/Farm Promotion Accessory
 
1 sign, 4 square feet maximum area. May be building-mounted or freestanding.


Incidental Sign
 
2 sq. ft. combined area per business/use.


Memorial Sign
 
2 square feet maximum area.


Political Sign
 
6 square feet maximum area.  May only be displayed on private property.
Signs relating to any election or referendum must be removed within 48 hours
after the end of said election or referendum.


Special Event Sign
 
6 square feet maximum area. May only be displayed on the site of the event or
other private property. May not be installed in the right-of-way of a public
street. Signs may be installed no more than 7 days prior to the event and
must be removed within 48 hours after the event. Signs for a single multi-day
event may be installed for a total of no more than 21 days.


Window Sign
 



   Non-illuminated
 
Maximum size is 15% of window area in which displayed.


   Illuminated
 
1 illuminated window sign, not to exceed 2 square feet in area may be
displayed per (facade/business).


Yard or Garage Sale
 
4.5 square feet maximum area. Shall not be erected prior to 24 hours before
sale, and shall be removed within 24 hours after the end of the sale.




 



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord.
2012-1, passed 4-2-12)



§ 1210  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   Temporary signs not classified as exempt in § 1209 shall only be
displayed upon issuance of a temporary sign permit by the Sign Officer.
Temporary signs are subject to all requirements of this subchapter. Banners
are permitted to be used as temporary signs. Temporary signs may be displayed
as follows:



   (A)   A business may display one temporary sign for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Any temporary sign which remains in place more than 30 days
constitutes a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   No more than four temporary sign permits shall be issued to a
single use or business in any one calendar year. Each temporary sign permit
issued in a single calendar year shall be for a separate use or purpose.



   (C)   No temporary sign shall exceed 16 square feet in area.



   (D)   A business shall not install a temporary sign during the time
that a seasonal sign permitted under § 1211 is installed. The combined time
period permitted for installation of all temporary and seasonal signs for a
single business shall not exceed seven months (210 days) per calendar year.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord.
2012-1, passed 4-2-12)



§ 1211  SEASONAL SIGNS.



   Seasonal signs not classified as exempt in § 1209 shall only be
displayed upon issuance of a sign permit by the Sign Officer. Seasonal signs
are subject to all requirements of this subchapter.  Seasonal signs may be
displayed as follows:



   (A)   A business may display one seasonal sign for a period not to
exceed seven consecutive months, minus any period for which one or more
temporary sign permits have been issued in that calendar year. Any seasonal
sign which remains in place beyond this period constitutes a violation of
this chapter.



   (B)   A business shall be granted no more than one seasonal sign
permit per calendar year.



   (C)   No seasonal sign shall exceed 16 square feet in area.



   (D)   Seasonal signs shall comply with design requirements of this
chapter provided that seasonal signs shall not be internally illuminated.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-12)



§ 1212  PERMITTED SIGNS.



   (A)   Except for nonconforming and exempt signs, all signs shall
comply with the terms of this section. A sign may vary from the requirements
set forth in this section only upon the issuance of a special use permit by
the Zoning Board of Review. In making the decision for special use permits to
exceed requirements set forth in this section, the Zoning Board of Review
shall consider the following factors and characteristics, in addition to
those requirements set forth in § 902:



      (1)   Quality, character, and appropriateness of proposed sign;



      (2)   Aesthetic impact of the sign on the public right-of-way;



      (3)   The total amount of sign area on the premises;



      (4)   Existence of non-conforming sign(s) on the premises;



      (5)   Site design and layout of the property.



   (B)   Number allowed.



      (1)   No more than three types of signs may be displayed per
building or parcel, regardless of the number of occupancies. For example, a
building may have pole, awning, and wall signs; or wall, projecting and
awning signs.



      (2)   The total number of signs per building is limited to
two, unless the building has more than one occupancy, in which case there can
be one sign per occupancy plus one additional sign for the building. In
addition, the number of signs per building/use shall comply with the Number
Permitted table set forth below.



      (3)   Buildings located on parcels fronting on two public ways
may display one building-mounted sign in addition to the number of
building-mounted signs permitted in Number Permitted table set forth below.
In no case shall more than one of the permitted building mounted signs be
visible from any single public way.



      (4)   In addition to the signs permitted by  the Number
Permitted table set forth below, any use with more than one public entrance
is permitted one sign for each additional public entrance. Such sign may be
wall-mounted or projecting, shall not exceed three square feet in area, and
must be displayed adjacent to or above a public entrance.



 


NUMBER PERMITTED




Use

 

Signs Permitted





Single non-residential use on a parcel
 
Either 1 freestanding sign and 1 building-mounted sign or 2 building mounted
signs.


Office, research or industrial park
 
1 entry sign per main entrance.


1 or more directory signs. The number permitted shall be determined by the
Sign Officer or through development plan review, as appropriate.


1 freestanding sign per building.


2 building-mounted signs per business/use within the park.


Shopping center (more than one business)
 
1 freestanding sign per main entrance, to a maximum of 2 freestanding signs.


1 building-mounted sign per business.


Residential subdivision, multifamily dwelling project, etc.
 
1 entry sign per main entrance.


Agricultural
 
1 freestanding sign per main entrance.




 



   (C)   Design.



      (1)   Color.  No more than four colors may be used in a sign,
except for pictures or illustrations.  Day-Glow and similar super-bright
colors are prohibited.



      (2)   Type.



         (a)   Entry signs shall either be a monument or post
sign, or else incorporated into an architectural feature such as a stone wall.



         (b)   Directory signs shall be of monument design.



      (3)   Plaza signs.  The design/display board of plaza,
directory or any other multi-tenant sign shall be of an integrated and
uniform design.



   (D)   Dimensional criteria.



      (1)   Freestanding signs.



         (a)   Freestanding signs shall meet the requirements set
forth in the Maximum Sign Area and Height: Freestanding Signs table set forth
below.



         (b)   Pole signs shall have a minimum ground clearance
of eight feet.



 


MAXIMUM SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT:  FREE STANDING SIGNS




Sign Type

 

GB

 

OB and LB

 

LI and OP

 

P and OS

 

Residential






 

Area
(ft)2

 

Height
(ft)

 

Area
(ft)2

 

Height
(ft)

 

Area
(ft)2

 

Height
(ft)

 

Area
(ft)2

 

Height
(ft)

 

Area
(ft)2

 

Height
(ft)





Single Business
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





   Pole sign
 

16

 

16

 

12

 

12

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

12

 

12

 

N/A

 

N/A



   Post sign
 

20

 

8

 

16

 

6

 

16

 

6

 

12

 

6

 

6

 

6



   Monument sign
 

32

 

4

 

24

 

4

 

24

 

4

 

16

 

4

 

8

 

4



Plaza Sign1
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





   Pole sign
 

60

 

20

 

32

 

16

 

32

 

16

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



   Post sign
 

80

 

10

 

48

 

8

 

48

 

8

 

12

 

6

 

6

 

6



   Monument sign
 

100

 

6

 

60

 

4

 

60

 

4

 

16

 

4

 

8

 

4



Entry Sign
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





   Facing an arterial road
 

32

 

6

 

32

 

4

 

32

 

4

 

16

 

6

 

16

 

6



   Facing a non-arterial road
 

32

 

6

 

32

 

4

 

32

 

4

 

8

 

4

 

8

 

4



Directory Sign
 

16

 

4

 

16

 

4

 

16

 

4

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



1   The maximum permitted area of a plaza sign is increased by 3 square
feet for each individual business within the development to which it refers.




 



      (2)   Building-mounted signs.



         (a)   In a single-tenant building, the size of the
building-mounted sign shall not exceed one square foot in area for each
lineal foot of the facade on which it is displayed up to the maximum area
specified in the Maximum Sign Area: Building-mounted Signs table set forth
below.



         (b)   In a multiple-tenant building, the size of each
individual building-mounted sign shall not exceed one square foot in area for
each lineal foot of the wall of the portion of the building containing the
individual use and on which the sign is located, up to the maximum specified
in Maximum Sign Area: Building-mounted Signs table set forth below.



 


MAXIMUM SIGN AREA:  BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGNS




Type

 

GB
(ft)2

 

OB and LB
(ft)2

 

LI and OP
(ft)2

 

P and OS
(ft)2

 

Residential
(ft)2





Single Business on Property
 



 



 



 



 





   Wall-mounted
 

60

 

32

 

60

 

32

 

16



   Awning
 

32

 

32

 

32

 

16

 

8



   Projecting
 

10

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

8



Multiple Business on Property
 



 



 



 



 





   Wall-mounted
 

70

 

70

 

60

 

32

 

16



   Awning
 

32

 

32

 

32

 

16

 

8



   Projecting
 

10

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

10



1   The maximum sign area of a building-mounted sign is 1 square foot for
every 1 linear foot of the building facade to which it is attached, up to the
maximum shown in this table.




 



   (E)   Placement.



      (1)   General.



         (a)   No sign may be affixed to a utility pole, or
traffic control structure, or to a tree, shrub, or other natural object.



         (b)   Signs shall not obscure arches, sills, moldings,
cornices, and transoms and similar architectural features.



      (2)   Building-mounted signs.



         (a)   Wall-mounted signs shall project no more than 16
inches from the surface upon which they are mounted. No wall-mounted sign
shall extend above the lowest point of the roof, nor beyond the ends of the
wall to which it is attached.



         (b)   Awning signs over a sidewalk or public way shall
be at least eight feet above the sidewalk or way, measured from the lowest
point of the sign. No awning sign shall extend beyond the valance of an
awning or be attached to the underside of an awning.



         (c)   Projecting signs shall not extend into a vehicular
public way or be less than eight feet above a pedestrian public way or less
than 13 feet over a lane way, alley or driveway measured from the lowest
point of the sign. No projecting sign shall extend above the roof line or
extend into a vehicular public way.



      (3)   Freestanding signs shall be setback a minimum of five
feet from any public right-of-way.



   (F)   Illumination.  Signs shall only be illuminated in accordance
with this division and with  the Illumination table set forth below.



      (1)   No sign may be illuminated if, because of intensity or
direction of illumination, it unreasonably interferes with neighboring land
uses or constitutes a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



      (2)   Exposed electrical wires may not be used in connection
with illuminated signs.



      (3)   Signs shall not be illuminated after 11:00 p.m. unless
the premises are open during such hours.



      (4)   Internal illumination.



         (a)   Internally illuminated box/cabinet signs shall
have dark opaque backgrounds with light colored letters and graphics.



         (b)   Signs internally illuminated by gas-filled light
tubes must be placed so that the tubes are not exposed to view from a
sidewalk or public way.



      (5)   External illumination.



         (a)   Signs with exterior illumination shall be
illuminated only with steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed
solely onto the sign.



         (b)   Box/cabinet signs shall not be externally
illuminated.



 


ILLUMINATION




Type of Sign

 

Zoning District




GB

 

LB and OB

 

OP and LI

 

P and OS

 

Residential





Freestanding Signs
 



 



 



 



 





   Internally illuminated box/cabinet sign
 

Y

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N



   Channel lit letters
 

Y

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N



   Reverse-channel/halo lit letters
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

N



   External illumination
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



Building-mounted Signs
 



 



 



 



 





   Internally illuminated box/cabinet sign
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N



   Internally illuminated awning
 

Y

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N



   Channel lit letters
 

Y

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N



   Reverse-channel/halo lit letters
 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

N

 

N



   External illumination
 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



Y = Permitted         N = Prohibited




 



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord.
2012-1, passed 4-2-12)



 



§ 1213  PROPERTY ADDRESS.



   The street address of all commercial and industrial buildings shall be
prominently displayed so as to be visible from the public right-of-way, in
accordance with Section 10.13.1 of the RI Uniform Fire Code (NFPA 1) and as
follows:



   (A)   The address shall be conspicuously placed, in a color
contrasting with the background, on a freestanding sign if present or else
incorporated into a building-mounted sign or attached directly to the
building. Such address shall not be counted toward the maximum sign area as
set forth in § 1211 provided no more than two square feet is devoted to said
address.



   (B)   Addresses must be clearly visible to traffic in either
direction from the street to which each unit is addressed. Buildings with
parking and access areas provided at their side or rear shall have additional
numbers displayed on the building that are visible from any and all such
parking and access areas.



   (C)   Address displays located no farther than 100 feet from the
curb line of the street shall have numbers of not less than eight inches in
height. Address signs set back greater than 100 feet shall have numbers of
not less than 12 inches in height.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 07-08, As Amended, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord.
2012-1, passed 4-2-12)



ARTICLE 13  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



§ 1300  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   No structure or use shall be erected, substantially altered or
developed unless permanently maintained off-street parking and loading spaces
have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1301  SITE IMPROVEMENTS.



   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall conform to the
following regulations:



   (A)   The area shall be permanently paved and maintained and shall
have adequate and safe ingress and egress. Parking spaces required in
connection with one- or two-family dwelling uses need not be permanently
paved. For the purposes of this section, the term PAVING shall mean a
uniform, hard, smooth covering which will bear travel by vehicles or by
pedestrians in all seasons, which includes concrete, bituminous concrete,
oil-penetrated gravel, brick and paving stone but shall not include such
materials as gravel, crushed clamshells or any other similar material. The
use of porous pavements, space paving blocks or similar pavements which
provide for infiltration of ground water are permitted, provided they will
result in a durable and dust-free surface.



   (B)   Where an off-street parking or loading area adjoins or lies
within a residential district or abuts a residential use in any zoning
district, a landscaped buffer strip of not less than 20 feet in width
containing a double row of compact evergreen vegetative screening not less
than four feet in height shall be erected and maintained between such area
and the adjoining residential district or use. This screening requirement
shall not apply to parking places required in connection with dwelling uses,
except motels or hotels.



   (C)   Lighting fixtures used to illuminate the parking or loading
area shall reflect the light away from adjoining property and away from
adjacent streets and shall not exceed one foot candle projection onto
abutting property.



   (D)   No off-street parking facility shall be located closer than
ten feet to any front lot line, street line, rear lot line or side lot line
in any commercial or industrial zoning district.



   (E)   Access driveways serving any required parking lot from a
street shall not be less than 12 feet in width for one-way traffic, and not
less than 24 feet in width for two-way traffic.



   (F)   Individual parking stalls shall be no less than nine feet wide
and 18 feet in length and in no case shall the gross area of parking space
including aisles be less than 162 square feet per car. Aisles between rows of
parking stalls shall not be less than 12 feet for one-way traffic, and not
less than 24 feet for two-way traffic.



   (G)   All parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision and Development of Land. 
Design of landscaping area(s) as bio-retention cells to accept and infiltrate
stormwater runoff is encouraged whenever site conditions allow.



   (H)   Handicapped parking spaces accessible to disabled persons
shall be provided as may be applicable under the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) and any federal or state regulations promulgated thereunder.



   (I)   All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be
suitably sloped and drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to
abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, so as not to cause any
nuisance to adjacent or public property. The design of all parking lot
drainage shall conform to the Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision
and Development of Land and Chapter 153 of this code.



   (J)   All off-street parking and loading facilities shall maintain
distances from buildings, fire hydrants, post indicator valves and emergency
access ways as required by the applicable Fire Code.



   (K)   No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be
permitted in conjunction with parking or loading facilities provided in
commercial districts, except emergency repair service necessary to start
vehicles.



   (L)   Any parking area and loading space as defined in this chapter
shall be continually maintained in satisfactory condition so as to be safe
and attractive and free of hazard, nuisance, weeds, overgrown grass or other
unsafe condition.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1302  LOCATION OF FACILITY.



   All parking and loading facilities required by this chapter shall be
located on the same lot as the principal use it is intended to serve. Shared
parking facility plans may be approved as part of the development plan review
process. Parking plans shall be a part of overall site planning and shall be
subject to review and approval by the Planning Board. All parking shall be in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision and
Development of Land.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1303  SUBMISSION OF PLANS.



   Plans and specifications for the required parking or loading facility
shall be submitted at the time of application for a building permit for the
main use or at the time of application for development plan review pursuant
to § 305.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1304  MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   The following minimum off-street parking space requirements shall apply
to all principal and accessory uses. The total parking spaces provided shall
not exceed 150% of the minimum number required, except that for retail uses
the total parking spaces shall not exceed 125% of the minimum number required.



 


MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM OFF-STREET
PARKING REQUIREMENTS




Type of Use
(Principal and Accessory)

 

Minimum Parking Spaces Required





Residential dwellings, except elderly housing
 
2 spaces per dwelling


Elderly housing
 
1 space per dwelling unit


Hotel or motel with restaurant/meeting room
 
5 spaces plus 1 space per unit


Hotel or motel only
 
4 parking spaces plus 1 per unit


Extractive and  industrial non-manufacturing; manufacturing  uses;
transportation, communication and utilities; wholesale commercial
 
1 space for every 2 employees on the largest shift for which the building is
designed, plus 1 for each motor vehicle maintained or used on the premises
(minimum of 4 total spaces)


Automobile service stations
 
1 for each employee, minimum 2; plus 4 for each service bay


Gas station/mini-mart
 
1 for each employee plus 3 each 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA (not to include parking
at the pumps)


Lunchrooms, restaurants, taverns, etc.
 
1 space for each 3 persons of total capacity


Large scale shopping center
 
2.5 for each 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area (GFA)


Small scale shopping center
 
3 for each 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area (GFA)


General retail/all other commercial uses
 
4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable floor area (GFA)




 



 


MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM OFF-STREET
PARKING REQUIREMENTS




Type of Use
(Principal and Accessory)

 

Minimum Parking Spaces Required





Boarding and rooming houses
 
2 spaces plus 1 for each room


Personal, Business and Professional Services


Offices, public or professional administration or service buildings
 
3 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA


Banks, financial institutions and similar uses
 
4 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA


ATM machine
 
2 per machine


Theaters, concert halls, auditoriums and similar uses
 
1 for each 3 seats of total capacity


Bowling alleys
 
4 for each alley or lane plus 1 additional space for each 100 sq. ft. of the
floor area used for restaurant, cocktail lounge or similar use


Funeral parlors, mortuaries and similar uses
 
1 for each 3 seats total capacity


Unspecified personal and business uses
 
4 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA


Government, Institutional and Educational


Churches and other places of religious assembly
 
1 for each 5 seats


Hospitals
 
1 for each bed


Rest, retirement, convalescent or nursing homes and similar uses
 
1 for each 3 beds


Medical and dental offices
 
1 for every 100 sq. ft. floor area of examination, treating room, office and
waiting room (Minimum of 4 spaces)


Libraries, museums and art galleries
 
1 for each 400 sq. ft. floor area (Minimum of 4 spaces)


Elementary schools (private)
 
2 for each classroom plus 1 for every 5 seats in auditoriums or assembly halls


High schools (private, except boarding schools)
 
1 for every 10 students or 1 for every 5 seats in auditoriums or assembly
halls, whichever is greater


Business, technical and trade
 
1 for each 2 students


Colleges, universities (private)
 
1 for each 2 students


Kindergartens, child care centers, nursery schools and similar uses
 
2 for each classroom but not less than 6 for the building


Recreation
 



Marina or yacht club
 
1.5 spaces per boat slip


Athletic fields and courts
 
1 space for each 4 persons of total capacity


Swimming pool, ice rink, public or community club or hall
 
1 for each 5 persons capacity plus one 1 for each 4 seats; or 1 for each 30
sq. ft. floor area used for seating purposes, whichever is greater




 



 


MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM OFF-STREET
PARKING REQUIREMENTS




Type of Use
(Principal and Accessory)

 

Minimum Parking Spaces Required





Recreation (Cont'd)


Golf course (18 holes)
 
80 spaces


Golf course (18 holes) with dining facilities add:
 
1 space for each 3 persons of total capacity


Health club
 
1 for every 250 sq. ft. of GFA plus 5 employee spaces


Golf driving range
 
2 plus 1 per tee


Miniature golf
 
1.25 per hole plus 2 for employees




 



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 2011-12, passed 11-21-11)



§ 1305  OFF-STREET LOADING - APPLICABILITY.



   No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be erected or
used for nonresidential purposes in any zoning district unless the off-street
loading spaces required herein are provided. Off-street loading spaces as
specified in this chapter shall be provided for any enlargement or
alterations to any such existing structure of use. These off-street loading
requirements shall not apply to residential uses except motels or hotels.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1306  OFF-STREET LOADING - LOCATION.



   No off-street loading spaces required by this chapter shall be located
closer than ten feet to any front lot line, street line or side lot line in
any zoning district. Off-street loading spaces may be located closer than ten
feet to any rear lot line, provided, however, that if the use lies within a
residential zoning district, or the rear lot line abuts a residential zoning
district or existing residential use, said off-street loading space shall be
screened from said adjacent residential district or use as required in §
1301(B).



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1307  OFF-STREET LOADING - REQUIREMENTS.



   Each nonresidential use or structure in which services or commodities
are used, sold, displayed, serviced, repaired, altered or fabricated as the
principal or special use permit use of the parcel or lot shall provide the
following:



   (A)   Each use or structure of under 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area or ground area shall provide one off-street loading space of at
least 300 square feet in area.



   (B)   Each use or structure of over 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area or used ground area shall provide one off-street loading space, plus one
additional loading space for each 20,000 square feet of area. Each loading
space shall have a minimum area of 450 square feet, with a minimum vertical
clearance of 14 feet and shall include sufficient space for standing, loading
and unloading of commercial vehicles.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 14  MOTELS AND HOTELS



§ 1400  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to encourage the appropriate use of
land for the development of motels and hotels and to provide well-designed
and convenient tourist accommodations within the town.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1401  PROCEDURE FOR PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.



   No building permit shall be granted for the construction of a motel or
hotel until the Zoning Board of Review shall grant a special use permit
therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon receipt of a
completed application as required by § 1403, the Zoning Board shall refer
two copies of the application to the Middletown Planning Board for site plan
review, who shall make a written report to the Zoning Board within 45 days of
receipt of the application. The Zoning Board shall then hold a public hearing
on the application for a special use permit. Where the decision of the Zoning
Board of Review differs from the recommendations of the Planning Board, the
reasons therefor shall be clearly stated in writing.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1402  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.



   An application for a special use permit to construct a motel or hotel
shall contain, as a minimum, development plans and supplementary information
as required by § 305, plus the following:



   (A)   Preliminary architectural drawings of all buildings;



   (B)   Location, dimensions and nature of all signs which would
require a building permit;



   (C)   Description of proposed accessory uses and interior and
exterior areas devoted to such uses;



   (C)   Description of proposed method of sale or rental of units;
duration of lease agreements; proposals for time share estate, if any.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1403  STANDARDS OF DEVELOPMENT.



   The following standards of development shall apply to all motels and
hotels.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1404  MINIMUM LOT SIZE.



   Minimum zoning lot size for a hotel or motel use shall be as set forth
in § 603.  In addition, no hotel or motel shall provide less than 1,000
square feet of land per room or unit.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1405  UNIT SIZE.



   No individual motel unit or hotel room shall be erected or altered so
as to have a floor area of less than 240 square feet, including bathroom and
closet space.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1406  BUFFER ZONES.



   In all zoning districts where permitted, a minimum ten-foot wide
landscaped or natural buffer zone shall be required along all property lines
and no building, parking area or aboveground structure shall be permitted in
any such buffer zone; provided, that wherever such buffer zone abuts a
nonresidential zoning district or use, the Zoning Board of Review may allow
such buffer zone to be used for these purposes. Along street lines, a minimum
ten-foot buffer zone shall be required, except for necessary access
driveways. Such buffer zones shall be planted with natural landscape
materials, screen planting, fencing or trees so as to provide a natural
buffer between hotel and motel uses and adjacent streets or property.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1407  UTILITIES.



   Where public sewers or public water lines exist, any motel or hotel use
shall be required, at its own expense, to connect to such utilities. Where
such sewers or water lines are not available, but are planned or shall be
extended to serve the development, the Zoning Board may prescribe, as a
condition of approval, that such utilities be provided at the developer's
expense. The applicant is required to obtain evidence that the public water
lines have adequate capacity to service the motel or hotel and that the sewer
system has adequate capacity to transmit and treat wastewater generated from
the project. At the discretion of the Public Works Director, a holding tank,
capable of storing the anticipated 24-hour sewer flow from the project may be
required.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1408  KITCHEN FACILITIES.



   Individual rooms or units in a hotel or motel are permitted to contain
kitchen facilities, kitchenettes or kitchen/dining areas intended for the
exclusive use of transient guests, subject to the following provisions:



   (A)   Kitchen facilities shall not be designed or used for the
provision of housekeeping facilities capable of long-term residential use;



   (B)   Kitchen facilities shall be clearly subordinate to the
principal use for transient sleeping and bath accommodations;



   (C)   No more than 50% of the rooms or units in a hotel or motel
shall contain kitchen facilities;



   (D)   Extended stay hotels or motels may incorporate kitchen
facilities in all rooms.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1409  ACCESSORY USES.



   Any use normally associated with, and subordinate to, the principal use
of the premises for hotel and motel accommodations, including but not limited
to necessary office, recreation, parking and maintenance areas, lunchroom,
restaurant, cocktail lounge or gift shop shall be considered an accessory
use. The total floor area of all interior accessory uses shall not exceed 20%
of the floor area of the principal use.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 15  MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS



§ 1500  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to encourage the appropriate use of
land for the development of multifamily housing, taking into consideration
the natural amenities of the site. No multifamily dwelling structure or
multifamily dwelling project shall be erected or otherwise created except in
accordance with the standard set forth in this subchapter, or, where
applicable, in accordance with the requirements of Article 27A Mixed-Use
Development Projects.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08; Am. Ord. 2018-16,
passed 9-4-18)



§ 1501  PROCEDURES FOR PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.



   For multifamily structures or dwelling projects, no building permit
shall be granted for the construction thereof until the Zoning Board of
Review shall grant a special use permit or, for conservation developments,
the Planning Board has approved a land development project in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.



   (A)   Conventional development - special use permit required.  Upon
receipt of a completed application as required by § 1502, the Zoning Board
shall refer two copies of the application to the Middletown Planning Board
for development plan review, who shall make a written report to the Zoning
Board within 45 days of receipt of plans. The Zoning Board shall then hold a
public hearing on the application for a special use. Where the decision of
the Zoning Board of Review differs from the recommendations of the Planning
Board, the reasons therefor shall be clearly stated in writing.



   (B)   Conservation development - land development project approval
required. Review of multifamily dwellings in conservation developments shall
take place in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 19 and with
the Middletown Subdivision and Land Development Regulations.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1502  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   An application to construct a multifamily dwelling project or structure
shall contain, at a minimum, development plans and supplementary information
as required by § 305, plus the following:



   (A)   Computation of projected sewage volumes and sewage flow
calculations, along with a letter from the town's Director of Public Works,
to be obtained by the applicant, rendering an opinion as to the adequacy of
the proposed sewer size, design and the ability of the public sewer system to
accept and adequately treat projected volumes and flows.



   (B)   Computation of water usage, along with a letter from the City
of Newport Water Department, to be obtained by the applicant, rendering its
opinion as to the adequacy of the supply of water and the pressure in the
water system to serve the calculated needs of the project.



   (C)   Written comments from the Middletown Fire Department regarding
adequacy of fire safety provisions.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1503  STANDARDS OF DEVELOPMENT.



   The following standards of development shall apply to all multifamily
dwelling structures or projects.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1504  ALLOWABLE DENSITY.



   (A)   In addition to the dimensional regulations provided in § 603,
the following provisions will govern the maximum density of residential land
use which may be developed in any conventional multifamily dwelling structure
or project. Density of townhouses in conservation developments shall be
governed by the conventional yield plan.



 


Minimum Developable Land Area per Dwelling Unit 6,000 sq. ft.

More details below:




Zoning District

 

Studios and 1 Bedroom

 

2 Bedrooms

 

3 or More Bedrooms



RM, LB
 

6,000

 

8,000

 

10,000




 



   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, a BEDROOM shall be defined
as a room or portion of a room of at least 70 square feet floor area within a
dwelling unit allocated to sleeping, dressing and personal care.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1505  OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Conventional development.



      (1)   Open space shall be provided in the same lot as the
principal building(s) for the use and enjoyment of the residents. Said open
space shall be defined as all land area uncovered by buildings or vehicular
traffic, maneuvering or parking, including garages. Covered open space may be
counted as one-half for required open space area, and includes roofed porches
or patios, covered exterior balconies, breezeways, etc., which are open on
the sides and closed to the sky.



      (2)   Minimum open space requirements are expressed as a ratio
of the area of open space to the total floor area for residential use on the
several floors of a multifamily building. The ratio is measured from the
faces of the exterior walls, including halls, lobbies, stairways, basements
and storage areas, but excluding any floor area for common use of all
occupants such as recreation or laundry, and also excluding unused attic
space, garages or carports or areas used for major mechanical equipment.



 


MINIMUM OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS




Minimum Open Space Requirements
(Ratio of Open Space Divided by Floor Area)



Multifamily dwelling project
 

3.0



Multifamily dwelling structure
 

1.5




 



   (B)   Conservation development.  Open space for townhouses in
conservation subdivisions shall be governed by Article 19 and by Section
514.1 of the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1506  UTILITIES.



   (A)   No multifamily dwelling project or structure shall be
permitted unless each dwelling unit is serviced by public water and public
sewer systems of adequate capacity.



   (B)   All multifamily dwelling projects or structures shall provide
for the safe and adequate disposal of surface water runoff as required by
Chapter 153 of this code.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1507  OFF-STREET PARKING.



   In addition to the requirements of Article 13, the following off-street
parking requirements shall apply to multifamily dwelling structures and
projects:



   (A)   No off-street parking facility except driveways shall be
located closer than 25 feet to any lot line in a multifamily dwelling
project, or closer than ten feet to any lot line for a multifamily dwelling
structure.



   (B)   No off-street parking area shall be located within 25 feet of
any wall of a principal building (except a garage) used for residential
purposes along which is located an entrance or exit generally intended for
use by residences thereof or along which are located windows serving
habitable rooms less than ten feet above the ground.



   (C)   All parking areas shall be adequately landscaped and no rows
or parking spaces shall exceed 100 feet without a landscape separation of at
least ten feet in width. There shall be a separation of at least ten feet
between rows.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1508  BUILDING DESIGN AND LOCATION.



   (A)   In multifamily dwelling projects, principal buildings shall be
separated from any other principal building by a minimum of 50 feet. Where
the building walls of two adjacent buildings contain no windows serving
habitable rooms, buildings may be separated by not less than 25 feet.



   (B)   No facade of any principal building in any multifamily
dwelling project or structure shall exceed 80 lineal feet without a building
jog of at least 45 degrees for a building having two wings, or 30 degrees for
a building having three or more wings.



   (C)   For townhouses in conservation developments, the minimum
distance between any two rows of buildings substantially parallel to each
other shall be 100 feet. The minimum distance between two abutting ends of
buildings in the same general plane or row shall be 50 feet.



   (D)   Each townhouse unit in a conservation development (CSD) shall
be provided with its own lot. Such lot shall contain the entire ground area
covered by the principal building and may, in addition, contain private open
space, courtyards, patios, decks, parking areas, or garages. Density shall be
calculated using the area of developable land for the entire parcel.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



ARTICLE 16  ACCESSORY FAMILY DWELLING UNIT



§ 1600  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to allow parent(s), grandparent(s),
children or grandchildren of owner-occupant of single-family dwellings to
live in a separate dwelling unit within the principal dwelling, without
converting the principal dwelling into a two-family dwelling.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1601  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No part of any dwelling shall be used as an accessory family
dwelling unit until the Zoning Board of Review has granted a special use
permit under Article 9; all requirements of this subchapter are satisfied;
and the Zoning Officer has issued a certificate of zoning compliance under §
311.



   (B)   The total floor space devoted to an accessory family dwelling
unit shall not exceed 35% of the floor area of the entire dwelling exclusive
of porches, decks or basements, and shall be a minimum of 400 square feet in
gross floor area. Only one accessory family dwelling unit is permitted in a
principal dwelling unit, and the accessory family dwelling unit shall have no
more than one bedroom and shall not have a separate outside door on the front
of the building. The property containing an accessory family dwelling unit
shall retain the appearance and character of a single-family property.



   (C)   The right to use part of a single-family dwelling as an
accessory family dwelling unit shall automatically be terminated when the
accessory unit is no longer occupied by parent(s), grandparent(s) children or
grandchildren of the primary dwelling occupant.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1602  PROCEDURE.



   In addition to satisfying the requirements of § 305, a certificate of
zoning compliance for an accessory family dwelling unit shall not be issued
until the following requirements are satisfied.



   (A)   The owner-occupant shall sign an affidavit stating that the
accessory unit will be occupied only by one or both parent(s),
grandparent(s), children or grandchildren of an occupant of the principal
dwelling unit. The affidavit shall also identify such parent(s),
grandparent(s), children or grandchildren by name and identify the principal
occupant whose parent(s), grandparent(s), children or grandchildren will
occupy the accessory unit. Such affidavits shall be filed in the Town Clerk's
records and shall be available for public inspection; and



   (B)   The foregoing affidavit shall be accompanied by a surety
deposit of $100 which shall be refunded if and when the owner-occupant gives
proper notice to the town pursuant to § 1603 that the use of part of the
principal dwelling for an accessory family dwelling unit has been abandoned.
Such security deposit shall be forfeited if the owner-occupant fails to give
proper notice to the town pursuant to § 1603 that no parent(s),
grandparent(s), children or grandchildren identified in the affidavit
continues to occupy the accessory unit. If such notice is not given and the
accessory family dwelling unit is occupied by one or more persons who are not
parent(s), grandparent(s), children or grandchildren, the owner-occupant, in
addition to forfeiting the surety deposit, shall be subject to the
enforcement provisions of § 316.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1603  CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY.



   If an accessory family dwelling unit is no longer occupied by
parent(s), grandparent(s) children or grandchildren of an adult occupant of
the principal dwelling unit, an adult owner-occupant of the principal
dwelling unit shall within 30 days sign an amended affidavit. The amended
affidavit shall either identify the current occupants of the accessory unit,
in accordance with § 1602, or state that the use of part of the principal
dwelling for an accessory family dwelling unit has been abandoned. This
division shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership and/or occupancy of the
primary dwelling provided that at approximately the same time the accessory
unit is occupied by one or both parent(s), grandparent(s), children or
grandchildren of the new owner-occupants of the primary unit.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 17  LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING - COMPREHENSIVE PERMIT



§ 1700  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is intended to provide for the establishment of housing
opportunities for low and moderate income individuals and families in order
to meet the need for affordable, accessible, safe, and sanitary housing for
citizens of low and moderate income in accordance with Middletown's
Affordable Housing Plan.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1701  AUTHORITY.



   In accordance with R.I. Gen. Laws Title 45, Chapter 53, the "Low and
Moderate Income Housing Act", the Middletown Planning Board shall have the
power to issue a comprehensive permit for a qualifying low-and
moderate-income housing project. The comprehensive permit shall include all
permits or approvals from any local board or official who would otherwise act
with respect to such application including, but not limited to, the power to
attach to the permit or approval conditions and requirements with respect to
setbacks, height, site plan, size, shape, building materials, landscaping,
and parking consistent with the terms of the Act.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1702  ELIGIBILITY.



   Any applicant proposing a development or redevelopment project in which
at least 25% of the housing is low or moderate-income housing as defined in
this subchapter may submit to the local review board a single application for
a comprehensive permit.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1703  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.  For proposes of this subchapter, the Town
Planner is designated as the Administrative Officer.



   AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN. The town's Five Year Affordable Housing Action
Plan.



   APPLICANT.  An  applicant for comprehensive permit approval by the
Planning Board, which also includes his/her authorized agents or
representatives.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Town of Middletown Comprehensive Community Plan
(1992); and any amendments thereto as adopted by the Town Council.



   INFEASIBLE. Any condition brought about by any single factor or
combination of factors, as a result of limitations imposed on the development
by conditions attached to the zoning approval, to the extent that it makes it
impossible for a public agency, nonprofit organization, or limited equity
housing cooperative to proceed in building or operating low or moderate
income housing without financial loss, within the limitations set by the
subsidizing agency of government, on the size or character of the
development, on the amount or nature of the subsidy, or on the tenants,
rentals, and income permissible, and without substantially changing the rent
levels and unit sizes proposed by the public agency, nonprofit organization,
or limited equity housing cooperative.



   LOCAL BOARD.  Any town official, zoning board of review, planning
board, board of appeal or zoning enforcement officer, local conservation
commission, historic district commission, or other municipal board having
supervision of the construction of buildings or the power of enforcing land
use regulations, such as subdivision, or zoning laws.



   LOW OR MODERATE INCOME HOUSING. Any housing whether built or operated
by any public agency or any nonprofit organization or by any limited equity
housing cooperative or any private developer, that is subsidized by a
federal, state, or municipal government subsidy under any program to assist
the construction or rehabilitation of housing affordable to low or moderate
income households, as defined in the applicable federal or state statute, or
local ordinance and that will remain affordable through a land lease and/or
deed restriction for 99 years or such other period that is either agreed to
by the applicant and town or prescribed by the federal, state, or municipal
government subsidy program but that is not less than 30 years from initial
occupancy.



   LETTER OF ELIGIBILITY. A letter issued by the Rhode Island Housing and
Mortgage Finance Corporation in accordance with R.I. Gen. Laws §
42-55-5.3(a).



   LOCAL REVIEW BOARD. Middletown Planning Board.



   MEETING HOUSING NEEDS. Adoption of the implementation program of an
approved affordable housing plan and the absence of unreasonable denial of
applications that are made pursuant to an approved affordable housing plan in
order to accomplish the purposes and expectations of the approved affordable
housing plan.



   MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT SUBSIDY. Assistance that is made available through
a city or town program sufficient to make housing affordable, as affordable
housing is defined in R.I. Gen. Laws  § 42-128-8.1(d)(1); such assistance
may include, but is not limited to, direct financial support, abatement of
taxes, waiver of fees and charges, and approval of density bonuses and/or
internal subsidies, and any combination of forms of assistance.



   PROJECT.



      (1)   Major project.  A comprehensive permit application
involving a major subdivision or land development project.



      (2)   Minor project.  A comprehensive permit application
involving one or more of the following that is not a MAJOR PROJECT:



         (a)   Minor subdivision or land development project;



         (b)   Request for zoning variance;



         (c)   Request for special use permit;



         (d)   Request for relief from other local regulations or
ordinances not outlined above.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1704  PROCEDURE.



   Any applicant proposing to build low or moderate income housing may
submit to the local review board a single application for a comprehensive
permit to build that housing in lieu of separate applications to the
applicable local boards. This procedure is only available for proposals in
which at least 25% of the housing is low or moderate income housing. The
application and review process for a comprehensive permit shall be as follows.



   § 1704.1  Application.



      (A)   Pre-application conference.



         (1)   Prior to submission of the comprehensive permit
application, the applicant shall first schedule a pre-application conference
with the administrative officer. Members of the Planning Board, the Technical
Review Committee, the Administrative Officer and other local officials as
appropriate may participate in the pre-application conference.



         (2)   To request a pre-application conference, the
applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer a short description of
the project in writing including the number of units, type of housing, as
well as a location map. The purpose of the pre-application conference shall
be to review the concept plan of the proposed development, and to allow town
officials and staff to provide guidance to the applicant.



         (3)   The Administrative Officer shall schedule the
pre-application conference to be held within 30 days of receipt of the
applicant's request, if 30 days has elapsed from the filing of the request
for pre-application conference and no pre-application conference has taken
place, nothing shall be deemed to preclude an applicant from thereafter
filing and proceeding with an application for a comprehensive permit.



      (B)   Submission requirements. All applications for
comprehensive permits shall include:



         (1)   A completed "Application for Comprehensive Permit"
form;



         (2)   A letter of eligibility issued by the Rhode Island
Housing Mortgage Finance Corporation, or in the case of projects primarily
funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or other state
or federal agencies, an award letter indicating the subsidy, or application
in the form of a letter, or such other form as may be prescribed, for a
municipal government subsidy;



         (3)   A written request to the local review board to
submit a single application to build or rehabilitate low or moderate income
housing in lieu of separate applications to the applicable local boards. The
written request shall identify the specific sections and provisions of
applicable local ordinances and regulations from which the applicant is
seeking relief;



         (4)   A proposed timetable for the commencement of
construction and completion of the project;



         (5)   A sample land lease or deed restriction with
affordability liens that will restrict use as low and moderate income housing
in conformance with the guidelines of the agency providing the subsidy for
the low and moderate income housing, but for a period of not less than 30
years;



         (6)   Identification of an approved entity that will
monitor the long-term affordability of the low and moderate income units;



         (7)   A financial pro-forma for the proposed development;



         (8)   Application fee, as established in this subchapter.



      (C)   Additional requirements. 



         (1)   In addition to the requirements of division (B)
above:



 


Low and Moderate Income Housing
Application Requirements




If a project requires:

 

The application shall include materials required by:





Zoning variance
 
Zoning Board's Variance, Special Use and Appeals Information and Instructions


Special use permit
 
Zoning Board's Variance, Special Use and Appeals Information and Instructions
Zoning Ordinance development plan review (DPR)


Development impact review
 
Zoning Ordinance development impact review


Administrative subdivision
 
Administrative Subdivision Checklist - Plat Checklist
(Appendix A - Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision of Land)


Minor subdivision or land development project
 
Minor Subdivision Checklist - Preliminary Plat Checklist
(Appendix A - Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision of Land)


Major subdivision or land development project
 
Major Subdivision Checklist - Master Plat Checklist
(Appendix A - Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision of Land),
except evidence of state and federal permits.




 



         (2)   Notwithstanding the submission requirements set
forth above, the Planning Board may request additional, reasonable
documentation throughout the public hearing, including, but not limited to,
opinions of experts, credible evidence of application for necessary federal
and/or state permits, statements and advice from other local boards and
officials.



         (3)   All required state and federal permits must be
obtained prior to the final plan approval or the issuance of a building
permit.



      (D)   Fees.  Fees shall be consistent with fees that would
otherwise be assessed for a project of the same scope and type but not
proceeding under this subchapter, provided, however, that the imposition of
such fees shall not preclude a showing by a non-profit applicant that the
fees make the project financially infeasible. Applications shall include fees
as follows:



 


Low and Moderate Income Housing Application Fees



For applications requiring:
 
Fees as established by:


Zoning variance or special use permit
 
Zoning Board - Fee schedule


Subdivision of land
 
Subdivision and Land Use Regulations - Appendix A


Development impact review
 
Zoning Ordinance development impact review



 



   § 1704.2  Certificate of completeness. 



      (A)   Applications for comprehensive permits shall be made to
the Administrative Officer, who shall review all applications for form and
content in conformity with the requirements set forth herein. Complete
applications shall then be officially filed for review by the Planning Board,
and the Administrative Officer shall stamp all such applications with the
date of official submission to the town. The application shall be certified
complete or incomplete by the administrative officer as follows:



         (1)   Minor project: Within 25 days;



         (2)   Major project: Within 30 days for a master plan
and within 45 days for a preliminary plan.



      (B)   The running of the time period set forth herein will be
deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the
application by the Administrative Officer and will recommence upon the
resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no
event will the Administrative Officer be required to certify a corrected
submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its
resubmission. If the Administrative Officer certifies the application as
incomplete, the Officer shall set forth in writing with specificity the
missing or incomplete items.



   § 1704.3  Notification.  Upon issuance of a certificate of
completeness for a comprehensive permit, the Planning Board shall immediately
notify each local board, as applicable, of the filing of the application, by
sending a copy to the local boards and to other parties entitled to notice of
hearings on applications under the zoning ordinance and/or land development
and subdivision regulations as applicable, and as further provided below.



   § 1704.4  Public hearing.



      (A)   Requirement. A public hearing, held in accordance with
the applicable state and local regulations, shall be held for all
comprehensive permit applications requiring one or more of the following:



         (1)   A special use permit;



         (2)   A zoning variance;



         (3)   Major or minor subdivision or land development
project approval.



      (B)   Procedure.  Public notice of the hearing shall be given
at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation within the town following the town's usual and customary
practices for such advertising. Notice shall be sent to the applicant and to
each abutter, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the time and
place of the hearing not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
Said notice shall also include the street address of the subject property, or
if no street address is available, the distance from the nearest existing
intersection in tenths of a mile. In addition, notice of public hearing shall
be sent:



         (1)   By first class mail to the city or town planning
board of any municipality where there is a public or quasi-public water
source, or private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a
public water source, located within 2,000 feet of the town's boundaries.



         (2)   To the governing body of any state or municipal
water department or agency, special water district, or private water company
that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed
that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source located within
either  the town or 2,000 feet of the town's boundaries, provided, that a
map survey has been filed with the building inspector as specified in R.I.
Gen. Laws § 45-24-53(E)



         (3)   To an adjacent municipality if:



            a.   The adjacent municipality is an abutter; or



            b.   The development site extends into the
adjacent municipality; or



            c.   There is a potential for significant negative
impact to the adjacent municipality.



         (4)   The cost of all notices for public hearings shall
be borne by the applicant.



   § 1704.5  Review. In taking final action on an application, the local
review board shall make positive findings, supported by legally competent
evidence on the record which discloses the nature and character of the
observations upon which the fact finders acted, on each of the following
standard provisions, where applicable:



      (1)   The proposed development is consistent with local needs
as identified in the local comprehensive community plan with particular
emphasis on the community's affordable housing plan and/or has satisfactorily
addressed the issues where there may be inconsistencies.



      (2)   The proposed development is in compliance with the
standards and provisions of the municipality's zoning ordinance and
subdivision regulations, and/or where expressly varied or waived local
concerns that have been affected by the relief granted do not outweigh the
state and local need for low and moderate income housing.



      (3)   All low and moderate income housing units proposed are
integrated throughout the development; are similar in scale and architectural
style to the market rate units within the project; and will be built and
occupied prior to, or simultaneous with the construction and occupancy of any
market rate units.



      (4)   There will be no significant negative environmental
impacts from the proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all
required conditions for approval.



      (5)   There will be no significant negative impacts on the
health and safety of current or future residents of the community, in areas
including, but not limited to, safe circulation of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, provision of emergency services, sewerage disposal, availability of
potable water, adequate surface water run-off, and the preservation of
natural, historical or cultural features that contribute to the
attractiveness of the community.



      (6)   All proposed land developments and all subdivisions lots
will have adequate and permanent physical access to a public street in
accordance with the requirements of R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-23-60(5).



      (7)   The proposed development will not result in the creation
of individual lots with any physical constraints to development that building
on those lots according to pertinent regulations and building standards would
be impracticable, unless created only as permanent open space or permanently
reserved for a public purpose on the approved recorded plans.



   § 1704.6  Decision.



      (A)   All local review board decisions on comprehensive
permits shall be by majority vote of the membership of the board and may be
appealed by the applicant to the state housing appeals board as provided in
this subchapter. Unless agreed to by both the applicant and the local review
board, the local review board shall render a decision as follows:



         (1)   For minor projects: Within 95 days after the
issuance of the certificate of completeness.



         (2)   For major projects: Within 120 days of issuance of
the certification of completeness.



      (B)   If the public hearing is not convened or a decision is
not rendered within the time allowed, the application is deemed to have been
allowed and the relevant approvals shall issue immediately.



      (C)   In reviewing the comprehensive permit request, the local
review board may deny the request for any of the following reasons:



         (1)   The town has an approved affordable housing plan
and is meeting housing needs, and the proposal is inconsistent with the
affordable housing plan;



         (2)   The proposal is not consistent with local needs,
including, but not limited to, the needs



identified in an approved comprehensive plan, and/or local zoning ordinances
and procedures promulgated in conformance with the comprehensive plan;



         (3)   The proposal is not in conformance with the
comprehensive plan;



         (4)   The community has met or has plans to meet the
goal of 10% of the year-round units as defined in R.I. Gen. Laws §
45-53-3(2)(i) being low and moderate income housing;



         (5)   Concerns for the environment and the health and
safety of current residents have not been adequately addressed.



   § 1704.7  Expiration.  A comprehensive permit shall expire unless
construction is started within 12 months and competed within 60 months of
final plan approval unless a longer and/or phased period for development is
agreed to by the local review board and applicant. Low and moderate income
housing units shall be built and occupied prior to, or simultaneous with the
construction and occupancy of any market rate units that are part of the
project.



   § 1704.8  Appeal.



      (A)   By applicant.  Whenever an application filed under the
provisions this subchapter is denied, or is granted with conditions and
requirements that make the building or operation of the housing infeasible,
the applicant has the right to appeal to the state housing appeals board
established by R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-53-7, for a review of the application.
The appeal shall be taken within 20 days after the date of the notice of the
decision by the local review board by filing with the state housing appeals
board a statement of the prior proceedings and the reasons upon which the
appeal is based.



      (B)   By aggrieved person.  Any person aggrieved by the
issuance of an approval may appeal to the Supreme Court as provided in the
applicable local or state regulation.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 17A  COMMUNITY RESIDENCES AND FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES



§ 17A00  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate community residences and
family day care homes to the maximum extent allowed by state law, in order
that residents, particularly those living in the immediate vicinity of a
proposed community residence or family day care home, have advance notice and
adequate opportunity to present to the Zoning Board of Review arguments for
or against the establishment of such a facility. The purpose is not to
exclude community residences or family day care homes from any district, but
to regulate their placement for the health, safety, and general welfare of
all residents, including those in the facility.



(Ord. 07-18, As Amended, passed 12-3-07)



§ 17A01  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Subject to § 17A02, no building shall be used as a community
residence or family day care home until the Zoning Board of Review has
granted a special use permit under Article 9 and all requirements of this
subchapter are satisfied.



   (B)   An application for a community residence must be accompanied
by a map showing the location of the proposed residence and of all other
community residences in the town that have been approved or established.



   (C)   An application for a community residence or family day care
home may not be denied based solely on the nature of the facility or its
residents or on the impact of the facility on property values in the area.



   (D)   An application for a community residence or family day care
home may be denied if the Board of Review finds that, because of its proposed
location or other factors external to the facility, it is likely to have a
substantial adverse effect on the peace and quiet enjoyment of other
residents in the neighborhood.



   (E)   The following factors are particularly relevant and shall be
addressed by the Board of Review in deciding an application for a community
residence or family day care home, in addition to relevant factors in § 902
that are consistent with this section:



      (1)   Parking and traffic conditions on adjacent roadways;



      (2)   The proximity of residential care and assisted living
facilities and senior independent living facilities;



      (3)   The proximity of hospitals, schools (including nursery
schools), and churches.



(Ord. 07-18, As Amended, passed 12-3-07)



§ 17A02  EXEMPTION.



   This subchapter does not apply to a residential facility in which six
or fewer children or adults with retardation reside which is licensed by the
state pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws, Title 40.1, Chapter 24.



(Ord. 07-18, As Amended, passed 12-3-07)



ARTICLE 18  SHOPPING CENTERS



§ 1800  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to encourage the effective and
timely development of land for commercial purposes in accordance with the
objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Community Plan; to encourage the
use of the business districts as a shopping and service center for the
community and nearby areas; and to minimize traffic congestion on the public
streets. All large scale and small scale shopping centers to be located in
the general or limited business districts shall conform with the provisions
of this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1801  PROCEDURE FOR PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   No building permit shall be granted for the construction of a
shopping center until the Zoning Board of Review grants a special use permit
in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Shopping center applications shall be subject to development
plan review as described in §§ 300 through 321.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1802  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Only those uses permitted in the General Business (GB) Zoning
District, and listed below, are permitted as a principal use of land in a
large scale or small scale shopping center in the GB district.



      (1)   General merchandise retail activities, including
department stores (storage areas not to exceed 30% of gross floor area);



      (2)   Supermarkets;



      (3)   Grocery stores, delicatessens, fish markets, fruit and
vegetable markets, bakeries, dairy products stores;



      (4)   Lunchrooms or restaurants (no alcoholic beverages);



      (5)   Lunchrooms or restaurants (alcoholic beverages);



      (6)   Taverns, cafes, clubs, bars or cocktail lounges
(alcoholic beverages);



      (7)   Packaged liquor stores;



      (8)   Laundries or dry cleaners, pick-up only (no plant), or
self-service laundromats;



      (9)   Beauty or barber shops,



      (10)   Duplicating, printing or photocopying services;



      (11)   Miscellaneous repair shops and related services
(non-vehicle);



      (12)   General professional offices;



      (13)   Bank or financial institutions;



      (14)   Motion picture theaters;



      (15)   Bowling alleys and billiard and pool parlors;



      (16)   Exercise center, gymnasium, sauna or court games; and



      (17)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to a use
permitted in the district and located on the same lot as the principal use.



   Only those uses listed in § 603 as permitted in the Limited Business
(LB) Zoning District are permitted as a principal use of land in a small
scale shopping center in the LB district.



   (B)   To prevent the operation of a principal use not permitted
under division (A) on land adjacent to a shopping center in such manner that
it appears to be a part of the shopping center:



      (1)   All principal uses established on land adjacent to a
shopping center, except uses specified in division (A), shall be separated by
permanent barriers from direct access to the shopping center property and to
any private road or right-of-way leading to said shopping center, with the
exception of one defined access way, not more than 50 feet in width.



      (2)   No sign shall be displayed on either a shopping center
property or on adjacent land, directing traffic between the shopping center
and any principal use on the adjacent land that is not a permitted use or a
use permitted in a shopping center by § 1804(A).



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any
land that was part of a shopping center, on or after September 17, 2001, may
be used only for permitted uses in that district, (and not special uses), and
those uses permitted in a shopping center pursuant to § 1804(A).



      (4)   Each of the requirements of this section is separate and
independent and judicial invalidation of one or more of these requirements
shall not invalidate the remainder.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1803  BUILDING SETBACK LINE.



   (A)   Small scale shopping centers. Lots shall have a setback for
all principal buildings from all street rights of way of at least ten feet
and no more than 50 feet. A strip of at least ten feet deep along the street
line shall be maintained as a landscaped buffer strip except for necessary
driveways.



   (B)   Large scale shopping centers. Lots shall have a setback for
all principal buildings from all street rights of way of at least ten feet
and no more than fifty feet. A strip of at least 25 feet deep along the
street line shall be maintained as a landscaped buffer strip except for
necessary driveways.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1804  SIDE AND REAR YARDS.



   (A)   Small scale shopping centers. Lots shall have side yards of at
least 20 feet and rear yards of at least 50 feet, and a strip ten feet in
width or depth along side and rear lot lines shall be maintained as a
landscaped buffer strip.



   (B)   Large scale shopping centers. Lots shall have side and rear
yards of at least 50 feet in width and a strip 20 feet in width or depth
along side and rear lot lines shall be maintained as a landscaped buffer
strip.



   (C)   The remaining area may be used for parking.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1805  SPECIAL BUFFER REQUIREMENTS ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   Along the boundary line adjacent to a residential zoning district or
use, a landscaped buffer zone shall be provided which shall be at least 50
feet in depth, measured from the property line, within which no off-street
parking or loading area shall be permitted.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1806  ACCESS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   Access barrier. Each zoning lot, with its buildings, other
structures and parking and loading areas, shall be physically separated from
each adjoining street by a curb or other suitable barrier against unchanneled
motor vehicle ingress and egress. Such barrier shall be located at the edge
of or within, a ten-foot deep strip along the property line. Except for the
access ways permitted by division (B) below, the barrier shall be continuous
for the entire length of the property line.



   (B)   Access ways. Each zoning lot shall have not more than two
access ways to any one street unless unusual circumstances demonstrate the
need for additional access points. Each access way shall comply with the
following requirements:



      (1)   The width of any access way leading to a public street
shall not exceed 25 feet at its intersection with the property line. Curb
return shall have a minimum radius of 30 feet.



      (2)   At its intersection with the property line, no part of
any access way shall be nearer than 100 feet to the intersection of any two
street right-of-way lines, nor shall any such part be nearer than 50 feet to
any side of rear property line.



      (3)   The location and number of access ways shall be so
arranged that they will reduce traffic hazards as much as possible.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1807  OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   All off-street parking spaces and servicing drives shall be
located within the boundaries of the property being developed as a shopping
center and provided for in accordance with Article 13 and this section.



   (B)   All off-street loading areas shall be provided in accordance
with Article 13. In addition, each shop or store shall have a rear or side
entrance that is accessible to a loading area and service drive. Service
drives shall be a minimum of 26 feet in width and, wherever practicable,
shall be in addition to, and not part of, the drives or circulation system
used by the vehicles of shoppers. The arrangement of truck loading and
unloading facilities for each shop or store shall be such that in the process
of loading or unloading, no truck will block or extend into any other private
or public drive or street used for vehicular circulation. Loading and
delivery zones shall be clearly marked.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1808  LIGHTING.



   All parking area and access ways shall be lighted at night during
business hours. All outside lighting shall be arranged and shielded to
prevent glare or reflection, nuisance, inconvenience or hazardous
interference of any kind on adjoining streets or residential properties.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1809  WASTE RECEPTACLE ENCLOSURES.



   Each building shall be provided with an enclosed waste receptacle and
enclosure of sufficient size to accommodate all trash and waste stored on the
premises.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1810  TRASH BURNERS AND INCINERATORS.



   There shall be no exterior burning of trash or rubbish on the premises.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 1811  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STAND-ALONE BUILDINGS.



   A separate building, such as a bank or restaurant, constructed on land
used for a shopping center, but not physically connected to other buildings
in the shopping center, shall not be approved unless both of the following
requirements are met:



   (A)   The area for the separate building, including parking, lanes
for drive-up windows, and the building itself, shall be clearly set off from
the remainder of the shopping center by a boundary consisting of asphalt or
concrete berms, tightly-spaced plantings, or other permanent and unobtrusive
means of separation, with not more than two openings for vehicular access to
the separate building. Signs shall be placed at each opening in the boundary
to clearly show drivers where to enter and exit the separate building area.



   (B)   The separate building shall be located at least 50 feet from
any other principal building in the shopping center, measured from the
boundary of the separate building area to the other building.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 19  CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT



§ 1900  GENERAL.



   (A)   No conservation subdivision/land development project (CSD)
shall be permitted in the town except in accordance with the standards and
procedures as set forth in this subchapter and in the Middletown Rules and
Regulations Regarding the Subdivision and Development of Land.



   (B)   Where this subchapter is in conflict with other provisions of
this chapter, the Middletown Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision
and Development of Land or other town regulations, this subchapter shall
prevail.



(Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1901  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of conservation subdivision/land development project
design are:



   (A)   To encourage the preservation of open space for its scenic
beauty and the appropriate use thereof;



   (B)   To preserve historical and archeological resources;



   (C)   To protect natural resources, including but not limited to
those containing woodlands, unique vegetation, streams, floodplains,
wetlands, recharge areas, agricultural lands, wellheads, and vernal pools, by
setting them aside from development;



   (D)   To protect the value of real property;



   (E)   To promote more sensitive siting of buildings and roads, and
better overall site planning;



   (F)   To provide a buffer between new development and existing
streets, neighborhoods active farmland, and adjacent park or conservation
land;



   (G)   To perpetuate the appearance of Middletown's traditional
rural/agricultural landscape;



   (H)   To allow landowners a reasonable return on their investment
while also reducing the infrastructure costs for development;



   (I)   To facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets,
utilities, and public services in a more economical and efficient manner;



   (J)   To offer an alternative to conventional subdivision
development;



   (K)   To provide for a diversity of lot sizes, building densities,
and housing choices to accommodate a variety of age and income groups, and
residential preferences, so that the population diversity of the community
may be maintained;



   (L)   To create neighborhoods with direct visual and/or physical
access to open land, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space,
and with a strong neighborhood identity;



   (M)   To implement adopted land use, transportation and community
service policies, as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1902  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to any project required to be developed as
a CSD by the Planning Board under the provisions of § 602 and the Rules and
Regulations Regarding the Subdivision and Development of Land. The process
for review and approval of conservation subdivision/land development projects
by the Planning Board is provided in the Rules and Regulations Regarding the
Subdivision and Development of Land .



(Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1903  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Open space.  Agriculture, recreation, and other conservation
uses are allowed within the designated open space in all CSD developments
consistent with the provisions of § 1905.



   (B)   Residential uses. Single- and two-family dwellings are
permitted in all residential zoning districts, allowed by special use permit
in the LB and OB Districts, and are prohibited in other commercial and
industrial districts. Multi-family (townhouse style) dwellings are permitted
in the R-30, R-20, R-10, RM districts, and by special permit in the LB and OB
districts. Other multifamily housing is not permitted.



   (C)   Commercial and industrial uses.  Uses in the GB, LB, OB, LI,
and OP districts shall be consistent with the provisions of § 602.



   (D)   Accessory uses.  Article 7 shall govern accessory uses.



(Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1904  DENSITY.



   (A)   Maximum density.  The maximum density for a conservation
development (CSD) shall not exceed what could reasonably be expected to be
developed on the site through conventional development. Maximum density shall
be determined through the yield density formula provided in the Rules and
Regulations Regarding the Subdivision and Development of Land or development
of a yield plan conforming to the dimensional requirements of § 603 and any
and all other applicable sections of this subchapter. The proponent shall
have the burden of proof with regard to the reasonableness and feasibility of
the basic maximum number of lots/units, provided, however, that the Planning
Board's determination of the basic maximum number shall be conclusive.



   (B)   Basic maximum number. The basic maximum number of units in a
CSD shall not exceed the maximum number of units permitted in a conventional
subdivision, regardless of the type of unit proposed. Calculations of maximum
dwelling units shall be based on permitted uses in § 602, and as follows:



      (1)   Residential uses. The basic maximum number of units in a
CSD shall not exceed the maximum number of units permitted in a conventional
subdivision, regardless of the type of unit proposed. Calculations of maximum
dwellings shall be based on permitted uses in § 602.



      (2)   Mixed residential uses. When the CSD includes a mix of
residential types, the total number of dwelling units shall be the maximum
allowed under § 603.  Each lot of the CSD shall conform to the applicable
dimension regulations of § 604.



      (3)   Nonresidential development. The development intensity
for a nonresidential land development project shall not exceed that which is
allowed under conventional development standards for the total area of land
in the CSD plan. All dimensional requirements of this subchapter as well as
parking, landscaping, safety, and other requirements must be met.



(Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1905  OPEN SPACE.



   Open space shall be provided and administered in accordance with
Section 514 of the Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision of Land.



   (A)   The required open space shall be a separate and distinct
lot(s) to which ownership shall be vested in a legally viable entity, which
shall be responsible for the use and maintenance of the open space. Ownership
of required open space shall be conveyed to one of the following:



      (1)   The town (if accepted for park, open space,
agricultural, or other specified use or uses);



      (2)   A nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which
is the conservation of open space or resource protection;



      (3)   A corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the
owners of lots or units within the development, or owners of shares within a
cooperative development (if such a corporation or trust is used, ownership
shall pass with conveyances of the lots or units); or



      (4)   Private ownership if the use is limited to agriculture,
habitat or forestry, as the town has set forth in the comprehensive plan and
zoning ordinance, and where private ownership is necessary for the
preservation and management of the agricultural, habitat or forest resources.



   (B)   In any case where the open space is not conveyed to the town:



      (1)   A restriction, in perpetuity, enforceable by the town or
by any owner of property in the conservation or other land development
project in which the land is located shall be recorded providing that the
land is kept in the authorized condition(s) and not built upon or developed
except as allowed by this section; and



      (2)   The developmental rights and other conservation
easements on the land may be held, in perpetuity, by a nonprofit
organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open
space or resource protection.



      (3)   All open space land provided by a conservation
development or other land development project shall be subject to a
town-approved management plan that will specify the permitted uses for the
open space.



   (C)    Amount required.  Open space lots may consist of developable
as well as unbuildable area such as wetlands; however, only the buildable
area shall be counted towards the requirements of this section. The amount of
developable land required to be preserved as open space shall comply with the
following table.



 


REQUIRED OPEN SPACE




Zoning District

 

Minimum Amount of Required Open Space



R60, R60A
 

45%



R40, R40A
 

40%



R30, R30A, R20, R20A
 

30%



R10, R10A, RM, RMA
 

20%



All commercial districts (business, industrial districts)
 

35%




 



   (D)   Use.



      (1)   Primary use of open space shall be limited to one or
more of the following:



         (a)   Natural areas.  Areas of significant or
outstanding natural value, conservation areas, wildlife preserves, bird
sanctuaries, or areas of scenic, historic or archaeological value;



         (b)   Open recreation uses of a non-commercial nature
occupying no more then 50% of the required open space, including playfields
and playgrounds, tennis or other outdoor court games, outdoor swimming pools,
golf courses, parks, and beaches or swimming pools;



         (c)   Open agricultural uses such as raising of crops,
orchards, nurseries, and tree farms, but excluding areas for buildings or
structures associated with commercial farms, greenhouses, or other commercial
uses;



         (d)   Buffer areas between adjacent or nearby
residential areas, or neighboring streets or property. Such buffer areas may
contain fences or other natural or architectural screens. Buffer areas shall
not constitute the majority of open space in a CSD;



         (e)   Landscaped areas such as lawns, fields, wooded
areas, plantings, gardens or courtyards;



         (f)   Pedestrian facilities such as walks, footpaths or
bridges incorporated into the overall open space plan.



      (2)   The following uses of open space may be permitted
subject to the limitations provided:



         (a)   Underground utilities and/or drainage facilities
such as stormwater retention or detention areas, provided that such
facilities are incorporated into the open space landscaping and occupy no
more than 20% of the required open space;



         (b)   Vehicular facilities such as driveways and parking
areas as may be necessary to provide access to open recreational uses and
consisting of no more than 10% of the required open space. Public streets or
areas within a public street right-of-way shall not be allowed within the
open space.



(Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



§ 1906  DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The development must meet the area, setbacks and other
dimensional requirements provided in § 604 or the commercial design
requirements contained in Article 5 of the Rules and Regulations Regarding
the Subdivision of Land, as applicable.



   (B)   Dimensional requirements for townhouse development as part of
a CSD are provided in Article 15.



(Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-08)



ARTICLE 20  CEMETERIES



§ 2000  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to allow for the use of private
property as cemeteries and burial grounds, to protect neighboring property
owners from undesirable development of property as a cemetery and to make the
use of properly for a cemetery in open space districts consistent with the
preservation-conservation aspect of open space zones. It does not pertain to
public or municipal cemeteries.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2001  PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS FOR PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.



   The following standards of development shall apply to all cemeteries.
No permit shall be granted for the construction of a cemetery until the
Building Inspector has received a development plan which demonstrates that
the following standards are met.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2002  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   An application for a permit to operate a cemetery shall contain, as a
minimum, a development plan and supplementary information as required by
Article 7, plus the following:



   (A)   A development plan showing the location and dimensions of
driveways through cemeteries or burial grounds; all aboveground watercourses,
underground watercourses where known; existing stone walls; areas or spaces
intended for the placement of graves, tombs, mausoleums, crypts,
columbariums, storage of crypts, equipment or fill; structures or parking
areas; required special purpose buffer zones and plans for regrading or
changing of grade of the premises;



   (B)   Plans for regrading or changing of grade of the premises;



   (C)   No cemetery shall change its operations and the location of
activities shown on the development plan without revising its plan and
obtaining approval of the Building Inspector for compliance with the
standards herein set forth.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2003  MINIMUM AREA.



   The minimum lot size for any property used as a cemetery shall be four
acres.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2004  SPECIAL PURPOSE BUFFER ZONE.



   All cemeteries shall have a minimum five-foot wide buffer zone from any
abutting property which shall not be used for graves, tombs, mausoleums,
crypts, columbariums, storage of crypts, equipment or fill, structures,
driveways or parking areas, but this section shall not preclude driveways
crossing through the special purpose buffer zone areas to access cemeteries.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2005  REGRADING.



   The regrading or changing of the grade of any cemetery or burial ground
shall be subject to the soil erosion and sedimentation ordinance of the
town.  Where soil conditions permit, all underground burial sites shall be
at least 24 inches below grade.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2006  ALTERATION OF WATERCOURSES.



   There shall be no alterations of streams, brooks, rivers, or other
above or underground watercourses running through any cemetery except as
permitted by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2007  ALTERATION OF EXISTING STONE WALLS.



   There shall be no alterations of existing stone walls running through
any cemetery or burial ground except as required for access or to repair.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2008  CREMATORIUM.



   No cemetery shall be permitted to have a crematorium.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2009  FUNERAL PARLORS.



   No funeral home or show room for caskets shall be allowed in any
cemetery.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2010  LOT COVERAGE.



   No cemetery shall be permitted to have lot coverage in excess of 5% of
the lot area, including the portion of lots covered by columbariums,
mausoleums and similar structures involving above ground burials.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2011  HEIGHT.



   No structure in any cemetery shall exceed 30 feet in height.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2012  EQUIPMENT.



   Construction equipment, backhoes, bulldozers, dump trucks, graders and
the like shall not be operated in any special use buffer zone except for
landscaping purposes. Such equipment shall not be used between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. during any day without special permit from the Town
Council. All equipment shall be operated in conformance with the town's
ordinances regulating noise.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2013  SECURITY.



   Vehicular access to cemeteries shall be blocked by gates, fences or
chains from sunset to 6:00 a.m. each day.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2014  ENFORCEMENT.



   This subchapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 21  RESIDENTIAL CARE AND ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES



§ 2100  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to encourage the appropriate use of
land for the development of residential care and assisted living facilities.
This subchapter recognizes a need for this particular housing alternative for
the elderly. The standards set forth in this subchapter are intended to
ensure that these developments provide a level of service and facilities to
accommodate the residents' needs and to also minimize any adverse effect of
the residential care and assisted living facility on surrounding properties.
It is the intention of these regulations to ensure that these facilities be
compatible with the general character of the surrounding area. This provision
recognizes that housing for the elderly customarily has less adverse impact
on surrounding properties than multifamily developments and, therefore,
deserves separate consideration.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2101  USES AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Building containing dwelling units may be single-family,
two-family or multifamily.



   (B)   Each dwelling unit, except for one unit that may be reserved
for an on-site manager, shall be occupied by persons who are 60 years of age
or older, persons of any age who require assisted care or persons of any age
who cannot or should not live alone because they require assistance with
daily living activities or health care.



   (C)   Community space consisting of a minimum of 15 square feet per
bedroom shall be required to provide social and recreational facilities for
the development.



   (D)   Buildings without kitchen facilities in every dwelling shall
contain congregate dining facilities providing regular daily meals for
residents. This requirement may also be met by one on-site central dining
facility if, in the opinion of the Zoning Board, the needs of the occupants
would be adequately met.



   (E)   Buildings that do not include laundry facilities within each
dwelling unit shall include adequate common laundry facilities within the
development.



   (F)   All structures, buildings and facilities within the
development shall be designed and operated for the project residents and
their guests only.



   (G)   Articles of incorporation, declaration of association,
by-laws, endowments, leases, deed restrictions and all similar documents
shall be reviewed for compliance with this subchapter by the Town Solicitor
as a condition of approval.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2102  PROCEDURE FOR PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.



   No building permit for a residential care and assisted living facility
shall be issued until the Zoning Board of Review has granted a special use
permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon receipt of a
completed application, the Zoning Board shall refer two copies of the
application to the Planning Board for development plan review. The Planning
Board shall submit a written report to the Zoning Board within 45 days of
receipt of application and plans. Upon receipt of the Planning Board's
report, the Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application. 
When the Zoning Board's decision differs from the recommendations of the
Planning Board, reasons shall be clearly stated in writing.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2103  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   In additions to the information required by § 305, an application for
a special use permit to construct a residential care and assisted living
facility shall contain a development plan, including the following:



   (A)   Building design and site layout shall show: public,
semi-private and private spaces, ensuring a sense of protection and community
identity; minimization of public barriers to handicapped residents; and
provision of plantings and landscaping which adequately buffer abutting
property;



   (B)   Computation of projected sewage volumes and sewage flow
calculations. The Town Engineer shall render an opinion as to the adequacy of
the proposed sewer size and design of the proposed sewer system and its
ability to accept the projected volumes and flows;



   (C)   Computation of projected water use, along with a letter from
the City of Newport Water Department, to be obtained by the applicant,
rendering its opinion as to the adequacy of the water supply and pressure in
the water system to serve the needs of the proposed facility;



   (D)   Written comments from the Middletown Fire Department regarding
adequacy of fire safety provisions;



   (E)   Planning Board shall also be charged with reviewing and
commenting on the architectural design of the project.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2104  STANDARDS OF DEVELOPMENT.



   The following standards of development shall apply to all residential
care and assisted living facility developments.



   (A)   No residential care and assisted living facility shall be
located on any lot of less than 100,000 square feet of developable land area.



   (B)   No lot on which a residential care and assisted living
facility is located shall have less than 2,000 square feet of developable
land area for each unit within the facility. Each bedroom shall be considered
a separate unit for the purpose of this section. For the purposes of this
subchapter, a BEDROOM shall be defined as any room or portion of a room of at
least 70 square feet within a dwelling unit allocated to sleeping, dressing
and/or personal care.



   (C)   Residential buildings shall be separated from any other
building by a minimum of 25 feet.



   (D)   Maximum lot coverage shall be 25%.



 


RESIDENTIAL CARE AND ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY SETBACK REQUIREMENTS



Setbacks shall be:


   Front
 

40 feet



   Side
 

20 feet



   Rear
 

50 feet



Maximum height shall be:
 

35 feet




 



   (E)   Open space shall be provided on the same lot as the principal
buildings(s) for the use and enjoyment of the residents. Said open space
shall be defined and regulated in accordance with regulation of open space
and open space standards of this chapter. An open space management plan shall
be reviewed by the Planning Board and Zoning Board as a condition of approval.



   (F)   No development or structure shall be permitted unless each
dwelling unit is serviced by public water and a sewage system of adequate
capacity.



   (G)   All developments shall provide for the safe and adequate
disposal of surface water runoff as provided for in § 715.



   (H)   Individual units may have a kitchenette facility with a
refrigerator and/or microwave oven. A kitchenette facility does not qualify
as a kitchen facility for purposes of § 2101(D).



   (I)   All units shall be handicapped accessible, designed with
handicap accessible doorways and bathrooms and shall include a functioning
emergency call system. Individual units in buildings containing four or more
units shall not have an exterior entrance or exit.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2105  OFF-STREET PARKING.



   The following off-street parking requirements shall apply to
residential care and assisted living facilities:



   (A)   One space per every three dwelling units;



   (B)   One space per employee per highest shift;



   (C)   No off-street parking facility, except driveways, shall be
located closer than 25 feet to any lot line;



   (D)   No off-street parking area shall be located within ten feet of
any wall of a residential building (except a garage) used for residential
purposes;



   (E)   All parking areas shall be adequately landscaped and no row of
parking spaces shall exceed 100 feet without a landscape separation of at
least ten  feet in width. There shall be a separation of at least ten feet
between rows.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 22  SENIOR INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITIES



§ 2200  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to provide a housing alternative
for persons aged 55 and older who wish to live in a community setting with
similar individuals. This subchapter recognizes a need for this particular
housing alternative. The standards set forth in this subchapter are intended
to ensure that these developments provide a quality of life and level of
service to accommodate the residents' needs and to also minimize any adverse
effect on surrounding properties. It is the intention of these regulations to
ensure that these facilities be compatible with the general character of the
surrounding area. This provision recognizes that housing for persons aged 55
or older customarily has less impact on the community and surrounding
properties than multifamily developments and, therefore, separate development
standards apply.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2201  USES AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Buildings containing dwelling units may be single-family,
two-family or contain up to six  dwelling units.



   (B)   Community space consisting of a minimum of 15 square feet per
bedroom shall be required to provide social and recreational facilities for
the development.



   (C)   The senior independent living facility shall be occupied only
by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older, provided that:



      (1)   At least 80% of the units are occupied by at least one
person 55 years of age or older per unit;



      (2)   The housing accommodations has significant facilities
and services designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons,
or if the provisions of those facilities and services is not practicable,
that the housing is necessary to provide important opportunities for older
persons; and



      (3)   The owner or manager has published and adhered to
policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent to provide housing for
persons 55 years of age or older.



   (D)   Buildings that do not include laundry facilities within each
dwelling unit shall include adequate common laundry facilities within the
development.



   (E)   All structures, building and facilities within the development
shall be designed and operated for the development's community and their
guests only.



   (F)   Articles of incorporation, declaration of association,
by-laws, endowments, leases, deed restrictions and all similar documents
shall be reviewed for compliance with this subchapter by the Town Solicitor
as a condition of approval, and shall include a recorded covenant or
restriction as to the age requirement in division (C).



(Ord. passed 10-30-06; Am. Ord., As Amended, passed 8-2-09)



§ 2202  PROCEDURE FOR PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.



   No building permit for a senior independent living facility shall be
issued until the Zoning Board of Review has granted a special use permit in
accordance with the provisions of the chapter. Upon receipt of the completed
application, the Zoning Board shall refer two copies of the application to
the Planning Board for development plan review. The Planning Board shall
submit a written report to the Zoning Board within 45 days receipt of the
application and plans. Upon receipt of the Planning Board's report, the
Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application. When the Zoning
Board's decision differs from the recommendations of the Planning Board,
reasons shall be clearly stated in writing.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2203  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to the information required by § 305, an application for
special use permit to construct a senior independent living facility shall
contain a development plan, including the following:



   (A)   Building design and site layout shall show: public,
semi-private spaces, ensuring a sense of protection and community identity;
minimization of public barriers to handicapped residents; and provision for
planting and landscaping which buffer abutting property by maintaining a
landscaped area of at least one and one-half of the required setback;



   (B)   Computation of the projected sewage volumes and sewage flow
calculations. The Town Engineer shall render an opinion as to the adequacy of
the proposed sewer size and the design of the proposed sewer system and its
ability to accept the projected volumes and flows;



   (C)   Computation of the projected water use, along with a letter
from the City of Newport Water Department, to be obtained by the applicant,
rendering its opinion as to the adequacy of the water supply and the pressure
in the water system to serve the needs of the proposed facility;



   (D)   Written comments from the Middletown Fire Department regarding
adequacy of fire safety provisions;



   (E)   Preliminary architectural drawings demonstrating that the
buildings will have exteriors of traditional building materials used in New
England, such as wood shingles and clapboards or materials closely resembling
these materials. Buildings shall have traditional roofs such as gable,
gambrel or hip. Roof pitches shall be greater than 8/10 for the majority of
the buildings. The architectural design shall be subject to the development
plan review and subject to the commercial development review standards of the
Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision of Land.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2204  STANDARDS OF DEVELOPMENT.



   The following standards of development shall apply to all senior
independent living facilities developments.



   (A)   No senior independent living facility shall be located on any
lot less than five acres of developable land area.



   (B)   (1)   No lot on which a senior independent living facility
is located shall have less than 8,000 square feet of developable land area
for each unit in the facility in an R-10 district, 15,000 square feet of
developable land area in an R-20 district, 22,500 square feet of developable
land area in an R-30 district and 30,000 square feet of developable land area
in an R-40 district.



      (2)   These land area requirements are the minimum required in
each underlying zoning district. No applicant for a development under the
provisions of this section shall be permitted to build more dwelling units
than the number of dwelling units (single-family, duplex, or multifamily)
that would be allowed on the subject property using the underlying zoning
designation, unless the applicant demonstrates in the development impact
statement, under § 305(A) using statistics for housing limited to persons
aged 55 or older, that the proposed development would have no greater impact
upon municipal services, facilities, traffic, and other terms listed in §
305(A) and (B).



   (C)   Developments which include both senior independent and
assisted living facilities must meet the appropriate standards for each type
unit.



   (D)   Residential buildings shall be separated from any other
building by a minimum of 25 feet and there will be no more than six units in
any building.



   (E)   Dimensions.



 

SENIOR INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITIES
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS



 
R-10
 
R-20
 
R-30
 
R-40




Maximum frontage on a public street
 
50 feet 
 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet


Maximum lot coverage shall be as follows:


   Buildings
 
25%
 
20%
 
20%
 
15%


   Additional impervious
 
40%
 
25%
 
25%
 
20%


Maximum building height
 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
35 feet


Maximum length of any side of any building
 
160 feet
 
160 feet
 
160 feet
 
160 feet




 



 


SENIOR INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITIES
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS





Setbacks shall be:


(1)   For buildings with 3 or less units:
 



      Front
 
50 feet


      Side
 
30 feet


      Rear
 
50 feet


(2)   For buildings of 4 or more units:
 



      Front
 
100 feet


      Side
 
40 feet


      Rear
 
60 feet




 



   (F)   No development or structure shall be permitted unless each
dwelling unit is serviced by public water and public sewage systems. The
applicant must demonstrate to the town's satisfaction that each system has
adequate capacity to serve the development.



   (G)   All developments shall provide for safe and adequate disposal
of surface water runoff as provided for in § 715.



   (H)   At least 20% percent of senior independent living facility
dwelling units shall have handicap accessible doorways and provisions for the
conversion of bathrooms to handicap accessible.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2205  OFF-STREET PARKING.



   The following off-street parking requirements shall apply to senior
independent living facility:



   (A)   Two spaces for every unit of senior independent living; there
will be one visitor space per unit which may be on driveways or common
parking areas;



   (B)   One space per employee per highest shift;



   (C)   No off-street parking facility, except driveways, shall be
located closer than 25 feet to any lot line;



   (D)   No off-street parking area shall be located within ten feet of
any wall of a senior independent living facility (except a garage) used for
residential purposes.



   (E)   All common parking areas shall be adequately landscaped and no
row of parking spaces shall exceed  100 feet without a landscape separation
of at least ten feet in width. There shall be a separation of at least ten
feet between rows of parking spaces. Parking areas shall comply with all
other landscaping requirements in this chapter.



   (F)   No common parking areas shall be located within ten feet of
any residential building.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 23  MOBILE HOME PARKS



§ 2300  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to regulate the location and design
of mobile home parks in such a manner as to create neighborhoods designed for
long-term residential occupancy, to ensure compatibility with surrounding
areas and with the natural environment, and to provide safe, sanitary and
attractive living conditions for occupants of mobile homes located in such
parks.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2301  PROCEDURES FOR PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.



   No building permit shall be granted for the construction of a mobile
home park until the Zoning Board of Review shall grant a special use permit
therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon receipt of a
completed application as required by § 2302, the Zoning Board shall refer
two copies of the application to the Planning Board for development plan
review, who shall make a written report to the Zoning Board within 45 days of
receipt of the application. The Zoning Board may then hold a public hearing
on the application for a special use permit. Where the decision of the Zoning
Board of Review differs from the recommendations of the Planning Board, the
reasons therefor shall be clearly stated in writing.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2302  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   An application for a special use permit to construct a mobile home park
shall contain, as a minimum, development plans and supplementary information
as required by § 902, plus the following:



   (A)   A development plan showing the location and dimensions of
streets and other roadways; lot or spaces intended for the placement of
mobile homes, required buffer zones, recreation areas and open space, and the
location and nature of all proposed land uses;



   (B)   Typical lot improvements to include lot dimensions, required
yards, setbacks and location of mobile homes, off- or on-street parking;



   (C)   A plan or other description indicating all utilities and
methods of sewage disposal and water supply;



   (D)   Proposals for garbage and trash removal, and outdoor storage;



   (E)   Evidence of compliance with all appropriate state laws and
regulations, particularly those dealing with licensure of mobile home parks;



   (F)   Preliminary architectural plans of any proposed permanent
buildings, such as community buildings, recreation halls or service buildings.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2303  STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT.



   The following standards of development shall apply to all mobile home
parks.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2304  MINIMUM AREA.



   A mobile home park shall contain a minimum of ten acres.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2305  WIDTH AND DEPTH.



   For purposes of the tract used for general vehicular entrances and
exits only, the lot width shall be a minimum of 50 feet; for portions
containing mobile home lots and buildings open generally to occupants, the
width of the lot shall be a minimum of 250 feet.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2306  BUFFERING.



   Along all exterior property lines of a mobile home park, a landscaped
buffer zone shall be maintained.



   (A)   Such buffer zone shall be no less than 100 feet wide along all
property lines.



   (B)   Such buffer zone shall be planted, screened, or otherwise
maintained in a natural condition in order to provide year round visual
obstruction of the mobile home lots from abutting land and streets. Such
buffer zone may be used for recreation of a non-intensive character provided,
however, that no structure be located thereon.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2307  RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE.



   At least 10% of the gross land area of the mobile home park shall be
reserved for recreational open space uses. Such recreation and open space may
be located within the required buffer zone required in § 2306.  However,
this figure is in addition to any other open areas required by yard
provisions or other sections of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2308  ACCESS.



   All mobile home parks shall have a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet on a
public street.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2309  LOT REQUIREMENTS.



   Individual mobile home lots or spaces which are leased as lots, within
mobile home parks shall conform to the following requirements:



   (A)   Lot size.  Each individual mobile home lot shall contain a
minimum area of 6,000 square feet.



   (B)   Lot width and depth. The minimum width of each mobile home lot
shall be 60 feet and the minimum depth of each lot shall be 100 feet.



   (C)   Required separation between mobile homes.



      (1)   Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from
other buildings by at least 30 feet.



      (2)   Any accessory structure which has a horizontal area
exceeding 25 square feet, is attached to a mobile home or located within ten
feet of a window, and has an opaque top or roof that is higher than the
nearest window shall, for purposes of all separation requirements, be
considered to be part of the mobile home.



   (D)   Setback. No mobile home shall be located closer than 20 feet
to a lot line abutting an internal street.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2310  STREET SYSTEM.



   All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient
vehicular access from abutting public streets. Alignment and gradient shall
be properly adapted to topography. Each mobile home lot shall have frontage
on an internal street.



   (A)   Access.



      (1)   Access to mobile parks shall be designed to minimize
congestion and hazards at the entrance and exit and allow free movement of
traffic on adjacent streets.



      (2)   The entrance street connecting the park streets with a
public street shall have a minimum street pavement width of 34 feet where
parking is permitted on both sides, or a minimum street pavement width of 28
feet where parking is limited to one side. Where the primary entrance street
is more than 100 feet long and does not provide access to abutting mobile
home lots within such distance, the minimum street pavement width may be 24
feet, provided parking is prohibited at both sides.



   (B)   Internal streets.  Surfaced streets shall be of an adequate
paved width to accommodate anticipated traffic, and in any case shall meet
the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   All streets except minor streets:  26 feet;



      (2)   Minor streets, no parking:  24 feet (acceptable only if
less than 500 feet long and serving less than 25 mobile homes or of any
length if one-way and providing access to abutting mobile home lots on one
side only);



      (3)   Dead end streets shall be limited in length to 1,000
feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an
outside pavement diameter of at least 60 feet.



   All surfaced streets shall be constructed in a manner consistent with
§ 1301(A).



   (C)   Required off-street parking areas.



      (1)   Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile
home parks for the use of park occupants and guests. Such areas shall be
furnished at the ratio of at least two car spaces for each dwelling unit, and
shall be located upon the lot of the mobile home it is intended to serve.



      (2)   Use of joint carports is allowed, provided that no
carport shall have an area greater than 450 square feet.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2311  USES PERMITTED.



   The following uses are permitted in any mobile home park.



   (A)   Principal uses.  Mobile homes as defined in  § 2301.



   (B)   Accessory uses.  Uses directly accessory to a mobile home
including parking areas, carports, patios and semi-enclosed outdoor storage
sheds. Provided, however, that the total floor area of enclosed accessory
buildings does not exceed 400 square feet per mobile home.



   (C)   Community buildings, recreation halls, or service buildings
intended primarily to serve the residents of the mobile home park.



   (D)   Temporary model homes provided they are used only for display
of mobile homes for sale within the mobile home park. Under no circumstances
shall any retail sales of mobile homes be permitted in any mobile home park.



   (E)   Administrative offices for the management of the mobile home
park, including maintenance and service areas for same.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2312  OCCUPANCY.



   Mobile home parks as permitted in this chapter are intended for
long-term residential occupancy. No lot shall be rented for placement of a
mobile home, and no mobile home shall be rented or sold for residential
occupancy except for periods of 90 days or more.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2313  MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   A subdivision of land for the purpose of selling individual
lots for the placement and occupancy of mobile homes shall be permitted only
in zoning districts where mobile home parks are permitted as provided in §
602; and



   (B)   Each lot within the subdivision shall contain the land area
required for single-family homes under the provisions of § 603  for the
zoning district in which it is located; and



   (C)   The subdivision of land shall meet all the procedures and
construction requirements of the Middletown Rules and Regulations Regarding
the Subdivision and Development of Land, as amended.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2314  PROHIBITION OF INDIVIDUAL MOBILE HOMES.



   No mobile home shall be permitted to be used as a dwelling on any
individual lot in the town except in a mobile park as provided in this
subchapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 24  TRANSIENT TRAILER PARKS



§ 2400  PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of this subchapter to provide areas which are properly
located and designed to accommodate the leisure time and vacation activities
of transient residents utilizing transient trailers and similar recreational
vehicles, and intended for short-term residential occupancy only. It is
further intended to safeguard the health and safety of residents of trailer
parks, to ensure compatibility with the natural environment and to ensure
harmony with the character of the surrounding area.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2401  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TRANSIENT TRAILER.  Includes any of the following:



      (1)   CAMPING TRAILER. A canvas, folding structure, mounted on
wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation use;



      (2)   MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used
for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a
self-propelled vehicle;



      (3)   PICK-UP COACH.  A structure designed to be mounted on a
truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and
vacation;



      (4)   TRAVEL TRAILER.  A vehicular, portable structure built
on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreation and vacation uses;



      (5)   Any other mobile recreational vehicle subject to the
provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws Chapter 24-21, as amended.



   TRANSIENT TRAILER PARK.  A parcel of land in which two or more spaces
are occupied or intended for occupancy by transient trailers for transient
dwelling purposes and in which transient trailer spaces are rented by the day
or week only, and the occupancy of such space remains in same transient
trailer park for not more than 90 days within a period of one year.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2402  PROCEDURES FOR PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.



   No building permit shall be granted for the construction of a transient
trailer park until the Zoning Board of Review shall grant a special use
permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon
receipt of a completed application as required by § 2403, the Zoning Board
shall refer two copies of the application to the Planning Board for
development plan review, who shall make a written report to the Zoning Board
within 45 days of receipt of the application for a special use permit. Where
the decision of the Zoning Board differs from the recommendations of the
Planning Board, the reasons therefor shall be clearly stated in writing.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2403  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   An application for a special use permit to construct a transient
trailer park shall contain, as a minimum, development plans and supplementary
information as required by § 305, plus the following. Complete engineering
plans and specifications of the proposed park showing:



   (A)   The area and dimensions of the tract of land;



   (B)   The number, location and size of all transient trailer spaces;



   (C)   The location and width of streets and walkways;



   (D)   The location of service buildings, sanitary stations, and any
other proposed structures;



   (E)   The location and area of required recreation areas;



   (F)   The location of water and sewer line and riser pipes;



   (G)   Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and
sewage disposal facilities;



   (H)   Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be
constructed within the transient trailer park;



   (I)   The location and details of lighting and electrical systems;
and



   (J)   Evidence of compliance with all appropriate state laws and
regulations, particularly those dealing with sanitation, sewage disposal and
water supply.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2404  STANDARDS OF DEVELOPMENT.



   The following standards of development shall apply to all transient
trailer parks:



   (A)   Minimum area. No transient trailer park shall be less than ten
acres in land area.



   (B)   Density requirement.  The overall density of the transient
trailer park shall not exceed 20 transient trailer spaces per acre of area of
such park.



   (C)   Area of transient trailer spaces.  The minimum area of any
transient trailer space shall not be less than 1,200 square feet.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2405  REQUIRED RECREATION AREAS.



   In all transient trailer parks there shall be at least one recreation
area which shall be easily accessible from all transient trailer spaces. The
size of such recreation area shall be not less than 20% of the area of such
park.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2406  BUFFERING.



   A landscaped buffer strip shall be maintained along all exterior
property lines of a transient trailer park. Such buffer strip shall be no
less than 100 feet wide and shall be planted, screened or otherwise
maintained in a natural condition in order to provide year-round visual
obstruction of the transient trailer spaces from abutting land and streets.
Such buffer strip may be used for recreation of a non-intensive character
provided however, that no structures be located thereon. In the event that
terrain or other natural features, such as adjacent water bodies, are located
so that the landscaped buffer strip will not serve the intended purpose, then
no such buffer strip shall be required.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2407  REQUIRED SEPARATION BETWEEN TRANSIENT TRAILERS.



   Transient trailers shall be separated from each other and from other
structures by at least 20 feet. Any accessory structure such as attached
awnings, carports or individual storage facilities shall for purposes of this
separation requirement be considered to be part of the transient trailer.
Distance between permanent structures and transient trailers must be at least
30 feet.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2408  TRANSIENT TRAILER PARK STREETS SYSTEM.



   All transient trailer parks shall be provided with safe and convenient
vehicular access from abutting public streets. Each transient trailer space
shall have direct access to an interior street. Alignment and gradient shall
be properly adapted topography. Surfacing need not be permanent pavement, but
shall provide a smooth, hard and dense surface which shall be drained.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2409  ACCESS.



   All transient trailer parks shall have a minimum lot frontage of 50
feet on a public street. Access to transient trailer parks shall be designed
to minimize congestion and hazards at their entrance or exit and allow free
movement of traffic on adjacent streets. All traffic into or out of such
parks shall be through such entrances and exits.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2410  INTERNAL STREETS.



   All internal streets shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2411  OFF-STREET PARKING AND MANEUVERING SPACE.



   Each transient trailer park shall provide sufficient parking and
maneuvering space so that the parking, loading or maneuvering of transient
trailers shall not necessitate the use of any public street, sidewalk or
right-of-way or land not part of the transient trailer park.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2412  WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   All requirements regarding supply of water and disposal of sewage in
transient trailer parks shall conform to all applicable laws and requirements
of the State of Rhode Island, Department of Environmental Management.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2413  ENVIRONMENTAL AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.



   Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not
create hazards to the property or to the health or safely of the occupants.
The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise or odors. No
portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or
erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property
to hazards.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2414  SOIL GROUND COVER REQUIREMENTS.



   Exposed ground surface in all parts of every parking area shall be
paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other solid material, or
protected with a mulch or vegetative growth that is capable of preventing
soil erosion and of eliminating dust.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2415  USES PERMITTED.



   The following uses are permitted in any transient trailer park.



   (A)   Principal uses.  Transient trailers as defined in § 2401.



   (B)   Accessory uses.  Uses directly accessory to a transient
trailer space such as picnic area, fireplace, utility service, etc.



   (C)   Community buildings. Recreation halls, laundry facilities,
showers or rest rooms, convenience stores or other service buildings intended
primarily to serve the residents of the transient trailer park.



   (D)   Outdoor recreation facilities. Provided, however, that any
active recreation facilities shall not be located within the landscaped
buffer strip required in § 1301.



   (E)   Administrative offices for the management of the transient
trailer park, including maintenance and service areas for same. A resident
manager may be permitted to occupy no more than one single-family dwelling
located within the transient trailer park.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2416  PROHIBITION OF INDIVIDUAL TRAILERS.



   No transient trailer shall be permitted to be used as a dwelling on any
individual lot in the town except in a transient trailer park as provided in
this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 25  WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



§ 2500  PURPOSE.



   The overall purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public health,
safety, and general welfare while accommodating the telecommunication needs
of residents and business.  Specifically, this subchapter seeks to:



   (A)   Facilitate the provisions of wireless telecommunication
services to the residents and businesses of the municipality in full
compliance with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996;



   (B)   Minimize adverse visual effects of communication towers by
requiring them to have minimal visual impact and by setting minimum standards
for their design (including innovative camouflaging techniques), siting,
screening and landscaping;



   (C)   Designate the appropriate zoning districts for wireless
telecommunication facilities;



   (D)   Avoid potential danger to adjacent properties from tower
failure through structural standards and setback requirements;



   (E)   Mitigate tower proliferation through tower sharing
requirements (co-locations) for all new tower applicants and those existing
towers that are physically capable of sharing;



   (F)   Establish the standards and criteria for evaluation of
application for wireless telecommunications facilities and fair and
reasonable procedures to process applications; and



   (G)   Provide for the removal of abandoned and unsafe wireless
telecommunications towers and antennas.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2501  BASIC REQUIREMENTS.



   Four types of wireless telecommunications facilities shall be permitted
in the town:



   (A)   Communication towers. Only monopole communications towers
shall be permitted, and no tower shall be approved unless the applicant
demonstrates that the need for wireless telecommunications services that will
be satisfied by constructing the tower cannot, for technological, legal, or
economical reason, other than the financial circumstances of the applicant,
be reasonably satisfied by using an existing or approved tower, or by using
or constructing one or more building-mounted facilities, pole-mounted
antennas, or disguised facilities.



   (B)   Building-mounted facilities. Wireless telecommunications
facilities shall be permitted on existing buildings subject to the
requirements of this subchapter, except that no building-mounted facility
shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates that the need for
wireless telecommunications services that will be satisfied by means of the
building-mounted facility cannot, for technological, legal or economical
reasons, be reasonably satisfied by using an existing or approved tower, or
by using or constructing one or more disguised facilities.



   (C)   Pole-mounted antennas. Pole-mounted antennas shall be
permitted on existing poles or standards subject to the requirements of this
subchapter, except that no pole-mounted antenna shall be approved unless the
applicant demonstrates that the need for wireless telecommunication services
that will be satisfied by means of the pole-mounted antenna cannot, for
technological, legal or economical reason, be reasonably satisfied by using
an existing or approved tower, or by using or constructing one or more
disguised facilities.



   (D)   Disguised facilities.  Disguised facilities shall be
permitted subject to all applicable provisions of this  subchapter except §
2505.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2502  PROCEDURE FOR PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Special use permit. No wireless telecommunications facility
shall be established or substantially modified in any zoning district unless
a special use permit is obtained from the Zoning Board of Review. In
addition, all facilities to be located on public property, such as
pole-mounted antennas on structures on a public street, shall be approved by
the Town Council, after the granting of a special use permit by the Zoning
Board, and shall be maintained and operated under the terms of a license or
lease approved by the Town Council.



   (B)   Development plan review.  Upon receipt of a completed
application for a wireless telecommunications facility, the Zoning Board of
Review shall refer two copies of the application to the Planning Board for
development plan review, which shall make a written report to the Zoning
Board within 45 days after receiving the application. The Zoning Board shall
then hold a public hearing on the application for a special use permit. If
the decision of the Zoning Board differs from the recommendations of the
Planning Board the reasons therefor shall be clearly stated in writing.



   (C)   Notice. All notice requirements of § 317, shall apply to
applications for a special use permit under the subchapter, except that
applications to construct or substantially modify a communications tower
shall require notice by first class mail to:



      (1)   All owners of real property located within 1,000 feet of
the proposed tower site; and



      (2)   The Rhode Island Airport Corporation.



   (D)   Burden of proof. The applicant shall have the burden of
producing evidence to satisfy all applicable requirements and standards set
out in the subchapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2503  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to the information required by §§ 303 and 305, an
application for a special use permit to construct or substantially modify a
wireless telecommunications facility shall provide the following information.



   (A)   All facilities.



      (1)   Documentation by a qualified licensed engineer or other
person qualified by education or experience to show why the proposed facility
cannot, for technological, legal or economical reasons, be located on an
existing or approved facility. The documentation should discuss the following
factors:



         (a)   The proposed facility would cause unacceptable
interference with the operation of an existing or planned facility or with
other types of electronic facilities or equipment, or would be subject to
unacceptable interference from other facilities or equipment, and that such
interference cannot be prevented or eliminated at a reasonable cost.



         (b)   The proposed facility cannot be accommodated on an
existing or approved tower due to structural deficiencies, and that such
deficiencies cannot be eliminated at a reasonable cost.



         (c)   The proposed facility cannot be accommodated on an
existing or approved tower or other structure because no other reasonably
available tower or structure can accommodate the facility's antenna at the
height necessary for the communication services to be offered.



         (d)   Other reasons that make it infeasible to locate
the proposed wireless telecommunications facility on an existing or approved
tower or other existing structure.



      (2)   A service area map depicting the territorial extent of
the applicant's planned coverage, including any areas within the City of
Newport and the Town of Portsmouth if the facility will be capable of
providing wireless telecommunication services to customers in those
municipalities. Such map shall contain or be accompanied by a graph or chart
showing, with respect to the type of service for which the wireless
telecommunications facility is designed:



         (a)   The percentage of the Town of Middletown covered
by the proposed facility;



         (b)   The extent of any coverage in communities other
than Middletown, shown on a radius map of coverage; and



         (c)   An estimate of the number of other similar
facilities that will be needed to fully cover the Town of Middletown if the
proposed facility is constructed.



      (3)   A description of all proposed equipment building or
boxes, including proposed shielding and details of materials.



      (4)   A report from a licensed engineer affirming that the
proposed wireless telecommunications facility will comply with applicable
emission standards of the Federal Communications Commission, and that the
installation of the facility will not interfere with public safety
communications.



      (5)   Documentation by a licensed professional engineer of
what steps the applicant has taken, or will take, to avoid interference with
public safety telecommunication facilities.



      (6)   Inventory and master plan report. Each application for a
wireless telecommunications facility shall include an inventory report of the
applicant's existing or approved towers and antennas in Middletown and within
one mile of the border of Newport or Portsmouth. This report shall become
part of the public record and may be use by Town Board and official in
connection with future applications from other applicants. The inventory
report shall specify:



         (a)   The type, design, and location of each tower and
antenna, including the longitude and latitude of each tower;



         (b)   The ability of each tower to accommodate
additional antennas;



         (c)   Where applicable, the height of the support
structures on which the applicant's existing antennas are located; and



         (d)   The applicant's master plan for establishing
additional towers on Aquidneck Island during the next five years.



   (B)   Communication towers. In addition to the development plan
requirements for all wireless telecommunications facilities set out in
division (A), an application to construct or substantially modify a
communications tower shall include:



      (1)   Proof of ownership of the site or of a contractual right
to its long-term use, and evidence that necessary easements have been or will
be acquired.



      (2)   A report from a licensed professional engineer showing
the design of the tower, including a cross-section view and elevations and
the description of the tower's capacity, including the number and type of
antennas it can accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mounting
positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances
between antennas.



      (3)   A scaled site plan, prepared by a licensed engineer,
clearly indicating:



         (a)   The location, type and height of the proposed
tower;



         (b)   The fall zone and setbacks;



         (c)   Other structures and uses or activities on the
site and on all properties within 200 feet of the site perimeter;



         (d)   Adjacent roadways;



         (e)   Proposed means of access;



         (f)   Elevation drawings of the proposed tower and all
other structures;



         (g)   Topography;



         (h)   Proposed parking area;



         (i)   The zoning classification of the site and of
adjacent property on all sides of the site; and



         (j)   Other information deemed necessary by the Planning
Department to assess compliance with this subchapter.



      (4)   Certification by a licensed structural engineer that the
design of a new communications tower or substantial modification of an
existing tower will comply with the latest version of the American Institute
of Steel Construction Code Standards (TIA/EIA-22-F) and American Concrete
Institute (ACI 318) Standards.



      (5)   A report, which may be in the form of a letter, from the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) indicating that it has no objection to
the proposed tower or that the design of the proposed tower does not violate
applicable FAA requirements.



      (6)   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials
details of proposed fencing, including color.



      (7)   A bond as surety for the cost of removing an abandoned
communications tower, as provided in § 2505(G). The bond shall be in an
amount fixed by the Town Engineer after consultation with the applicant and
others knowledgeable about demolition of such structures.



   (C)   Building-mounted facilities. In addition to the development
plan requirements for all wireless telecommunications facilities set out in
division (A), the following information shall be provided on or with the
development plan for building-mounted facilities that do not qualify as
disguised facilities under this subchapter.



      (1)   A plan, drawn to scale, showing where and how the
proposed antenna will be affixed to a particular building or structure;



      (2)   Details of all proposed antenna and mounting equipment,
including size and color.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2504  STANDARDS OF DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Co-location. Communications towers shall be designed for and
shall permit the co-location of future wireless telecommunications
facilities. Each application for a new tower shall include a statement, to be
separately signed by the owner of an authorized agent, acknowledging that the
tower will be designed and constructed to accommodate the equipment of at
least five competitive carriers, and agreeing to provide for the shared use
of the tower at reasonable and prevailing market lease rates.



   (B)   Fall zone. Communications towers shall be located on the site
so as to provide for a fall zone in which no structures may be placed except
associated structures for wireless telecommunications equipment, storage
sheds, garages, and other unpopulated buildings. The purpose of the fall zone
is to safeguard citizens and property during hurricanes and other storms from
the dangers of a falling or collapsing tower structures and windborne objects
or debris from the structure. The fall zone shall consist of the area
surrounding the tower calculated as follows:



      (1)   From the base of the tower toward the nearest lot line
of any lot containing a single-family, two-family, or multifamily dwelling, a
distance equal to 125% of the height of the tower;



      (2)   From the base of the tower toward any other lot line, a
distance equal to 50% of the height of the tower, except that if any
populated building is closer to the tower than the distance equal to the
height of the tower, the fall zone shall be equal to 75%  of the distance
from the tower to the nearest such building.  For purposes of the division,
a POPULATED BUILDING means any building in which human activity is regularly
carried on.



      (3)   Setbacks.  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall
meet the setback requirements for the district in which they are located. For
purposed of this subchapter, all buildings and other structures for
communications equipment shall be considered part of the principal use for
setback requirements.



   (C)   Lot size. Telecommunications towers shall not be located on
any lot less than 20,000 square feet in area, or the minimum lot size for the
zoning district, whichever is greater.



   (D)   Height. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not
exceed the following height limitations:



      (1)   Communications towers. The maximum height of a tower
shall be 160 feet, measured from the average existing level of the ground
surrounding the tower and within ten feet thereof to the highest point of the
tower, including any antenna or other appurtenances.



      (2)   The maximum height of a building-mounted or pole-mounted
antenna shall be 20 feet above the highest point of the roof (excluding
chimneys and other appurtenances) or of the pole.



      (3)   The maximum height of a disguised facility not located
in an existing building shall be 60 feet.



   (E)   Lighting. Telecommunications towers and antennas shall not be
illuminated and shall not display any lights unless:



      (1)   One or more lights are specifically required by the FAA
or other governmental authority; and



      (2)   The requirement for lights cannot be eliminated by
reducing the height of the tower and/or antenna to the minimum height at
which its intended use is feasible.



   (F)   Signs.



      (1)   Each telecommunications tower site shall display a
non-illuminated identification sign containing the corporate name of the
owner and an emergency telephone number. At the owner's option, the sign may
also contain a corporate logo and/or a mailing address, but no other
information or graphics. The sign shall be:



         (a)   Made of durable, graffiti-resistant material;



         (b)   Not greater than three square feet in area or four
feet high;



         (c)   Posted in a place visible to the general public. 



      (2)   No other signs shall be displayed on the tower or at the
site unless expressly required by a federal or state agency.



   (G)   Accessory equipment structures. Accessory equipment structures
at tower sites shall not contain more than 2,400 square feet of gross floor
area for all accessory equipment for all carriers, or be more than eight feet
in height. Accessory equipment structures may be partially or completely
located underground, and underground space shall not be counted in
determining the maximum size of the structure. No externally visible
accessory equipment structures shall be allowed in connection with
building-mounted facilities, disguised facilities, or pole-mounted antennas
except as otherwise permitted by this subchapter.



   (H)   Aesthetics. The applicant shall successfully demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Board that the proposed telecommunications facility
will have minimal visual impact. The term MINIMAL VISUAL IMPACT means that
there are no other reasonably available sites in the town that will provide
the same level of wireless telecommunications service with less visual impact
than the proposed facility, as measured by the standards set forth in this
section. The fact that another site would require more towers or other
facilities to achieve the same level of service may be taken into
consideration, but shall not be determinative if the other site would have
less overall visual impact.  In determining whether the minimal visual
impact requirement has been satisfied, the Board shall consider, among other
factors:



      (1)   The height of the proposed tower as compared to the
height of other nearby structures, the elevation of the site, and the
distance from which the tower would be observable from various locations in
the town;



      (2)   The exterior components of building-mounted facilities
shall be of a color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the
color of the building and shall be located on the building at the point of
least visibility to persons on adjacent property, unless such location is
shown to be impractical for substantial reasons.



      (3)   Pole-mounted antennas shall be of a color that is
identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the structure on which
they are mounted.



      (4)   Telecommunication tower sites shall be landscaped with a
buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the base of
the tower and any accessory equipment structures from adjacent property.
Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as when towers
are sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter
may be a sufficient buffer. In locations where the visual impact of the
tower, particularly on residential lots, would be minimal, the landscaping
requirements may be reduced or waived.



   (I)   Security. All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be
protected against access by children and other unauthorized persons to the
maximum extent reasonably possible for the type and location of the facility.
Security measures shall include vandal-resistant design of accessory
equipment structures.



      (1)   Telecommunications towers, including any guy wires and
accessory equipment structures, shall be surrounded at a minimum distance of
ten  feet with opaque climb-resistant fencing eight feet high. Gates
allowing access to the tower shall be of the same material and height as the
fence and shall be equipped with strong weather-proof locks. Any ladder or
other means of climbing to the tower shall be separately protected against
unauthorized climbing by a lock or other means.



      (2)   Telecommunications equipment inside building-mounted
facilities shall be designed and located to insure limited access for
authorized persons only, such as by locating it in a separate lockable room,
cage or box, and access to antennas attached to the roof of the building
shall be through a lockable door.



      (3)   Telecommunications equipment inside disguised facilities
in existing structures shall be disguised and located to insure limited
access for authorized persons only, such as by locating it in a separate
lockable room, cage or box.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2505  MISCELLANEOUS ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Visual impact preview. Because aesthetics are a major concern
relating to wireless telecommunications facilities, all applicants for a
special use permit to construct a new telecommunications tower shall comply
with the following visual impact requirements.



      (1)   Comparative height illustration. The purpose of this
requirement is to show the relative height of a proposed telecommunications
tower as compared to landmarks familiar to Middletown residents.



         (a)   Applications to construct or substantially modify
a communications tower shall include an architectural drawing or scaled photo
simulations showing the proposed tower as it would look if it were
constructed on the same site with the World War I Memorial Tower in
Miantonomi Park and the chapel tower at St. Georges's School. Each structure
shall be drawn to scale and situate at a level that corresponds to the actual
level of that structure as measured from sea level, so that the drawing or
photo simulation will take into account the different elevations of land at
the site of the proposed tower and at the site of the existing structures.



         (b)   A copy of the drawing required by division
(A)(1)(a) shall be published in the newspaper advertisement with the notice
of all public hearings in connection with the application and shall be made
available to the public on request. In addition, an enlarged copy of this
drawing, not less than six  square feet in area, shall be on display at all
public hearings and shall be kept at the Town Hall available for inspection
until the conclusion of all hearings on the application.



      (2)   Crane demonstration.  After publication of the
newspaper notice of an application for a new telecommunications tower, but
before the first public hearing on the applicant, the applicant shall arrange
for the following demonstration:



         (a)   A crane shall be positioned as near as possible at
the exact location of the proposed tower and extended to the height of the
proposed tower for two consecutive days, including one weekend day, from 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., after the advertisement of the Zoning Board hearing has
been advertised and before the hearing is held.



         (b)   In addition to the advertised notice of the Zoning
Board hearing, the applicant shall publish a display advertisement, not less
than eight  column inches in size, in the same newspaper as the notice
advertisement, stating the dates and times of the crane demonstration.



   (B)   Anti-proliferation requirement. No new telecommunications
tower shall be recommended by the Planning Board unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the proposed
wireless telecommunications facility cannot be co-located on an existing
tower or established as a building-mounted facility, pole-mounted antenna, or
disguised facility.



   (C)   Certification of continued operation. On or before February 1
of each year the owner of a wireless telecommunications facility shall file a
certification with the Planning Department as to the continued operation of
the facility, including all co-located facilities. Failure to file the
certification shall create a rebuttable presumption that the facility has
been abandoned. Such certification shall be on a form provide by the Planning
Department and shall contain, to the extent possible:



      (1)   An affirmation that each telecommunications tower and
antenna in the facility is currently in operation or, if not, the owner's
plans with respect to renewed operation or removal of the tower or antenna;



      (2)   A statement whether any tower or antenna is expected to
cease operation within the next year;



      (3)   A current list of all tower user names, and the name and
mailing address of an agent of each user authorized to receive communications
from the town;



      (4)   A description of the insurance coverage on all
facilities, including the name and mailing address of a claims agent for each
insures; and



      (5)   Any other information which the Planning Department
believes is relevant to monitor compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (D)   Certification of continued structural integrity.  Every five
years, or within 60 days after a catastrophic act of nature or other
emergency that might effect the structural integrity of the tower, the owner
shall file with the Town Engineer a certification of continued structural
integrity prepared and signed by a licensed engineer. The certification shall
affirm that a thorough and complete inspection of the tower was conducted and
that the tower and all accessory structures are and will continue to perform
as originally designed.



   (E)   Insurance. Liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 shall be maintained by the owner and operator of a wireless
telecommunications tower until the tower is dismantled and removed from the
site. Failure to maintain insurance coverage shall continue a violation of
this chapter and grounds for revocation of a permit.



   (F)   Performance bond. The owner or operator of a wireless
telecommunications tower shall obtain and keep in force as long as the tower
is located on the site a performance bond payable to the town in the amount
of not less than $50,000, or such other greater amount as found by the Town
Engineer to cover the estimated reasonable costs of removal of the tower,
including direct and administrative costs associated with demolition,
dismantling, removal and disposal of the tower by the town or its contractor,
if the owner of operator fails to comply with the requirements of division
(G).



   (G)   Abandonment. A wireless telecommunications facility shall be
removed by the owner within 365 days after it ceases to be operated, unless
at the time the owner has a signed agreement for the facility to be
re-activated within an additional 60-day period. Upon removal the site shall
be restored to its previous appearance and, where appropriate, re-vegetated
to blend with the surrounding area. A facility not removed in accordance with
this division shall be considered abandoned and may be removed by the town at
the owner's expense.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2506  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DISGUISED FACILITIES.



   An applicant for a wireless telecommunication facility, that qualifies
as a disguised facility as defined in the subchapter, shall be subject to all
applicable provisions of this subchapter except § 2505  and to the
following requirements:



   (A)   Special use permit. The applicant shall obtain the development
plan requirements and standards of development in §§ 2504 and 2505 and
shall not be subject to development plan review under this chapter, provided
that the following requirements are met in a special use permit for the
facility under special use permits. In granting such a permit, the Zoning
Board may attach one or more conditions under § 904. For disguised
facilities located on existing buildings, such conditions may include:



      (1)   Limitations on the size, height, or shape of any
antenna, component or accessory equipment visible from outside the building,
in addition to the limitations imposed by this subchapter; and



      (2)   Reasonable requirements for painting, hiding, or
otherwise screening any part of the facility from public view.



   (B)   Dimensional requirements. Disguised facilities of new
construction shall meet all dimensional requirements of the district in which
they are located, except that height limitations may be modified by the
Zoning Board pursuant to the standards of § 902.



   (C)   Verification of status. The purpose of the following
requirements is to ensure that a wireless telecommunications facility,
established pursuant to this section, is a disguised facility as defined in
this subchapter.



      (1)   Existing structures. An applicant for a disguised
facility to be located in or on an existing structure shall submit, as part
of the permit application, at least four color photographs of the structure
containing or constituting the disguised facility taken within the month
preceding the filing of the application. Such photographs shall be
approximately eight by ten inches in size and shall show clearly each side or
facet of the existing structure as it appears to observers located on
adjacent property.



      (2)   New structures. An applicant for a disguised facility
that will be a new structure shall submit, as part of the permit application:



         (a)   A site map showing the location of the proposed
facility and all existing structures on the lot; and



         (b)   One or more sketches or drawings of the proposed
facility, drawn to scale and showing details as they will appear to observers
located on adjacent property.



      (3)   Approval of an application for a disguised facility
shall be conditioned on submission to the Planning Department, within one
month after completion of the facility, of one or more photographs of the
completed facility. If the facility is located in or on an existing
structure, this submission shall consist of a set of photographs
corresponding in all respects to the photographs submitted as part of the
permit application, except that the photographs required by this division
shall be taken after completion of the facility. If the facility is a new
structure, the photographs or photographs shall correspond as closely as
reasonably possible to the sketches or drawings submitted with the
application.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2507  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CO-LOCATED ANTENNAS.



   An additional antenna may be installed as a matter or right on a
telecommunications tower that has been approved for co-location, but does not
have the full number of antennas for which it was approved. A copy of the
lease or other agreement by which the owner of the tower permits co-location
shall be filed with the Planning Department within 30 days after it has been
signed or before installing the additional antenna, whichever first occurs.
Before the lease or agreement is filed it may be edited to block disclosure
of financial or other sensitive information.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2508  CONFLICT WITH OTHER ZONING PROVISIONS.



   All construction and placement of wireless telecommunications
facilities are subject to the provisions of this subchapter in addition to
all other provisions of this chapter. In the event of conflict between a
provision of this subchapter and any other provision of the this chapter, the
provisions of this subchapter shall prevail.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 25A  WIND TURBINES



§ 25A00  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to provide for the construction and
operation of wind turbines, also known as wind energy conversion facilities,
and to provide standards for the placement, design, construction, monitoring,
modification and removal of wind turbines that address public safety,
minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources of the town, and
provide adequate financial assurance for the costs of decommissioning and
removal.



(Ord. passed 2-16-10)



§ 25A01  APPLICABILITY.



   This article applies to all wind turbines constructed or substantially
modified after the effective date of this article.



(Ord. passed 2-16-10)



§ 25A02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING-MOUNTED WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine mounted on an existing
building.



   FALL ZONE. The calculated area of the land surrounding a wind turbine
that may be affected by debris should the supporting structure collapse or
any component of the wind turbine or anything attached to it fall to the
ground. The fall zone for all wind turbines shall be measured at ground level
below the center of the wind turbine as a circular area with a radius of 175%
of the height of the wind turbine.



   HEIGHT. The height of a wind turbine measured from pre-development
grade to the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point, or blade-tip height.



   OCCUPIED BUILDING. Any building regularly occupied by one or more
persons on a daily basis. Buildings ordinarily used for storage, such as
garages, sheds, and the like, are not occupied buildings even though they may
be entered for brief periods on a daily basis.



   PROMINENT PUBLIC VANTAGE POINT.  A location from which a significant
number of the public views a scenic, natural or historic landscape in the
Town of Middletown.



   SETBACK. The setback requirements for wind turbines shall be those
applicable to principal structures, as defined in Article 4.



   TOWER-MOUNTED WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine mounted on a free-standing
tower that does not exceed 120 feet in height.



   WIND MONITORING or METEOROLOGICAL TOWER. A temporary tower equipped
with devices to measure wind speeds and direction, used to determine how much
wind power a site can be expected to generate.



   WIND TURBINE. A device that converts kinetic wind energy into
rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine
typically consists of a tower, nacelle body, and a rotor with two or



more blades. Unless the wording or context indicates otherwise, a wind
turbine for purposes of this article includes the tower and the base or
foundation on which it is mounted (but not the building supporting a
building-mounted wind turbine), and all equipment, machinery and structures
on site utilized in connection with the collection, storage, and transmission
of electricity from the wind turbine.



(Ord. passed 2-16-10; Am. Ord. 2010-28, passed 10-18-10; Am. Ord. 2012-14,
passed 9-17-12)



§ 25A03  BASIC REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No wind turbine shall be permitted in any zoning district,
except that building-mounted turbines, and tower-mounted turbines not to
exceed 120 feet in height, may be permitted on parcels where the primary use
is comprised of one or more of the following: field crop farms or
horticultural nurseries; livestock farm.



   (B)   No wind turbine may be constructed or substantially modified
without first obtaining a special-use permit from the Zoning Board of Review.



   (C)   Generally.



      (1)   Wind facilities shall be constructed and operated in a
manner that minimizes any adverse visual, safety, and environmental impacts.



      (2)   Wind turbines shall have an automatic braking,
governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation,
overspeeding and excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor blades and
other turbine components.



      (3)   FAA Regulations. Wind facilities shall comply with
applicable requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).



      (4)   Setbacks. Wind turbines shall be set back from all
property lines a minimum distance equal to three times the height of the
turbine.



      (5)   Fall zone. The fall zone shall be a condition of
obtaining a special-use permit for a wind turbine, which may not be varied by
means of a dimensional variance or special-use permit. The fall zone shall be
located entirely within the boundaries of the lot on which the wind turbine
is located. Except for building-mounted wind turbines, no occupied building
shall be located within the fall zone of a wind turbine.



      (6)   The minimum ground clearance for the wind turbine blades
of horizontal axis turbines shall be 25 feet. The minimum ground clearance
for blades of vertical axis turbines shall be ten feet.



      (7)   Wind turbines shall not be located in areas that will
result in the wind turbine dominating the view of a scenic, natural or
historic resource of the town from one or more prominent public vantage
points.



      (8)   Temporary wind monitoring or meteorological towers shall
be permitted in all zoning districts subject to issuance of a building permit
and subject to reasonable conditions imposed by the Building Official. Such
towers shall be erected as near as reasonably possible to the proposed
location of the wind turbine on the site, and shall comply with the setback
and fall zone requirements of this article. Temporary wind monitoring or
meteorological towers shall not remain in place for more than one year.



      (9)   Maintenance. Wind turbines shall be maintained in good
condition. Such maintenance shall include painting, structural repairs, and
integrity of security measures. The proposed maintenance schedule shall be
provided with the application package. A report demonstrating compliance with
the maintenance schedule shall be submitted annually to the Department of
Building and Zoning on the anniversary of the issuance of the building permit.



      (10)   Insurance obligation. At all times from the
installation of a wind turbine until its removal the owner shall maintain
liability insurance in an amount



sufficient to cover loss or damage to persons and structures that might
proximately be caused by the wind turbine. The insurance policy shall provide
for notification to the Department of Building and Zoning a minimum of 30
days prior to its expiration or cancellation.



      (11)   The height of a building-mounted wind turbine may not
exceed 15 feet above the height limit for the type of building on which it is
mounted.



(Ord. passed 2-16-10; Am. Ord. 2010-28, passed 10-18-10; Am. Ord. 2012-14,
passed 9-17-12)



§ 25A04  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Color and finish. All components of the wind turbine shall be
painted a neutral, non-reflective exterior color designed to blend with the
surrounding environment, such as white, light gray or light blue.



   (B)   Lighting. Wind turbines shall be lighted only if required by
the FAA. Lighting of non-tower parts of the wind turbine, such as appurtenant
structures, shall be limited to that required for safety, security, and
operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting
properties. Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting
properties and except as required by the FAA be directed downward with full
cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.



   (C)   Shadow/flicker. Wind turbines shall be sited to ensure that no
shadowing or flicker occurs on neighboring property. The applicant has the
burden of proving that the wind turbine will not produce shadowing or flicker
on neighboring property. A failure to meet this burden of proof shall result
in denial of the wind turbine application.



   (D)   Noise. Noise levels resulting from operation of a wind turbine
shall not exceed 30 dB(A) as measured at the property line, and averaged over
a ten minute time period. This provision is to be considered a minimum
standard, and the Zoning Board of Review may impose more restrictive
requirements as deemed necessary. The applicant shall present appropriate
documentation and/or analysis to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Board of Review that the proposed installation will comply with this
requirement.



   (E)   Signs. A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage shall
be placed at the base of all wind turbines. No other signs shall be permitted
on any wind turbine, except signs necessary to identify the owner, provide
emergency contact information, and warn of other dangers associated with the
wind turbine. Also permitted are educational signs providing information
about the wind turbine and the benefits of renewable energy. All signs shall
comply with the requirements of Article 12, Signs.



   (F)   Before issuance of a permit for the wind turbine, the
applicant shall submit documentation from the utility approving the proposed
connection. All electrical connections, including transformers, shall be
installed underground unless the utility, as shown by the documentation,
requires the electrical connections to be installed above-ground.



   (G)   Unauthorized access. Wind turbines shall be designed to
prevent unauthorized access. When deemed reasonably necessary because of the
location of the wind turbine on the site and the surrounding neighborhood,
the Zoning Board of Review may require protective fencing.



   (H)   Appurtenant structures. Appurtenant structures, such as
equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall
be contained within the turbine tower or other existing structures on the
property whenever technically and economically feasible; shall be used only
for housing of equipment for this particular site; and, whenever reasonable,
shall be shielded from view by vegetation and/or located in an underground
vault and joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts. Appurtenant
structures to wind turbines are subject to regulations of this chapter
pertaining to accessory buildings in Table 6-2, § 603.



   (I)   Towers. Monopole towers, rather than lattice or
cable-supported towers, shall be used for wind turbines unless the Zoning
Board of Review finds, for reasons stated in its opinion, that the use of a
monopole tower is impractical. If a cable-supported tower is used, reflective
colored objects, such as flags, reflectors, or tape, shall be placed on the
anchor points of guy wires and along the guy wires up to a height of ten feet
from the ground.



   (J)   Other considerations. In deciding whether to grant a
special-use permit for a wind turbine, the Zoning Board of Review may
consider all relevant matters not expressly mentioned in this article, such
as the potential adverse impacts of the wind turbine on wildlife habitats and
scenic vistas, and interference with electromagnetic communications, such as
telephone, radio, and television. Wind turbines shall not interfere with any
telecommunications transmissions, including local emergency responders,
military and civilian personal radio use. The Board shall consider the
provisions of § 904 and may impose special conditions reasonably necessary
to remove or alleviate any potential adverse impacts.



(Ord. passed 2-16-10; Am. Ord. 2012-14, passed 9-17-12)



§ 25A05  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The following information shall be provided to the Zoning
Board of Review with an application for a special-use permit to install a
wind turbine:



      (1)   Site plan. A plan of the proposed wind turbine site,
scaled at one inch equals 20 feet, with contour intervals of no more than two
feet, showing the following:



         (a)   Property lines for the site parcel and adjacent
parcels within 200 feet.



         (b)   Outline of all existing buildings, including
purpose (e.g. residence, garage, etc.) onsite parcel and all adjacent parcels
within 200 feet. Include distances from the wind turbine to each building
shown.



         (c)   Location of all roads, public and private, on the
site parcel and on adjacent parcels within 200 feet, and proposed roads or
driveways, either temporary or permanent.



         (d)   Proposed location and design of the wind
turbine(s), including ground equipment, appurtenant structures, transmission
infrastructure, access, fencing, and exterior lighting.



         (e)   Location of the representations required by
division (A)(6) below.



      (2)   Environmental analysis. For a tower-mounted wind turbine
proposed to exceed 100 feet in height, an environmental impact analysis
report, prepared by a professional environmental consulting firm, shall be
submitted with the application package. The report shall, at a minimum,
address the following factors:



         (a)   Constraints imposed by environmental and
archeological regulations.



         (b)   The presence of animal species of concern, or
critical habitat for these species.



         (c)   Presence of plant communities of concern.



         (d)   Presence of critical areas of species
congregation, such as maternity roosts, hibernation sites, staging areas,
winter ranges, nesting sites, and migration stopovers.



         (e)   The potential impact of habitat fragmentation.



         (f)   Current studies of avian risk specific to the
proposed turbine type and its potential impact on known species that are
either present,



migrate through the project area, or may be attracted by site alteration.



         (g)   The environmental analysis should include the
following recommendations:



            1.   Suitability of the site for wind development
in light of its environmental impact.



            2.   Design and operational recommendations to
avoid or minimize significant adverse environmental impacts.   



            3.    Recommended mitigation measures if
significant adverse habitat impacts cannot be avoided.



            4.    Determination if post construction studies
are advised to evaluate animal mortality and develop operational measures for
mitigation if necessary.



      (3)   After the special-use permit has been approved by the
Zoning Board of Review, a copy of the site plan shall be provided to the
Middletown Fire Department. Upon request of the Fire Department, the
applicant shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an
emergency response plan.



      (4)   Documentation showing that the safety requirements of §
25A03(C) will be satisfied.



      (5)   Documentation showing that a policy of insurance
satisfying the requirement of § 25A03(C)(10) is available to the applicant.
Further documentation showing that such insurance has been obtained must be
presented to the building official in order to obtain a building permit for
the wind turbine.



      (6)   Visual impact illustrations. The purpose of this
requirement is to show how the proposed wind turbine will affect the existing
viewscape in the area, including the impact of the wind turbine on scenic,
natural and historic resources of the town. To satisfy this requirement the
applicant shall submit color photo representations of the proposed wind
turbine, including three to six sight lines, one from the nearest occupied
building with a view of the wind turbine. Such representations shall include
actual photos for pre-construction views and accurate post-construction
simulations (e.g. superimpositions of the wind turbine onto photographs of
existing views). Sites for the view representations shall be selected from
populated areas or public ways within a two-mile radius of the wind turbine.
View representations shall include existing and proposed buildings and tree
coverage, and shall describe the technical procedures followed in producing
the representations (distances, angles, lens, etc.).



      (7)   An impact statement prepared by a qualified individual
or firm which identifies the potential adverse impacts of the wind turbine to
the community, neighborhood, and the built environment. Measures for
mitigating any potential adverse impacts, such as noise, flicker or
shadowing, and electronic communications interference shall be identified in
the statement.



      (8)   Landscape plan. A plan indicating all proposed changes
to the landscape of the site, including temporary or permanent roads or
driveways, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting, and
screening vegetation or structures.



      (9)   An operation and maintenance plan, describing the
general procedures for operational maintenance of the wind turbine and for
maintenance of access roads and storm water controls, if applicable. The plan
shall also describe the provisions for remote monitoring, and the proposed
maintenance and inspection schedule.



   (B)   Independent consultants. The Zoning Board of Review be
authorized to hire outside consultants, at the applicant’s expense, as
necessary to fully evaluate the design and potential impacts of the proposed
wind turbine.



   (C)   Required findings on protection of scenic, natural and
historic resources. In view of the requirement in the Middletown
Comprehensive Community Plan that wind turbines be located so as not to
dominate the visual qualities of the land from prominent public vantage
points, the Zoning Board of Review, in considering an application for a
special-use permit to install a wind turbine, shall make a specific finding
as to whether the proposed wind turbine will dominate the view of any scenic,
natural or historic resource of the town from any prominent public vantage
point, and shall support its finding with reasons based on evidence.



(Ord. passed 2-16-10; Am. Ord. 2010-28, passed 10-18-10; Am. Ord. 2012-14,
passed 9-17-12)



§ 25A06  UNUSED OR ABANDONED WIND TURBINES.



   (A)   Any wind turbine which has been abandoned shall be removed.
Abandonment shall be presumed if the wind turbine is not operated for a
period of 60 days or more. This presumption may be rebutted by submission of
a letter or other signed document from the owner to the Building Official
which satisfactorily states the reasons for cessation of operation and plans
for restoring operation, including an estimated time for repairs or other
work necessary.



   (B)   At least 30 days before a large- tower wind turbine is
scheduled to be decommissioned, the owner shall notify the Building Official
by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans
for removal. The owner is responsible for securing any necessary state and
local permits prior to dismantling the wind turbine.



   (C)   Abandoned wind turbines, including towers and their base or
foundation and all associated structures and components, shall be physically
removed from the site. Medium-tower and wind turbines shall be removed within
90 days from cessation of operation. If the owner fails to remove the wind
turbine in accordance with the requirements of this section, the town shall
have the authority to enter the property and physically remove the wind
turbine. In that case, the owner of the wind turbine shall be responsible for
removal costs incurred by the town, and the obligation shall be recorded in
the Land Evidence Records as a lien against the property.



   (D)   When a turbine is removed, the site shall be restored to the
state it was in before the wind turbine was constructed. If applicable, solid
and hazardous waste generated by the wind turbine shall be disposed in
accordance with local and state waste disposal regulations, and the site
shall be stabilized and vegetation planted to minimize erosion. The owner is
responsible for securing any necessary state and local permits prior to
dismantling the wind turbine.



(Ord. passed 2-16-10; Am. Ord. 2012-14, passed 9-17-12)



§ 25A07  ENFORCEMENT.



   Violations of this article shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer
under Article 3.



(Ord. passed 2-16-10)



ARTICLE 26  PUBLIC ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 2600  CREATION OF PUBLIC ZONING DISTRICTS.



   There shall be a Public Zoning District (P) which shall be shown on the
official zoning map. The Public District is established as a district in
which the land is owned by federal, state or municipal governments, or
agencies thereof. The only uses permitted in Public Zoning Districts are the
use of land or structures or both by the United States government, the State
of Rhode Island, or the Town of Middletown, or any agency thereof in the
exercise of a governmental or proprietary function.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2601  CHANGE OF USE.



   Should the title or any interest in any land located in a Public
District be transferred to a person other than a federal, state or municipal
government or  agency thereof, no use other than that permitted by this
subchapter shall be permitted until such land is re-zoned by the Town Council
in accordance with the Comprehensive Community Plan to an appropriate zoning
district compatible with surrounding uses, and according to the procedure for
amendment specified in Article 28.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 27  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 2700  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide performance
standards in the control of commercial and industrial uses in the town. These
standards are designed to prevent health and safety hazards, public
nuisances, and harmful effects upon the natural environment. They are also
designed to permit potential industrial nuisances to be measured factually
and objectively, and to ensure that all commercial and industrial uses will
provide methods to protect the town from hazards which can be prevented by
processes of control and elimination.



   (B)   If any standards are established by local or state building or
fire codes, by local waste water or solid waste ordinances, by any department
or agency of the State of Rhode Island or by any federal agency, which
conflict with the standards specified in this subchapter, the more stringent
or restrictive standards shall apply.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2701  APPLICATION OF STANDARDS.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to any
commercial or manufacturing use located anywhere within the town and shall
also apply to any use established in any business or light industrial zoning
district.



   (B)   Performance standards for any use or process operating in LI
(Light Industry) District shall be measured at the zoning district boundary
at a point nearest the use or process being measured. Performance standards
for any use or process operating in any district other than LI shall be
measured at the lot line at a point nearest the use or process being measured.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2702  ADMINISTRATION OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   The administration of the performance standards herein set
forth is charged to the Zoning Officer. Any proposed use or process,
alteration or change to an existing use or process, or determination of
compliance for an existing use or process, either as a permitted use or a
nonconforming use, shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer who shall
determine compliance or noncompliance herewith.



   (B)   Subsequent to a study of the use, the Zoning Officer may
determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the use may
violate the performance standards set herein and may initiate an
investigation.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2703  REQUIRED DATA.



   (A)   Following the initiation of an investigation, the Zoning
Officer may require the owner or operator of any proposed use to submit such
data and evidence as is needed to make an objective determination. The
evidence may include, but is not limited to, the following items:



      (1)   Plan of the existing or proposed construction and
development;



      (2)   A description of the existing or proposed machinery,
processes and products;



      (3)   Specifications for the mechanisms and technique used or
proposed to be used in restricting the possible emission of any of the items
referred to in §§ 2711 through 2718.



      (4)   Measurements of the amount or rate of emissions of the
items referred to in §§ 2711 through 2718.



      (5)   Certification by a registered professional engineer that
the proposed use or construction would comply with the requirements and
standards for the regulation of commercial and industrial processes as set
forth in this subchapter.



   (B)   Failure to submit data required by the Zoning Officer shall
constitute ground for denying a certificate of zoning compliance for any use
of land.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2704  REPORT BY EXPERT CONSULTANTS.



   In the investigation of the compliance with the standards set forth in
this subchapter by any existing or proposed use, the Zoning Officer may
require the owner or operator of the existing use or the applicant for the
proposed use to provide a study and report by an expert consultant as to the
compliance or noncompliance with said standards of the existing or proposed
use and advice as to how such existing or proposed use if not in compliance,
can be brought into compliance with said standards.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2705  ZONING OFFICER'S ACTION.



   Within 30 days following the receipt of the required evidence, or
receipt of the reports of expert consultants, the Zoning Officer shall make a
determination as to compliance, he shall authorize the issuance of any
permits which may have been withheld pending said determination. The issuance
of a permit for a proposed use shall not constitute compliance with the
performance standards if, after construction and operation, there is evidence
of noncompliance with such standards.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2706  REQUIRED ALTERATIONS.



   The Zoning Officer may require modifications or alterations in the
existing or proposed construction or the operational procedures to insure
that compliance with the performance standards will be maintained. The
operator shall be given a reasonable length of time to effect any changes
prescribed by the Zoning Officer for the purpose of securing compliance with
the performance standards.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2707  ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW TO HEAR APPEAL.



   The Zoning Officer's action with respect to the performance standards
procedures may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Review within 30 days
following said action. In the absence of such appeal, the Zoning Officer's
determination shall be final.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2708  CONTINUED ENFORCEMENT.



   The Zoning Officer shall investigate any purported violation of
performance standards and, for such investigation, may request that the
Zoning Board employ qualified experts. If he finds that a violation occurred
or exists, a copy of said findings shall be forwarded to the Town Solicitor.
The services of any qualified experts, employed by the Zoning Officer to
advise in establishing a violation, shall be paid by the violator if said
violation is established, otherwise, it shall be paid by the town.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2709  CANCELLATION OF PERMITS.



   If, after the conclusion of time granted for compliance with the
performance standards, the Zoning Officer finds the violation is still in
existence, any permits previously issued shall be void and the operator shall
be required to cease operation until the violation is remedied.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2710  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise and
vibration level regulations of this subchapter:



   (A)   Noises and vibrations not under the control of the property
user;



   (B)   Noises and vibrations emanating from construction activities
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;



   (C)   The noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency
pressure relief valves;



   (D)   Transient noises and vibrations of moving sources such as
automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2711  NOISE.



   Noise levels shall comply with the applicable standards of the town
ordinance relating to noise, §§ 130.75 through 130.91 of this code. Noise
levels at the receiving property shall be measured at the property line
closest to the source of the noise.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2712  VIBRATION.



   No vibration is permitted which is discernible to human sense of
feeling for three minutes or more duration in any one hour of the day between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., or of 30 seconds or more duration in
any one hour between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. No vibration at any
time shall produce an acceleration of more than 0.1g or shall result in any
combination of amplitudes and frequencies beyond the "safe" range of Table 7,
U.S. Bureau of Mines Bulletin No. 442, "Seismic Effects of Quarry Blasting,"
on any structure. The methods and equations of said Bulletin No. 442 shall be
used to compute all values for the enforcement of this regulation.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2713  SMOKE AND AIR POLLUTION.



   All applicable commercial and manufacturing operations shall conform to
the "Air Pollution Control Regulations" of the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management issued under the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws Title
23, Chapter 23-23, as amended, which regulations are hereby incorporated in
and made a part of this section.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2714  SEWAGE AND WASTE.



   (A)   Sewage and waste shall be deposited in the public sewerage
system when available. All requirements of the Newport Industrial
Pretreatment Program as authorized under Chapter 1040 of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of Newport, entitled "Sewers, Generally" shall, as a
minimum, be met.



   (B)   Effluent from any applicable commercial and manufacturing
operation which is discharged into the ground shall at all times comply with
"Rules and Regulations Establishing Minimum Standards Relating to Location,
Design, Construction and Maintenance of Individual Sewage Disposal Systems,
December 1, 1980," and subsequent amendments thereto, of the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management, issued under the provisions of R.I.
Gen. Laws §§ 42-17.1-2(1), (m), (4) and (s), as amended, which regulations
are hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2715  ODORS.



   (A)   Emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter released
from any operation or activity shall not exceed the odor threshold
concentration beyond lot lines, measured either at ground level or habitable
elevation.



   (B)   The odor threshold is the concentration in air of a gas or
vapor which will just evoke a response in the human olfactory system. Odor
thresholds shall be measured in accordance with ASTEM d1391-57 "Standard
Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres (Dilution Method)" or its
equivalent.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2716  TOXIC MATTER.



   The measurement of toxic matter shall be at ground level or habitable
elevation and shall be the average of any 24 hour sampling period. The
release of measurable airborne toxic matter is not allowed at any time.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2717  HEAT AND GLARE.



   (A)   Any applicable commercial or manufacturing operation producing
heat or glare (as differentiated from interior illumination) shall be
shielded so that no heat or glare can be recorded at the property line.



   (B)   No exterior lighting shall be used in such a manner that
produces glare on public highways or neighboring property. Exterior lighting
shall be shielded and directed to the ground and away from all abutting
properties and streets, and shall not be discernible at the property line.
All street lighting shall be of a design intended to minimize glare and
night-sky pollution.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2718  RADIATION.



   All applicable commercial and manufacturing operations shall cause no
dangerous radiation at the property line as specified by the regulations of
the State of Rhode Island Radiation Control Agency or the United States
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, whichever is applicable.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2719  FIRE AND EXPLOSIVES.



   All uses and storage facilities shall be approved by the town Fire
Marshal with regard to fire and explosive hazards.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2720  CONDUCT OF ACTIVITIES.



   All land use activities in a light industrial district abutting a
residential district or use shall be conducted indoors, except for outside
storage permitted by this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2730  GRAVEL PROCESSING AND OUTDOOR STORAGE OF BULK MATERIALS.



   The purpose of this section is to establish standards for gravel
processing and the outdoor storage of bulk materials within the town, to
protect and preserve the town's valuable natural resources, groundwater, and
environment, and to protect abutting property owners from unreasonable noise,
dust, and other adverse impacts of such operations, and to protect and
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.



   (A)   Gravel processing. Gravel processing as defined in § 400 of
this chapter, with or without outdoor storage of bulk materials, shall be
permitted by special use permit in Industrial and Traffic Sensitive
Industrial Districts, but shall be prohibited in all other zoning districts.
All gravel processing operations shall comply with the provisions of this
section.



   (B)   Outdoor storage of bulk materials. Outdoor storage of bulk
materials as defined in § 400 of this chapter shall be permitted only as an
accessory use to the primary uses specified in § 602 which specifically
includes outdoor storage of bulk materials, and only upon issuance of a
special use permit by the Zoning Board of Review.



   (C)   Hours of operation. Gravel processing and outdoor bulk storage
operations shall not take place outside the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, or Saturday. No gravel
processing or outdoor bulk storage operations shall be allowed on Sundays or
legal holidays.



   (D)   Noise. Gravel processing and outdoor bulk storage operations
shall comply at all times with the provisions of the town's noise ordinance
set forth in §§ 130.75 through 130.91 of this code, and provided further,
that gravel processing and outdoor bulk storage operations shall not be
considered to constitute permitted construction and demolition activities
under § 130.78(H) of this code.



   (E)   Setback requirements. Gravel processing operations and outdoor
storage of bulk materials shall comply with and shall not extend into the
following setbacks:



      (1)   Front setback: 40 feet;



      (2)   Side setback: 30 feet; and



      (3)   Rear setback: 30 feet.



   (F)   Height requirements. Outdoor storage piles of bulk materials
shall not exceed 20 feet in height, measured as the vertical distance from
grade immediately adjacent to an outdoor storage pile of bulk materials to
the highest point of that pile.



   (G)   Screening requirements. Where permitted, gravel processing
operations and outdoor bulk storage areas shall be screened from adjacent
public ways, residential districts, or residential use by a landscaped buffer
strip of not less than 20 feet in width containing a double row of compact
evergreen vegetative screening not less than six feet in height, which shall
be erected and maintained between such area and the adjoining residential
district or use.



   (H)   Dust control. The owner and operator of any property
containing gravel processing operations and/or outdoor storage of bulk
materials shall take adequate precautions to prevent dust or other airborne
particulate matter from traveling beyond the property line, including without
limitation, the use of water sprays or such alternative methods approved by
the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management.



   (I)   Drainage and sediment control. The owner and operator of any
property containing gravel processing operations and/or outdoor storage of
bulk materials shall take adequate steps to prevent the permanent collection
and stagnation of surface or underground waters, and to prevent the flooding
and erosion of surrounding property, and the pollution of ponds and streams,
and shall comply with all applicable provisions of Chapters 151 and 153 of
this code.



(Ord. 2018-15, passed 9-4-18)



ARTICLE 27A  MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS



§ 27A00  PURPOSE.



   Mixed-use development is provided as an option for development in the
General Business (GB) and Limited Business (LB) Zoning Districts in order to:



   (A)   Preserve open land and community character while permitting
appropriate development of mixed-use projects in the General Business and
Limited Business Districts;



   (B)   Encourage traditional architecture and historical village
settlement patterns which are well integrated into the existing community,
while avoiding the creation of large-scale shopping centers, business, or
industrial parks having little or no relation to each other or to the
surrounding community;



   (C)   Promote pedestrian friendly environments which provide both a
safe walking atmosphere and a logical connection of destinations within and
adjacent to the development;



   (D)   Provide for compatible mixed- uses and development densities,
including limited residential, commercial, office, institutional, and
agricultural, as well as recreation and open space;



   (E)   Provide areas for economic development in the community and
allow for creative development of businesses that serve the residents of the
district and surrounding areas, and reduce the demand upon the automobile for
access to business;



   (F)   Preserve, create, or enhance the scenic roadside view from
major arterial roads of the town, and where applicable preserve and enhance
scenic water views; and



   (G)   Encourage development of residential uses, including those
that meet the needs of the community as expressed in the Middletown
Affordable Housing Action Plan, but which have limited adverse impact on the
town's ability to provide necessary facilities and services.



(Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



§ 27A01  APPLICABILITY.



   The development of a mixed-use project under the provisions of this
subchapter is optional. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all
proposed mixed-use developments in the General Business (GB) and Limited
Business (LB) Zoning Districts, except for those developments proposed in
accordance with § 719 of this chapter that do not include more than one
mixed-use building, and which do not include more than three residential
dwelling units.



(Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



§ 27A02  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   No building permit shall be granted for construction of any
mixed-use structure or project that is subject to the provisions of this
section until final approval has been granted for a land development project
by the Planning Board and recorded in the land evidence records, except as
follows. Small-scale projects, independently developed in accordance with an
approved mixed-use project master plan shall be encouraged. Therefore, where
master plan approval has been granted for a phased project, preliminary
approval and final plan approval may be granted at the discretion of the
Planning Board for an individual phase or phases, and construction may
commence on that phase or phases independent of other phases.



   (B)   Mixed-use development shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Board in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Middletown
Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision and Development of Land
(Regulations) for a major land development project, including potential
referral to the Technical Review Committee, and is also subject to review
under the development plan review process as provided for in this subchapter
and in accordance with procedures and standards set forth in the Regulations
and as further provided herein.



   (C)   Any development approved under this subchapter that then seeks
approval for expansion of, or a change in the distribution of percentage of
types of use(s) of existing or proposed buildings shall be reviewed as a new
development.



   (D)   Pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-22-7(c), for development
applications being reviewed under the provisions of this section, the
Planning Board shall have the authority to grant special use permits and
variances as may be requested in relation to the requirements of this chapter
subject to the required procedures and findings contained in § 902 Special
Use Permit, and § 903 Variances.



(Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



§ 27A03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.  The use of any lot or lots of record
in the GB or LB zones for the coordinated development of more than one
building, and including not less than three residential dwelling units, to
create a mix of residential and commercial uses in accordance with this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



§ 27A04  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Generally. More than one permitted use shall be allowed on the
same lot and/or within the same building. Permitted uses are established as
specified in § 602 of this chapter for the subject zoning district, except
as otherwise specified below. The provisions of this section shall take
precedence over those of other subchapters that purport to regulate certain
specific uses that are otherwise permitted. No use shall be permitted which
is found to generate unreasonably high traffic volumes, be environmentally
unsound or visually objectionable, or is not consistent with the desired
village character of a mixed-use development project.



   (B)   Prohibited uses. Within a mixed-use development project
authorized under the provisions of this subchapter, the following uses as
defined in § 602 of this code are prohibited:



      (1)   All uses under the extractive and industrial
non-manufacturing heading;



      (2)   All uses under the manufacturing heading;



      (3)   All uses under the transportation, communication, and
utilities heading;



      (4)   All uses under the commercial outdoor recreation
heading, except conservation lands, bird sanctuaries, wildlife preserves, and
public and private parks;



      (5)   All uses under the governmental, educational, and
institutional on privately owned land heading;



      (6)   Livestock farms;



      (7)   Offices of veterinarians and animal hospitals;



      (8)   Offices of veterinarians and animal hospitals, including
indoor boarding of dogs, cats, and other fur-bearing animals;



      (9)   Licensed kennels for the raising, boarding and care of
dogs, cats, and other fur-bearing animals;



      (10)   Single-family and two-family dwellings;



      (11)   Institutional dormitory;



      (12)   Wholesale distribution;



      (13)   Lumber, building materials, heavy equipment, plumbing,
electrical supply, and service;



      (14)   Auto dealers, trailers, tire, battery, access, and
dealers;



      (15)   Gasoline service station;



      (16)   Gasoline station with convenience store;



      (17)   Boat sales, including trailers;



      (18)   Large-scale shopping center;



      (19)   Supermarkets;



      (20)   Convenience stores with fueling pumps;



      (21)   Lunchroom or restaurant with drive-thru or drive-in
service (with or without alcoholic beverages);



      (22)   Retail outlet for wholesale, storage, or manufacturing
use;



      (23)   Funeral home;



      (24)   Crematorium;



      (25)   Automotive repair, service and garages, vehicle body
shop, and welding;



      (26)   Vehicle washing establishment;



      (27)   Vehicle or equipment rentals;



      (28)   Catering and food packaging;



      (29)   Bank or financial institution with drive-thru service;



      (30)   Bowling alleys, billiard, and pool parlors;



      (31)   Gymnasium, court games;



      (32)   Skating rinks; and



      (33)   Indoor roller blade and skateboarding facility.



   (C)   Performance standards. In addition to the requirements of
Article 27 of this chapter, the following performance standards shall apply
to mixed-use development.



      (1)   Commercial uses within a mixed-use development located
in the Limited Business (LB) Zoning District shall limit hours of operation
to 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.



      (2)   Commercial uses within a mixed-use development located
in the General Business (GB) Zoning District shall limit hours of operation
to 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.



      (3)   For purposes of applying the town's noise regulations,
§ 130.75 et seq., mixed-use developments shall comply with the maximum
permissible sound levels allowed in a residential zoning district.



      (4)   Dumpsters within a mixed-use development shall not be
emptied between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   (D)   Mix of uses.



      (1)   Retail commercial uses shall be limited to no more than
35% of gross leasable floor area (hereinafter referred to as “GLFA").



      (2)   A minimum of 25% and maximum of 60% of the GLFA of the
proposed development shall be dedicated to residential uses, not including
hotel, motel, or other transient use.



      (3)   Consistent with § 521.3 of the Regulations, at least
25% of the master plan's developable land area shall be dedicated to
landscaped areas. These areas may consist of plazas, lawns, gardens, or
vegetated buffer areas, and may include picnic areas, playgrounds, and/or
playing fields.



   (E)   Residential. Townhouses, apartments, and mixed
residential/commercial uses shall be reviewed in accordance with the
procedures specified in this subchapter, and the development standards of
Article 15 Multifamily Dwellings. A special use permit shall not be required
for a use classified as a multifamily dwelling structure or multifamily
dwelling project developed as a component of a mixed-use development project.
Where there is a conflict between the requirements of this subchapter and
those of Article 15 Multifamily Dwellings, the provisions of this subchapter
shall control.



   (F)   Commercial. Commercial uses consistent with the desired
character of the district, such as small-scale retail and office, shall be
permitted. Where applicable, the development standards of Article 14 Motels
and Hotels, or Article 18 Shopping Centers, shall be met. Where there is a
conflict between the requirements of this subchapter and those of Article
14Motels and Hotels, or Article 18 Shopping Centers, the provisions of this
subchapter shall control.



   (G)   Open space.



      In addition to the landscaped areas required by this chapter and
the Regulations, the developer has the option of dedicating a portion of the
property for open space uses. Such dedication might entitle the developer to
certain incentives subject to the provisions below.



      (1)   Ownership. Open space designated for use as a public
park or for agricultural use, and dedicated in exchange for certain
incentives provided under this chapter shall be a separate and distinct
lot(s) to which ownership shall be vested in a legally viable entity, which
shall be responsible for the use and maintenance of the open space. Such open
space shall be subject to a conservation easement. Other open space and
landscaped areas to be integrated into the mixed-use development project,
such as common areas, plazas, gardens, and small parks and playgrounds
intended for use by the residents, tenants, and customers of the development
need not be a separate parcel and are not subject to the conservation
easement requirement. Ownership of separate open space parcels shall be
conveyed to one of the following:



         (a)   The town (if it is accepted for park, open space,
agricultural, or municipal use);



         (b)   A nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of
which is the conservation of open space;



         (c)   A corporation, trust, or association owned or to
be owned by the owners of lots or units within the development in common,
based on percentage as outlined in covenants; or



         (d)   Land in agricultural use at the date of adoption
of this subchapter may remain in private agricultural use, provided that a
conservation easement to preserve such agricultural use shall be conveyed to
one of the entities set forth in divisions (a) and (b) above.



      (2)   Use. Open space may be used for one or more of the
following purposes:



         (a)   Agricultural use, including farming or growing
crops and nursery stock;



         (b)   Conservation and passive recreation areas;



         (c)   Pedestrian friendly parks, plazas, town green,
village commons, and the like, designed to include such features as benches,
tables, playground equipment, sidewalks, lighting and landscaping;



         (d)   Stormwater treatment best management practices
(BMP), provided, however, that they occupy no more than 10% of the open space;



         (e)   Active outdoor recreation to fulfill the
community's needs for such facilities as identified by the town, and meet the
need created by the residential development component of the project;



         (f)   Buffer areas between development and adjacent
property; or



         (g)   Underground utilities.



(Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



§ 27A05  DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Density in the mixed-use development project shall be
regulated by net density as well as by the dimensional standards set forth
herein. Where there is conflict between this subchapter and the provisions of
§ 603 Schedule of District Dimensional Regulations, the provisions of this
subchapter shall control. Density shall be based on the total developable
land area within the master plan area. Maximum building lot coverage shall be
35%.



   (B)   Residential density limits. Residential density is determined
by the number of total dwelling units, and the bedroom configuration of such
units, within the overall land development project area, including land
dedicated for open space. Rooming units shall include hotel, motel, and other
transient residential use units, as well as residential care and assisted
living facility units. For the purposes of this section, bedroom shall be
defined consistent with § 1504(B) of this chapter. Residential density shall
not exceed the following:



 

Use
 
Maximum Density


Dwelling units containing one bedroom or less (studios)
 
One unit per 5,000 square feet of land area


Dwelling units containing two bedrooms or more
 
One unit per 7,000 square feet of land area


Rooming units (hotel, motel, and other transient use)
 
One unit per 1,000 square feet of land area



 



(Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



§ 27A06  INCENTIVES AUTHORIZED.



   The allowed mix of uses may be modified as follows if certain public
amenities or affordable housing are provided.



   (A)   The maximum allowed GLFA dedicated to residential use, not
including hotel or motel uses, may be increased up to 75% if a minimum of 10%
of the proposed residential units are affordable, meeting the definition of
"low or moderate income housing" as defined in this chapter and in the Low
and Moderate Income Housing Act, R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-53.



   (B)   The maximum allowed GLFA dedicated to retail commercial use
may be increased up to 50% if a minimum 25% of developable land area of the
parcel(s) is conserved open space for use as a public park, agriculture, or
natural open space. Such open space land shall consist of parcels at least
one acre in size and shall be subject to a conservation easement.



   (C)   Where the proposed project or portion of a project obtains
certification in a recognized green building program the project may take
advantage of a property tax incentive as follows in addition to any tax
incentives than may apply to the project under the town's economic
development incentive program, Chapter 39. Such tax incentives will take
effect upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and demonstrable proof
of qualifying certification subject to the approval of the Tax Assessor. The
abatement shall apply only to the building tax assessment for those buildings
earning certification.



 


Green Building Tax Abatement Incentive






 

Year 1

 

Year 2

 

Year 3

 

Year 4

 

Year 5

 

Year 6+



Tier 1
 

20%

 

16%

 

12%

 

8%

 

4%

 

0%



Tier 2
 

15%

 

12%

 

9%

 

6%

 

3%

 

0%



Tier 3
 

10%

 

8%

 

6%

 

4%

 

2%

 

0%



Tier 4
 

5%

 

4%

 

3%

 

2%

 

1%

 

0%



Green building certification programs are assigned in the following tiers:

Tier 1: LEED Platinum, Green Globes Four, BREEAM Outstanding, and Living
Building Certification or equivalent certification.

Tier 2: LEED Gold, Green Globes Three, BREEAM Excellent, Net Zero
Certification, and Living Building Petals Certification or equivalent
certification.

Tier 3: LEED Silver, Green Globes Two, BREEAM Very Good, and Passive House
Institute United States Certification or equivalent certification.

Tier 4: LEED Certified, Green Globes One, BREEAM Pass, and BREEAM Good or
equivalent certification.



 



(Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



§ 27A07  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   In addition to the design standards contained in Article 5 of the
Regulations, the following standards shall apply to new mixed-use development
projects.



   (A)   Site design. In order to create the desired village-style
development pattern in mixed-use development projects, village-like groupings
of small-scale buildings, rather than a large individual structure or
box-like buildings set back on a large expanse of paved parking is required.
New buildings shall not be large, bulky masses, but shall be scaled down into
groupings of smaller attached or detached structures. To facilitate this
style of development, more then one principal structure per lot shall be
permitted.



   (B)   Parking. Generally, parking shall be regulated by the
provisions of Article 13 Off Street Parking and Loading, and Article 5 of the
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations. To facilitate the desired
village-style development, shared parking and on-street parking may be
permitted.



      (1)   Shared parking arrangements may be permitted by the
Planning Board for different uses which have different hours, days, and/or
seasons of peak parking demand.



         (a)   Non-competing uses. Applicants may propose a
reduction in parking requirements based on an analysis of peak demands for
noncompeting uses. Up to 75% of the requirements for the predominant use may
be waived by the Planning Board if the applicant can demonstrate that the
peak demands for two uses are offset.



         (b)   The Board may require written easements or other
assurances as may be required to enforce shared parking arrangements.



         (c)   In the event of a proposed change in use of one or
more of the uses subject to the shared parking arrangement, the property
owner must first submit documentation demonstrating that the subject uses
would continue to be non-competing, or provisions must be made to ensure that
adequate parking is provided for all uses, subject to the approval of the
Planning Board prior to any change in use.



      (2)   On-street parking may be permitted by the Planning Board
for any internal roads within the development. In permitting on-street
parking, the Board may require roadway construction standards, including
pavement width, which may be reasonably necessary to accommodate on-street
parking. If permitted, the number of on-street spaces may be added to the
number of off-street spaces for the purpose of calculating minimum parking
requirements. The Board may impose conditions required in order to guarantee
that on-street parking spaces remain available for parking in the future.



   (C)   Circulation.



      (1)   The design of proposed access, street layouts, and
impacts on adjacent public roads, traffic control, existing traffic
conditions, and projected traffic generation shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board. Common driveways and shared access that serves more than one
property are encouraged. Roads within a mixed-use development project shall
be constructed to the standards for roads established by the Town of
Middletown Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision and Development of
Land. An application may be denied by the Board if the proposal is
demonstrated to create a hazardous condition when the traffic to be generated
together with existing traffic conditions will adversely impact the safety of
the general public.



      (2)   Access. To the extent possible, all new uses as part of
a master plan shall be provided with vehicular access to an internal network
of streets which shall intersect with arterial roads at locations approved by
the Planning Board. Subject to the approval of the Board, new uses may also
have vehicular access from an existing local road. The number of curb cuts to
access the master plan area shall be minimized.



      (3)   Pedestrian circulation. As part of its review the
Planning Board shall ensure that adequate, safe and attractive pedestrian
and/or bicycle circulation is provided. A sidewalk network shall be provided
throughout the development that interconnects all dwelling units,
non-residential uses, and common open spaces, and with major activity centers
within and adjacent to the development. The Board may require construction of
on-site or off-site sidewalks, footpaths, or bicycle paths. Access to
off-site areas is required, particularly to permit pedestrian and/or bicycle
access to the existing retail areas on arterial roads.



      (4)   Street layout.



         (a)   To the extent practical, subject to site
conditions, street layout shall be designed in a traditional street grid
pattern.



         (b)   Intersections shall be at right angles whenever
possible, but in no case less than 75 degrees.



         (c)   Street orientation. The orientation of streets
should enhance the visual impact of common open spaces and prominent
buildings, create lots that facilitate passive solar design, and minimize 
street gradients. Streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land
where possible, except local streets may terminate in stub streets when such
streets act as connections to future phases of the development.



         (d)   Roundabouts are allowed as applicable.



   (D)   Signs. Signage shall be governed by Article 12 of this
chapter, with the following additional requirements.



      (1)   Signage plan. The Planning Board shall require the
submission of a comprehensive signage plan for all uses, individual
buildings, or complex of buildings and uses as part of its review. The
signage plan shall include conceptual drawings and supporting information
describing the proposed signage for all major buildings and uses, including
entrance signs, directional signs, and the like. The Board may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny such plan as required to achieve consistency
with the purposes of this subchapter and the Commercial Design Regulations.



      (2)   Setbacks. Signs for any individual buildings and/or uses
shall not be located within any required setback, except for permanent signs
at major entrances to the development. The Planning Board shall limit the
number of such major entrance signs to roads or driveways which provide
access to major complexes of uses and buildings, and not to individual uses
or buildings. No such major entrance sign shall be permitted for individual
uses or buildings.



   (E)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   No new principal building shall be located within 100
feet of an existing residential building on abutting property or 50 feet of a
residentially zoned lot.



      (2)   The area within the required setbacks shall be devoted
to a landscaped or natural buffer zone.



      (3)   The maximum height of any building shall be 35 feet.



      (4)   The minimum building front yard setback from public or
private roads within and part of the internal roadway system for the
development plan area shall be five feet, except that where a minimum five
foot planting strip between the sidewalk and roadway are provided, the
building setback may be zero feet. The maximum building setback shall be 50
feet. In the case of a private roadway or driveway internal to the
development, front setback shall be measured from the edge of the sidewalk.



      (5)   The minimum side or rear yard setback within the
development plan area shall be ten feet, provided, however, that irrespective
of lot lines, the minimum separation of buildings shall be 20 feet.



      (6)   The maximum footprint per building shall be as set forth
in § 605 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2018-16, passed 9-4-18)



ARTICLE 28  AMENDMENT



§ 2800  GENERAL.



   The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this chapter
may be amended by the Town Council; and any person, group of persons, or
corporation may make application to the Town Council for an amendment. Any
amendment may be adopted only after due notice and public hearing as
prescribed by the Rhode Island General Laws. Prior to the enactment of any
amendment, a public hearing shall be held by the Town Council in relation
thereto, at which hearing all interested persons shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. Following the public hearing, the Town Council may
act upon the proposed amendment in such manner as it deems to be in the best
interest of the Town. The Town Council may require the applicant to bear the
cost of advertising and mailing relative to the public hearing.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2801  CONDITIONS UPON AMENDMENT.



   The Town Council may, in approving a zone change, limit such change to
one of the permitted uses in the zone to which the subject land is rezoned,
and impose such limitations and conditions upon the use of the land as it
deems necessary. The Town Clerk shall cause the limitations and conditions so
imposed to be clearly noted on the zoning map and recorded in the records of
land evidence of the town. If the permitted use for which the land has been
rezoned is abandoned or if the land is not used for that purpose for a period
of two years or more, the Town Council may after a public hearing as herein
before set forth, change the land to its original zoning use before such
petition was filed.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2802  ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES FOR AMENDMENT TO ZONING MAP.



   If the proposed amendment involves a change to the zoning map, the
applicant shall submit a plan, accurately drawn, showing the shape and
dimension of the area in question, abutting property within 200 feet,
location by tax assessor's plat and lot number and street and, if available,
street numbers, and the location of all zoning district boundaries as they
affect the property in question. In addition, the applicant shall submit a
list of the names and addresses, determined from public record, of the owner
or owners of the property in question and abutting property within 200 feet,
and such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Town Council for
the consideration of a proposed amendment.



(Ord, passed 10-30-06)



§ 2803  FURTHER PROVISIONS AS TO AMENDMENT OF ZONING MAP.



   (A)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
amendments are made in zoning district boundaries or other matter shown on
the zoning map, such amendments shall be made as soon as is practicable after
their adoption by the Town Council. Each such amendment shall be accompanied
by an entry on the zoning map of the date of enactment, and appropriate
reference to the Town Council records where the amendment is described.



   (B)   A description of an adopted amendment shall be attached to the
zoning map until such time as the amendment is made a part of the zoning map.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2804  DUTIES OF TOWN CLERK.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to maintain and update
the text and zoning map, to have custody of the zoning map and to ensure that
entries are made on the zoning map as specified in §§ 2801 and 2803.
Changes which impact the zoning map shall be depicted on the map within 90
days of the authorized changes.



   (B)   The Town Clerk shall make available copies of this chapter and
all subsequent amendments to town officials and the public. The Town Clerk
shall also, from time to time, publish copies of the zoning map which shall
be available for general distribution.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2805  DUTIES OF PLANNING BOARD.



   The Planning Board shall file with the Town Council an advisory opinion
giving its findings and recommendations on all amendments to this chapter
within 45 days after receipt of the proposal and shall review this chapter at
reasonable intervals and whenever changes are made to the Comprehensive Plan
shall identify any changes necessary to this chapter  and forward the
recommended changes to the Town Council. In addition, the Planning Board
shall recommend amendments to the text and map of this chapter wherever there
is a provision for major extension of water or sewer service, location of a
major employment facility or major highway construction. Among its findings
and recommendations to the Town Council with respect to a proposal for
adoption, amendment or repeal of a zoning ordinance or zoning map, the
Planning Board shall:



   (A)   Include a statement on the general consistency of the proposal
with the Comprehensive Plan, including the goals and policies statement, the
implementation program, and all other applicable elements of the
comprehensive plan; and



   (B)   Include a demonstration of recognition and consideration of
each of the applicable purposes of zoning, as presented in § 100.



   (C)   At least once every two years, the Planning Board shall review
this chapter and make recommendations concerning its revision.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2806  REPETITIVE PETITIONS FOR AMENDMENT OF CHAPTER OR FOR GRANTING OF
EXCEPTION OR VARIANCE.



   (A)   Where the Town Council, in the case of an amendment, or the
Zoning Board, in the case of a special use permit or variance, denies an
application, the Town Council or the Board may not consider another
application requesting the same amendment, special use permit or variance for
a period of one  year from the date of such denial or withdrawal.



   (B)   The Town Council or the Zoning Board, as the case may be, may
accept such an application after six months; provided that the application is
accompanied by an affidavit setting forth facts, to the satisfaction of the
Council or Board, showing a substantial change of circumstance justifying a
rehearing.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2807  LANDOWNERS' PROTESTS.



   The Town Council shall have power, after a public hearing as herein
provided, from time to time to amend or repeal this chapter and thereby
change said regulations or districts; provided, that, if there shall be filed
in the office of the Town Clerk on or before the day of such hearing or
within three days thereafter a written protest against such proposed
amendment or repeal signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more of
the street frontage of the property proposed to be affected, or by the owners
of 20% or more of the boundary line between the property proposed to be
affected and the property immediately in the rear thereof when there is no
street between said properties, no such amendment or repeal shall be passed
except by a three-fifths vote of the Town Council. The word OWNER as used in
this section shall not be construed to include attaching creditors or lien
holders other than mortgagees.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



ARTICLE 29  LEGAL STATUS



§ 2900  SEVERABILITY.



   Each article, section, subsection, requirement, regulation or
restriction established by this chapter or any amendment thereto is hereby
declared to be independent, and if any part of this chapter shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other part
of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2901  PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   In their interpretation and application the provisions of this chapter
shall be construed to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this
chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the more
restrictive of those imposing the higher standards, shall govern.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)



§ 2902  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption and all ordinances or
any parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith shall be repealed; provided,
nevertheless, that the provisions of this chapter are substituted for the
prior zoning ordinance and are to be considered as a continuance and
modification to the prior ordinance rather than as an abrogation of the prior
ordinance and a re-enactment of a new ordinance.



(Ord. passed 10-30-06)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 153:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



Section



General Provisions



   153.01   Purpose



   153.02   Applicability



   153.03   Exemptions



   153.04   Variance



   153.05   Compatibility with other requirements



   153.06   Severability



   153.07   Definitions



Permit Procedures



   153.11   Permit requirement



   153.12   Application requirement



   153.13   Application fee



   153.14   Application procedure



Stormwater Management Design Criteria



   153.21   Minimum control measures



   153.22   Stormwater management measures



   153.23   Specific design criteria



   153.24   Maintenance requirements



   153.25   Protection of functions and values



   153.26   Soil erosion and sediment control



   153.27   Safety



Stormwater Management Plan



   153.31   Contents of the stormwater management plan



   153.32   Preparation of the stormwater management plan



Maintenance



   153.41   Maintenance inspection



   153.42   Maintenance agreement



   153.43   Maintenance responsibility



Surety



   153.50   Surety



   153.51   Value



   153.52   Review and approval



   153.53   Posting with the subdivision bond



   153.54   Release



Enforcement



   153.60   Enforcement



   153.61   Revocation or suspension of approval



   153.62   Notification of violation



   153.63   Hearing



Miscellaneous



   153.70   Effective date



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the
public health, safety and general welfare by establishing minimum
requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated with
increased stormwater runoff. Proper management of stormwater runoff will
minimize damage to public and private property, reduce the effects of
development on land, control stream channel erosion, reduce local flooding,
minimize adverse water quality impacts and maintain after development, as
nearly as possible, pre-development runoff characteristics. This chapter
requires stormwater management controls that are consistent with the State of
Rhode IslandStormwater Design and Installation Manual (as amended), and is
intended to minimize water quality impacts and maintain pre-development
runoff conditions.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.02  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to all development occurring within the Town
of Middletown. No person shall develop any land for residential, commercial,
industrial, or institutional uses without having provided stormwater
management measures that control or manage runoff from such developments and
received approval from the Town of Middletown, unless specifically exempted
by § 153.03 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter and the requirements of providing stormwater management:



   (A)   Agricultural land management activities carried out in
accordance with a conservation management plan that has been approved by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service;



   (B)   Additions or modification to existing single-family
residential structures if they comply with division (C) of this section; and



   (C)   Grading, as a maintenance measure or for landscaping, on
contiguous area of developed land, parcels and lots, which in aggregate do
not exceed 5,000 square feet.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.04  VARIANCE.



   A variance from any requirement of § 153.23 of this chapter may be
granted if there are exceptional circumstances applicable to the site.
Requirements of this chapter may be varied:



   (A)   When strict implementation of the requirements create an
unnecessary hardship or are not feasible.



   (B)   To allow use of an innovative management practice where strict
adherence to existing criteria would be costly or of negligible environmental
benefit.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.05  COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   This chapter shall not obviate or supercede any other federal, state or
local ordinances, regulations or statutes. The provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of public health,
safety and general welfare. If a provision of this chapter imposes a standard
different from any related ordinance, regulation or statute, the provision
that imposes the more protective standard shall be observed.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by court of
competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.07  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT.  Land uses normally associated with the
production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.  For purposes of this
chapter, such uses shall not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally related
products.



   APPLICANT. A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a stormwater management permit.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP).A structural device or a nonstructural
practice for pollution management, which is deemed to provide the best
available treatment or control of a pollution source such as stormwater.



   DESIGN MANUAL. The State of Rhode IslandStormwater Design and
Installation Standards Manual, as amended, which serves as the official guide
for stormwater management principles, methods, and practices.



   DETENTION BASIN. An embankment and associated space for impoundment of
water or, alternatively, the space for impoundment partially or entirely
created by excavation rather than by embankment, in either case designed to
temporarily retain stormwater runoff.



   DEVELOPMENT.  The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill or land disturbance; any change in use, or alteration or
extension of the use, of land.



   INFILTRATION BASIN.  A detention facility, which is not an injection
well, which is designed to gradually filter and pass retained water to the
subsurface.



   NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION. Pollution from any source that is not
discernible, confined and discrete. Potential sources of NONPOINT POLLUTION
include, but are not limited to, stormwater runoff, agriculture,
silviculture, mining, construction, septic systems and urban development.



   RECHARGE.  The replenishment of underground water reserves.



   STORMWATER RUNOFF.  Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation.



   WET BASIN. A detention basin designed to retain some water on a
permanent basis.



   WETLAND.  An area, as defined by the R.I. Gen. Laws § 2-1-14 (Coastal
Wetland) and R.I. Gen. Laws § 2-1-20 (Freshwater Wetland) and as determined
by the Department of Environmental Management or the Coastal Resources
Management Council, which is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support–and under
normal circumstances does support–a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic
vegetation.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



PERMIT PROCEDURES



§ 153.11  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   In accordance with § 153.02 of this chapter, all persons must
have an approved Stormwater Management Plan prior to engaging in any land
development activities, unless exempted by § 153.03 of this chapter. To
obtain approval applicants must demonstrate compliance with all policy,
standards and requirements of this chapter to the satisfaction Town Engineer.
Applicants may demonstrate compliance via submission of materials and
documentation in accordance with this section.



   (B)   No building permit shall be issued unless and until:



      (1)   A Stormwater Management Plan has been approved; or



      (2)   The development is exempted by § 153.03 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.12  APPLICATION REQUIREMENT.



   Unless otherwise excepted by this chapter, a permit application must
include the following, prepared to meet the requirements of this chapter, in
order that the permit application be considered:



   (A)   Stormwater Management Plan (§ 153.31);



   (B)   Maintenance agreement (§ 153.42); and



   (C)   Application fee (§ 153.13).



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.13  APPLICATION FEE.



   A nonrefundable application fee will be collected at the time the
stormwater management plan or application for variance is submitted. The
permit fee will provide for the cost of plan review, administration, and
management of the permitting process, and inspection of all Stormwater BMPs
required by this chapter. An application fee schedule shall be established by
the Town Council; fees shall be based upon the relative complexity of the
project and may be amended from time to time.



   (A)   Site plan reviews.



      (1)   Single-Family/Duplex subdivisions.



   No. of Lots            Fee



   1 lot               $100



   2 - 4 lots             150



   5 - 9 lots             300



   10 - 15 lots             400



   16 - 25 lots             550



   26 - 50 lots             700



   51 - 100 lots             950



   100 plus lots:            $950, plus $40 per lot for each
lot over 100.



      (2)   Site plans:  Multi-family, commercial, industrial,
parking lots, pipelines, utilities, land grading, quarrying, mining;
landfills, demolition, and the like.



   Lot Size            Fee



   Up to 30,000 sq. ft.          $150



   30,000 sq. ft - 1.5 acres        200



   2 acres - 5 acres           300



   6 acres - 10 acres           425



   11 acres - 20 acres           550



   21 acres - 50 acres           700



   51 acres - 75 acres          950



   76 plus acres:             $950, plus $40 per acre for each
acre over 75.



   (B)   Site inspections.



      (1)   Single Family/Duplex subdivisions.



   No. of Lots            Fee



   1 lot               $50



   2 - 4 lots             100



   5 - 9 lots            150



   10 - 15 lots             175



   16 - 25 lots             200



   26 - 50 lots             275



   51 - 100 lots             400



   100 plus lots             500



      (2)   Site plans:  same as division (A)(2) of this section.



   Lot Size            Fee



   Up to 30,000 sq. ft         $75



   30,000 sq. ft. - 1.5 acres      100



   2 acres - 5 acres         125



   6 acres - 10 acres         175



   11 acres - 20 acres         250



   21 acres - 50 acres         350



   51 acres - 75 acres         400



   76 plus acres            500



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.14  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   Procedures for processing of submittals shall be as follows:



   (A)   Submittals for approval shall be provided for review,
processing and approval. The number of copies provided shall be as follows:



Type of Project            Number of Copies



                  Required



Minor Subdivision or Land Development    5



Major Subdivision or Land Development    6



Development Plan Review         10



Building Permit only            5



   (B)   All applicants shall provide an application fee as part of the
submittal. Application fees shall be charged in accordance with § 153.13 of
this chapter.



   (C)   The time allowed for plan review shall be commensurate with
the proposed development project, and shall be accomplished simultaneously
with other reviews. Written comments shall be provided to the applicant
regarding the completeness of the submittal and requesting further
information as necessary.



   (D)   If the Town Engineer determines the submittal to be in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, a permit may be issued. If
the Town Engineer determines the submittal does not fully conform to the
requirements of this chapter, a written denial shall be issued with an
explanation for the denial.



   (E)   Any applicant who believes that a submission for approval has
been denied without sufficient cause and that the submittal fully conforms to
this chapter may petition in writing. If the applicant is again denied, the
denial may be appealed to the Zoning Board, whose decision shall be final.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA



§ 153.21  MINIMUM CONTROL MEASURES.



   (A)   All stormwater management practices shall be designed to
provide protection of life and property from flooding and flood flows. The
following standards shall be incorporated into the proposed project:



      (1)   Post-development peak discharge rates from the 2-, 10-,
and 25-year frequency (Type III) storm shall be maintained at or below
pre-development rates;



      (2)   Downstream analysis of the 100-year frequency storm and
control of the peak flow for the 100-year storm to mitigate significant
downstream impacts; and



      (3)   Discharge from any stormwater facility must be conveyed
through properly constructed watercourses to provide for nonerosive flows
during all storm events. The proposed stormwater conveyance system consisting
of open channels, pipes and other conveyance devices shall at a minimum
accommodate the runoff from a 25-year storm event and shall not increase
downstream or off-site flooding, draining, soil, erosion or other runoff
related problems to public or private land, facilities, or water resources.



   (B)   Stormwater management plans shall incorporate best management
practices for water quality control as described in the Rhode Island
Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, as amended, which in
combination are demonstrated to reduce the average annual total suspended
solids in post-development runoff by 80%. Development in drinking water
supply watersheds may be held to higher standards. The water quality design
volume shall be defined as one inch of runoff over all impervious surfaces or
0.4 inches of runoff over pervious areas.



   (C)   Stormwater management plans shall meet the following standards:



      (1)   Each lot will be adequately drained;



      (2)   Natural drainage patterns will be maintained whenever
possible;



      (3)   All existing watercourses will be left open, unless
approval to enclose is granted;



      (4)   All new open watercourses will be seeded, sodded, or
protected with stone rip-rap depending on grades and soil types;   



      (5)   A drainage system designed to accommodate flows
resulting from up to a 25-year frequency storm will be installed and
connected to a defined and approved watercourse; and



      (6)   All necessary easements to off-site watercourses will be
obtained by the applicant, and granted to the Town of Middletown. Easements
shall guarantee access to the Town of Middletown to or along any proposed
stormwater drainage facility or watercourse and shall guarantee the right to
construct, maintain or alter any such facility.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.22  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES.



   The structural and nonstructural stormwater management measures
established in this chapter shall be used, either alone or in combination, in
developing a stormwater management plan.



   (A)   Structural stormwater management practices shall be designed
according to the Design Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum control
requirements established in § 153.21 of this chapter.



      (1)   Appropriate structural practices include, but are not
limited to:



         (a)   Detention, retention and extended detention ponds;



         (b)   Infiltration systems; and



         (c)   Filtering systems.



      (2)   The performance criteria specified in the Design Manual
with regard to site suitability, pretreatment, geometry, and maintenance
shall be considered when selecting structural stormwater management practices.



      (3)   Structural stormwater management practices shall be
selected to accommodate the unique hydrologic conditions of the project site.



   (B)   Nonstructural stormwater management practices shall be applied
to minimize increases in new development runoff or reduce runoff in
redevelopment projects.



      (1)   Appropriate nonstructural practices include:



         (a)   Natural area conservation;



         (b)   Disconnection of rooftop runoff;



         (c)   Sheet flow to buffers;



         (d)   Grass channels; and



         (e)   Environmentally sensitive development.



      (2)   The use of nonstructural stormwater management practices
shall be encouraged to minimize the reliance on structural BMPs.



      (3)   The minimum control requirements listed in § 153.21 of
this chapter may be satisfied when nonstructural stormwater management
practices are incorporated into site designs in accordance with the Design
Manual.



      (4)   The use of nonstructural stormwater management practices
may not conflict with existing state or local laws, ordinances, regulations,
or policies.



      (5)   Nonstructural stormwater management practices used to
satisfy the minimum control requirements must be recorded and remain
unaltered by subsequent property owners.  Prior approval shall be obtained
before nonstructural stormwater practices are altered.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.23  SPECIFIC DESIGN CRITERIA.



   The basic design criteria, methodologies, and construction
specifications, subject to the approval of the Town Engineer shall be those
of the Design Manual. Additional guidance may be provided in the "Middletown
Development Guidelines," as amended.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.24  MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   Maintenance design and maintenance procedures for all stormwater best
management practices shall be in accordance with the Rhode Island Stormwater
Design and Installation Standards Manual, as amended; or the Rhode Island
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. Stormwater management
plans shall demonstrate appropriate maintenance design and procedures for
each proposed best management practice.



   (A)   A maintenance schedule for each type of BMP must be included
in the application package and on the final site plans. These schedules shall
list the frequency and type of maintenance operations necessary along with
the legally responsible party's name, address, and telephone number.



   (B)   Stormwater management facilities must be designed to operate
with minimal maintenance. Facilities that require maintenance shall be
designed to minimize the need for regular maintenance, facilitate required
maintenance, and ensure accessibility of components that require maintenance.



   (C)   The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment
practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing
all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis. These easements
will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect even with transfer
of title to the property.



   (D)   A maintenance agreement must be developed for all privately
owned stormwater practices as established in § 153.42 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.25  PROTECTION OF FUNCTIONS AND VALUES.



   (A)   Stormwater management plans shall address protection of areas
that provide wildlife habitat benefits.



   (B)   Stormwater management plans shall address protection of areas
that provide recreational, cultural or aesthetic values.



   (C)   Stormwater management plans shall demonstrate that during
development and post-development, all receiving waters will be recharged in a
manner closely resembling pre-development conditions and that the developed
site will retain hydrological conditions that closely resemble those prior to
disturbance.



   (D)   Stormwater management plans shall be designed to minimize
negative impacts to water quality in receiving waters.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.26  SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.



   Stormwater management plans shall demonstrate soil erosion and sediment
control in accordance with Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances and the
Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.27  SAFETY.



   (A)   Safety measures are to be incorporated in the design of all
stormwater and infiltration control projects. These may include but are not
limited to fencing, warning signs/stadia rod indicating depth at the deepest
point, outlet structures designed to limit public access, and aquatic benches
in basins containing permanent or standing water levels.



   (B)   (1)   Detention/retention ponds capable of holding water to
a depth of 24 inches for a period of 24 hours shall be enclosed by a
five-foot high fence.



      (2)   Other detention/retention ponds may be required to be
fenced if reasonably necessary for safety.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN



§ 153.31  CONTENTS OF THE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   The applicant is responsible for submitting a stormwater
management plan that meets the design requirements of this chapter. The plan
shall be accompanied by a report that includes sufficient information to
evaluate the environmental characteristics of affected areas, the potential
impacts of the proposed development on water resources, and the effectiveness
and acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff. The
developer or builder shall certify on the drawings that all clearing,
grading, drainage, construction, and development shall be conducted in strict
accordance with the plan.



   (B)   The stormwater management plan shall include the following
information:



      (1)   Narrative description.  A narrative description which
includes the following information: a brief description of the proposed
project; potential water quality and/or hydrologic impacts of the proposed
project on surface and/or groundwater resources, existing infrastructure,
and/or adjacent properties, and proposed measures or practices to mitigate
potential impacts. All affected wetlands, surface water and groundwater
resources, and any significant site constraints affecting the selection of
stormwater management practices must be identified. The narrative shall
include a discussion of protection of environmental resource functions and
values, BMPs employed both during construction and post construction, and a
description of construction and post construction maintenance of BMPs.



      (2)   Site plans. Site plans shall include existing and
proposed contours, watershed patterns, wetlands, limits of clearing and
grading, location of best management practices for erosion and sediment
control and stormwater management, existing and proposed improvements, and
easements and rights-of-way.



      (3)   Construction drawings.  Construction drawings submitted
for stormwater management plan approval shall include the following
structural and construction details for all components of the proposed
drainage system or systems, and stormwater management facilities, all
necessary construction specifications, erosion and sediment control measures
to be implemented in all construction phases along with final site
stabilization plans, limits of clearing and overall site disturbance, data
for total site area, disturbed area, new impervious area, and total
impervious area, table of materials to be used for stormwater management
facility planting, location and results of soil testholes, certification by
the owner/developer that all stormwater management construction will be done
according to this plan, and an as-built certification signature block to be
executed after project completion.



      (4)   Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the
2-, 10-, 25-, and 100-year frequency, 24-hour duration, type III distribution
storm, storm events. These calculations shall use the methodology contained
in the report entitled Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical
Release No. 55 (Second Edition) USDA, Soil Conservation Service, 1986, and
any subsequent amendments thereto. Where the use of the above report is not
practical for reasons based on accepted engineering practice, the use of
alternate methodologies for calculating stormwater discharge may be
permitted; provided, however, that such alternate methodologies shall not
result in an increase in the rate of rain runoff during or after
construction. Watershed maps must be provided depicting pre- and
post-development sub-catchments; within each sub-catchment, the following
information must be shown: areas, soil types, cover types and time of
concentration flow. The calculations shall also include soil curve numbers or
runoff coefficients, peak runoff rates for each watershed area, infiltration
rates, where applicable, culvert capacities, flow velocities, documentation
of sources for all computation methods and field test results.



      (5)   Soils information.  If a stormwater management control
measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration
basins, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be
based on onsite boring logs or testhole data. The number and location of
required soil borings or testholes should be determined based on what is
needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at
the location of the control measure.



      (6)   Maintenance plan.  The design and planning of all
stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and
repair procedures to ensure their continued function. The maintenance plan
shall comply with the requirements of § 153.24 of this chapter. 



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.32  PREPARATION OF THE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   The stormwater management plans shall be prepared and stamped by a
registered professional engineer.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



MAINTENANCE



§ 153.41  MAINTENANCE INSPECTION.



   (A)   Maintenance agreements shall include a reasonable and regular
schedule for the Town Engineer, to conduct on-site inspection of the
functionality and safety of stormwater management facilities. Inspection
schedules shall be based on the complexity and frequency of maintenance needs
and shall be subject to the approval of the Town Engineer.



   (B)   Maintenance agreements shall recognize the authority of the
town, or designee, to conduct on-site inspections of stormwater management
facilities should evidence exist that the facility is not being operated in
accordance with the maintenance agreement or this chapter; or should evidence
exist that the facility poses an eminent threat to public health, welfare, or
safety.



   (C)   Maintenance agreements shall include provisions for
maintenance and record keeping. All activities conducted in accordance with a
maintenance agreement must be recorded in a work order and inspection log.
Timely updates of the log shall be the responsibility of the stormwater
management facility owner. Review of the maintenance and inspection log shall
be completed by the Town Engineer, or designee, to determine the
effectiveness of operation, maintenance and safety activities. Reviews shall
occur as part of each on-site inspection. Additional reviews may be made as
deemed appropriate by the Town Engineer.



   (D)   Inspection reports for stormwater management systems shall
include the following:



      (1)   The date of inspection;



      (2)   Name of inspector;



      (3)   The condition of:



         (a)   Vegetation or filter media;



         (b)   Fences or other safety devices;



         (c)   Spillways, valves, or other control structures;



         (d)   Embankments, slopes, and safety benches;



         (e)   Reservoir or treatment areas;



         (f)   Inlet and outlet channels or structures;



         (g)   Underground drainage;



         (h)   Sediment and debris accumulation in storage and
forebay areas;



         (i)   Any nonstructural practices to the extent
practicable; and



         (j)   Any other item that could affect the proper
function of the stormwater management system.



      (4)   Description of needed maintenance.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.42  MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.



   Maintenance agreements shall provide written, contractual
documentation, which demonstrates compliance with this section and legal
arrangements for the upkeep of stormwater facilities to assure their
functionality and safety in accordance with this chapter. Maintenance
agreements, which describe all maintenance schedules and requirements, must
be developed for each stormwater management facility unless the facility is
dedicated to and accepted by the town. Maintenance agreements may be tracked
by the town to ensure that stormwater management facilities are maintained in
accordance with the recorded agreement.



   (A)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit for which
stormwater management is required, the applicant or owner shall execute an
inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land
served by a private stormwater management facility. Such agreement shall
provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for regular
inspections by the Town Engineer or authorized representative to ensure that
the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design
standards.



   (B)   The agreement shall be recorded by the applicant and/or owner
in the land records of the Town of Middletown.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the stormwater management
facility owner to inform the Town Engineer, or designee, when maintenance has
been accomplished in accordance with the agreement. If notification that
required maintenance has not been performed is not received as scheduled, the
Town Engineer or designee shall, within 14 days, notify the stormwater
management facility owner that maintenance is required and may use any
provision established in §§ 153.60 through 153.63 to ensure said
maintenance is accomplished.



   (D)   The agreement shall also provide that, if after notice to
correct a violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory corrections are
not made by the owner(s) within a reasonable period of time, the town shall
then have the right to take whatever actions it deems necessary to correct
the violations and to assert a lien on the subject property in an amount
equal to the costs of remedial actions as specified in § 153.62.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.43  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The owner of the property on which work has been done pursuant
to this chapter for private stormwater management facilities, or any other
person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition
and promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces, walls, drains, dams and
structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other
protective devices. Such repairs or restoration and maintenance shall be in
accordance with approved plans.



   (B)   A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any
stormwater management facility and shall state the maintenance to be
completed, the time period for completion, and who shall perform the
maintenance. This maintenance schedule shall be printed on the approved
stormwater management plan.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



SURETY



§ 153.50  SURETY.



   The town shall specify the required security, which shall provide for
and secure to the Town of Middletown the actual construction and installation
costs of the improvements shown upon the Stormwater Management Plan. The form
of security shall be reviewed by the Finance Director and Town Solicitor and
shall be rejected if the Finance Director and/or Town Solicitor disapproves
of the content, format or wording of any security submitted to satisfy the
intent and requirements of this chapter. The required security shall include
provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to complete work specified in
the approved stormwater management plan, compliance with all of the
provisions of this chapter, and other applicable laws and regulations, and
any time limitations. All construction shall be inspected and approved under
the direction of the Town Engineer, Public Works Director, and the Town
Planner.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.51  VALUE.



   The application shall submit to the Town Engineer the written estimate
of the cost of construction of stormwater facilities. Such estimate shall be
reviewed by the Town Engineer who shall set an amount estimated to be
sufficient to cover the cost of improvements. The amount of surety required
shall equal 125% of the estimate.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.52  REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   The acceptance of the performance bond and letter of credit for the
purposes of this chapter shall be subject to approval of the form, content,
amount and manner of execution by the town.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.53  POSTING WITH THE SUBDIVISION BOND.



   The amount of a performance bond for the stormwater management plan may
be included with the performance bond of a subdivision provided that the
performance bond receives full review and approval in accordance with §
153.52 of this chapter. The posting of such bond as part of the subdivision
bond does not, however, relieve the owner of any requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.54  RELEASE.



   The installation performance bond shall be released in full only upon
submission of "as-built plans" and written certification by a registered
professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in
accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this
chapter. The Town Engineer will make a final inspection of the stormwater
practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 153.60  ENFORCEMENT.



   The town shall have the authority and discretion to invoke penalties,
whenever a stormwater management facility is not implemented and operated in
accordance with its approval and this chapter. Any penalty invoked shall be
in accordance with this section.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



Cross-reference:



   General penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.61  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF APPROVAL.



   The approval of stormwater management plans, stormwater management
facility construction and stormwater management facility operation, as
subject to this chapter, may be revoked or suspended, and all work on the
project halted for an indefinite time period after written notification is
transmitted by the town for one or more of the following reasons:



   (A)   Failure to comply with any condition of an approved plan, or
specification pertaining thereof;



   (B)   Violation of any requirement of this chapter; or



   (C)   The existence of any condition or the performance of any act
constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangerment to human life or
the property of others.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.62  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Whenever there is a failure to comply with the provisions of
this chapter, the town shall have the right to notify the applicant/owner
that he or she has five days from the receipt of the notice to temporarily
correct the violations and 30 days from receipt of notice to permanently
correct the violations.



   (B)   Should the applicant/owner fail to take the corrective
actions, the town shall then have the right to take whatever actions it deems
necessary to correct the violations and to assert a lien on the subject
property in an amount equal to the costs of remedial actions. The lien shall
be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement
of common law liens on personal property. The lien shall be recorded in the
land evidence records of town and shall incur legal interest from the date of
recording. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including revocation of the
performance bond or assessment of a lien on the property.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.63  HEARING.



   Any owner or responsible party, receiving a written notice of
violation, shall be given an opportunity, within a reasonable time frame, for
a hearing before the town to state his or her case. If evidence indicates
that a violation has not occurred, the town shall revoke the notice of
violation.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



MISCELLANEOUS



§ 153.70  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall take effect upon its passage, provided however,
developments which have received preliminary approval by the Planning Board
or a special use permit by the Zoning Board of Review as of the effective
date shall be subject to the ordinances in effect at the time of the issuance
of said special use permit or preliminary approval. Provided further, after
the installation of stormwater control measures for a development approved
under the earlier ordinance, any additional, stormwater control measures
necessitated by changes or additions to the development or alterations to
such existing stormwater control measures shall comply with this chapter.



(Ord. passed 2-21-06)



TITLE XVII:  TOWN POLICIES



      Policies:



         1.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES HANDBOOK



         2.   EMPLOYEE PHOTO IDENTIFICATION BADGE



         3.   MEMORIAL POLICY



         4.   GRANT APPLICATION & ADMINISTRATION POLICY



         5.   CIVIC APPROPRIATION



         6.   OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION ACQUISITION POLICY



         7.   WATER SERVICE EXTENSION REQUEST POLICY



         8.   MUNICIPAL USE OF RESTRICTED MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
POLICY



         9.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY FOR
EMPLOYEE-CMV DRIVERS



         10.   AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR (AED) POLICY



         11.   HAZARD COMMUNICATION/RIGHT-TO-KNOW PROGRAM



         12.   TECHNOLOGY POLICY



         13.   FACILITY USE POLICY



         14.   STOP SIGN POLICY



         15.   STREET LIGHT POLICY



         16.   VOLUNTEER HANDBOOK



         17.   MISCELLANEOUS BILLING POLICY



         18.   CHANGE OF STREET NAMES POLICY



         19.   RULES OF THE COUNCIL



POLICY 1.
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES HANDBOOK




April 4, 2004




PURPOSE



This manual has been prepared to assist members of all Town of Middletown
boards, committees and commissions in understanding their role in town
government.



GENERAL INFORMATION



The Town of Middletown is organized and operated in accordance with the Rhode
Island General Laws.



The Town of Middletown, by charter, is governed by an elected Citizen Town
Council. The Town Council has provided a Town Administrator. The Town
Administrator manages the administrative functions of the government and is
responsible for effective and economical municipal operation and ensuring
that Town Council policies are implemented.



The Town Council is responsible for establishing policies and providing
overall direction for the town’s operation. As elected representatives,
Council members are directly accountable to the citizens of Middletown. It is
this accountability that requires the Council to be responsible for all
municipal activities. To assist the Council in gaining a greater awareness of
the sentiments of the residents, committees and commissions composed of local
residents familiar with a specialized aspect of Middletown and its needs have
been formed. Committees and commissions expand the opportunity for citizen
input, participation in policy development and provide needed assistance to
town staff.



APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEE AND COMMISSION MEMBERS



Committees and commissions are appointed by the Town Council. The Town Clerk
will supply ordinances or adopted policies associated with a given committee
and a copy of the Rhode Island Public Meetings Law, Town Charter and the
Comprehensive Community Plan, to all board, committee and commission members.



To assist the committee or commission a town staff member may be assigned to
provide technical information, research capability, and professional support.
Town staff members are employees of the town and are accountable to the Town
Administrator, who in turn, is accountable to the Town Council.



Although many committees, commissions and boards shall have a staff person
assigned, it is not mandatory for the staff person to attend each meeting.
Attendance at meetings should be decided by the staff person in consultation
with the respective Chair.



AUTHORITY OF COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS



Unless provided by town ordinance or state law, committees and commissions
are strictly advisory to the Town Administrator and Town Council. Committees
and commissions recommend to the Town Council or Town Administrator the
action they think should be taken on specific issues. Except for the Planning
Board, Zoning Board and Conservation Commission, committees and commissions
have no authority to act on their own without



Town Council or Town Administrator concurrence. They can neither commit
resources, direct staff, nor establish policy for the town without Council
authorization, however, they may never direct staff.



While committees and commissions have no authority to commit town resources,
the Town of Middletown values their recommendations for effective allocation
of resources and development of town policy. Committees and commissions
provide the following important services:



   1.   Identify and develop alternative recommendations regarding
policy issues within a committee’s or commission’s area of specialization.



   2.   Ensure consideration of community values and goals.



   3.   Provide a “sounding board” when solutions are proposed to
problems addressing community needs.



   4.   Provide citizen input into local government.



Committees and commissions responsibilities include:



      1.   Advising the Town Council and Town Administrator on
budget priorities.



      2.   Advising the Town Council and Town Administrator on
long-range plans for capital and program needs.



      3.   Advising the Town Council and Town Administrator on
staffing needs.



SELECTION OF OFFICERS



A committee or commission annually selects one of its members to serve as the
Chair and another as Vice-Chair to act as the Chair in the Chair’s absence.
The Chair’s function is to conduct meetings of the committee or commission
and to serve as a liaison between the staff and the committee or commission.
The Chair runs meetings in accordance with the Rhode Island Open Meetings Law
and Robert’s Rules of Order.



In addition, there shall be a Secretary who will be responsible to record
minutes of every meeting to serve as the official record of a committee’s
or commission’s activities and will be responsible to transmit minutes to
the Secretary of State in conformance with the General Laws of the State of
Rhode Island.



STAFF RELATIONS



Article III, Section 304(g) of the Town Charter states that the Town
Administrator coordinates the activities and programs of all departments,
agencies and all committees or commissions whose members are chosen by the
Town Council. In order for information and requests to flow smoothly, all
requests for funding or requests with a budgetary impact, will go to the Town
Administrator. Town staff members assigned to assist the committee or
commission will provide administrative assistance as required. These duties
include preparing staff reports, and providing analysis and technical data
needed to develop recommendations for the Town Council or Town Administrator.



The staff role is limited to support and advisory functions. The town staff
members are non-voting members and, consequently, do not participate in a
committee’s or commission’s decision-making process. Because of their
purely supporting roles, staff members will not respond to questions from the
public unless requested to do so by the Chair.



Formal staff contacts should be with the primary staff member assigned to the
committee or commission. Contacts by members with the staff members should
clearly be in the framework of the committee or commission assignment.
Committee or commission members should not ask for individual reports,
favors, or special consideration from town staff members.



The staff serves the committee or commission in an advisory capacity, much
the same as the committee and commission serves the Town Council and Town
Administrator in an advisory capacity. Staff members are selected by the Town
Administrator on the basis of their professional and technical abilities and
are expected to guide the committee or commission with recommendations based
upon analysis of the situation, regardless of personal opinion.



The committee or commission should be aware of the staff member’s
responsibilities to provide advice to the committee or commission, the Town
Council and the Town Administrator. In instances where the primary staff
person disagrees with a committee or commission recommendation, staff is
obligated to advise the Town Council, through the Town Administrator, of the
staff member’s recommendation. The Town Council or Town Administrator, in
making a final decision, will consider the advice of both the committee or
commission and the staff, as well as other interested individuals.



TOWN SOLICITOR



The Town Solicitor is responsible for advising the Town Council and staff on
legal matters. It is appropriate for staff to gain any required advice from
the Town Solicitor prior to any meeting on matters requiring legal review.



ATTENDANCE



Committees and commissions in general, meet regularly. Members are expected
to attend all regular meetings. If a member is absent for three consecutive
meetings or has four absences from regular meetings in a calendar year, he or
she may be considered to have lost interest in the committee or commission.
The Council President and Committee Chair will discuss any problems with the
respective member and recommend that the Town Council replace the member if
necessary.



When less than a quorum of the committee or commission members attends a
regular meeting the only action that may be taken is to adjourn the meeting
for a lack of quorum. Without a quorum the meeting is automatically adjourned
until the next regular scheduled meeting unless a special meeting is called
at that time.



MEETINGS



There are two categories of committee or commission meetings: regular and
special meetings. All are open to the public and must be conducted in
accordance with the Rhode Island Public Meetings Law.



When a regular meeting is called, notice of the meeting must be given to all
members 48 hours prior to the meeting posting to the Secretary of State. The
notice must include the date, time, and place of the meeting and the topics
to be discussed. Additionally, a notice announcing the meeting must be posted
in Town Hall at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. The staff will work
with the committee to ensure that proper notice and posting is accomplished.



Committee or commission discussions must be limited to those items contained
in the posted agenda.



Special meetings are those which are called by the Chair or a majority of the
commission members. When a special meeting is called, a notice of the meeting
must also be given to all members and the local news media 48 hours prior to
the meeting. The notice must include the date, time, and place of the meeting
and the topic to be discussed. Additionally, a notice announcing the meeting
must be posted in Town Hall at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. The
staff will work with the committee to ensure that proper notice and posting
is accomplished.



In the case of special meetings as with regular meetings, committee or
commission discussions must be limited to those items contained in the posted
agenda.



CONDUCT OF MEETINGS



Public Meetings:



All regular and special commission meetings must be open to the public.
Adequate notice, as explained in the previous sections, must be given when a
meeting is called.



Agenda Preparation:



To facilitate the orderly conduct of meetings and to provide advance notice
of the business scheduled for discussion, an agenda is prepared for each
meeting. The agenda provided by the committee or commission prior to the
meeting includes staff reports if available and materials necessary for the
decision-making process. The agenda and back-up material, are available for
interested members of the public.



The agenda is prepared by the Chair of the committee or commission. Items
included in the agenda are based upon staff need for direction, Town Council
or Town Administrator referral of items for committee and commission review,
committee and commission direction, and requests by concerned citizens for
consideration of issues of interest. Members wishing to have an item included
on the agenda should contact the appropriate staff or Chair.



Order of Business:



Call Meeting to Order



Roll Call



Approval of Minutes



Committee/Commission Business



Adjournment



Meeting Minutes:



The Secretary is responsible for preparing minutes of all committee and
commission meetings. These minutes provide an official record of the actions
taken and a summary of the important topics raised in the discussion. They
are not intended as verbatim transcript.



Prior to voting to approve the minutes, the members will be given the
opportunity to review minutes of previous meetings. The minutes may be
ordered corrected at the request of the committee or commission to ensure
that they accurately reflect the prior proceeding.



Minutes become the official record of a meeting only after they have been
approved by the committee or commission.



Presiding Officer:



The Chair, selected annually by the members of the committee or commission,
serves as the presiding officer at all committee or commission meetings. In
the Chair’s absence this role is assumed by the Vice-Chair. The Vice-Chair
is also elected annually by members. If both the Chair and the Vice-Chair are
absent, the staff liaison will call the meeting to order and the members will
select a temporary Chair to serve until adjournment or the arrival of the
Chair or Vice-Chair.



The presiding officer retains the right to make seconds and motions,
participate in debate, and vote on all matters.



Right to Address the Committee or Commission:



Every resident or property owner of the town has a right to be present at a
committee, board, or commission meeting and there may, at the committee’s
discretion, be a portion of the meeting allocated for public comments. In
addition, any interested person may request permission from the presiding
officer to address the committee or commission regarding the subject under
consideration or any other subject within the committee or commission’s
jurisdiction.



Voting:



After a motion has been made and seconded, all members of the committee or
commission have the opportunity to vote. Only those motions which receive a
majority vote of the members become official actions of the committee or
commission. Tie votes are lost motions which may be reconsidered.



REPORTS TO THE TOWN COUNCIL



Except for certain planning and zoning actions, motions recommending action
must be returned to the Town Council when appropriate, to receive Council
approval prior to implementation. A subsequent Town Council agenda will list
formal committee or commission recommendations. These items may then be
referred back to the committee or commission by the Town Council with or
without instructions.



Normally, formal committee and commission recommendations are included in a
staff report from the staff liaison to the Town Council through the Town
Administrator, although the Chair may submit the report instead.



The report summarizes the recommendation as well as the pertinent factors
which led to the recommendation for action.



Based on this report and the results of the Council’s own deliberation or
hearings, an ultimate decision is made or the item is referred back to the
originating committee or commission or another related committee or
commission for additional study.



RHODE ISLAND PUBLIC MEETINGS LAW



The Rhode Island Public Meetings Law is designed to ensure that meetings of
organizations supported with public funds are conducted openly without
restrictions on the right of public to attend.



CONFLICT OF INTEREST



Because of the Town Council’s desire to appoint committee and commission
members who will represent a cross section of the community, it is inevitable
that matters will be considered by a committee or commission on which one or
more members have a direct or indirect interest. In these situations, a
member must decide if this interest will cause him or her to be biased in his
or her opinion. If he or she feels a conflict or appearance of conflict
exists, he or she must disqualify himself or herself from participating in
the deliberations and must recuse. Always, Rhode Island Ethics Laws must be
adhered to.



POLICY 2.  EMPLOYEE PHOTO IDENTIFICATION BADGE




Policy # hr2005-1





Date:  February 1, 2005





Revision Date:  N/A




1.0   Policy Statement



   1.1   All employees of the Town of Middletown will be issued an
official photo identification badge. All employees are required to wear their
badges, or carry them if they wear a uniform that identifies them as a town
employee, while performing town business.



   1.2   All retired members of the Middletown Police Department and
Middletown Fire Department will be issued an official photo identification
badge, upon request. The badge will clearly show the word “RETIRED,”
printed next to the employee’s rank at retirement.



   1.3   Except for Middletown police officers and Middletown fire
fighters, the front of the identification badge shall include a photo of the
employee, the employees’ full name, job classification, employee number,
department worked in, and badge expiration date, and shall have the signature
of the Town Administrator on the back.



   1.4   For Middletown police officers and Middletown fire fighters,
the front of the identification badge shall have a photo of the employee, the
employee’s full name, rank, employee number, height, weight, hair color,
Chief of the Department’s signature, and the badge expiration date. The
back of the badge will have a fingerprint of the left index finger (police
only), employee date of birth, and employee signature. In addition, the
Police Department and Fire Department may issue a second ID card to be used
for accountability purposes during emergency operations. The Police Chief and
Fire Chief will develop specific department policies covering the use of such
ID cards.



2.0   Purpose



   2.1   The purpose of the employee photo identification badge policy
is to enhance the personal security of town employees and members of the
public. The employee photo identification badge policy is also intended to
promote customer service by providing easy identification of town employees
by the public and other staff.



   2.2   This policy applies to all town employees regardless of their
employment classification.



3.0   Exceptions



   3.1   Specific employees of the Town of Middletown may be exempt
from visibly displaying their photo identification badge when a safety hazard
may be created while performing aspects of their job, when town
identification may be unnecessary (e.g., out-of-town meetings), or when it
may not be appropriate or safe to be identified. Police officers and fire
fighters in full uniform are exempt from continuously displaying their photo
identification badge, but must have their photo identification badge readily
available for identification purposes.



   3.2   Any other exception to this policy requires the approval of
the Town Administrator.



4.0   Responsibility



   4.1   Human Resources is responsible for administering the town’s
employee photo identification badge program, and maintaining complete and
accurate records of all photo identification badges issued to personnel.



5.0   Procedure



   5.1   Every town employee issued a photo identification badge is
required to display their badge at all times when involved in town business,
except those employees listed in Section 3.1 of this policy. The badge shall
be worn in plain sight, on the outmost clothing garment, above the waistline,
with picture and name clearly observable. Each employee will have the option
of attaching their badge to a 36-inch breakaway lanyard, or to a pocket/lapel
clip.



   5.2   Employees in departments where “call-back” may be
necessary, are required to carry their photo identification badge with them
at all times.



   5.3   Under no circumstances is an employee to permit others to use
his or her photo identification badge, nor may any employee use the photo
identification badge of another person. Employees are not to use their photo
identification badge for any purpose other than to identify themselves as an
employee of the Town of Middletown.



   5.4   No attachments such as pins, stick-on emblems, or awards will
be allowed on the photo identification badge, as they may obstruct clear
identification.



   5.5   Noncompliance with this policy may result in disciplinary
action.



   5.6   Upon termination of employment, leave of absence, or change
from active employee status, the photo identification badge must be
surrendered to the employee’s supervisor. The supervisor shall immediately
return the badge to Human Resources.



   5.7   All photo identification badges are considered to be the
property of the Town of Middletown and shall be surrendered at the request of
the employee’s supervisor, department management, or Human Resources.



   5.8   All new employees will have their photo taken during their new
hire orientation, and will receive their photo identification badge within
five days of their first day of employment. If a current employee has a
change of appearance, name, department, classification, or their badge has
expired, and issuance of a new badge is necessary, submission of an approved
Photo Identification Badge Request Form to Human Resources is required. The
employee’s old badge must be returned to Human Resources before a new badge
will be issued.



   5.9   The first photo identification badge will be issued at the
town’s expense. Replacement of lost or damaged badges will be at the
employee’s expense. There will be no replacement charge due to expiration,
normal wear and tear, damage in the line of duty, change in job title,
department, name, or appearance, which renders the badge inadequate for
identification purposes.



         TOWN OF MIDDLETOWN



   PHOTO IDENTIFICATION BADGE REQUEST FORM



Request Date:                                        
       



Requested By:                                        
              Department:                            
               



_______________________________________________________________________________
______________



To Be Completed By Supervisor / Information will appear on front of Badge



Requested For:                                        
              I.D. #                              
                     



         Full Name               (To Be Assigned if
new employee)



Job Classification:                                    
           



Department Worked In:                                    
           



 

Reason:
 
 
 
 


 
 
_____ New Employee
 
 


 
 
_____ Replacement of Lost Card
 
_____ Fee Collected


 
 
_____ Replacement of Damaged Card
 
_____ Fee Collected if not normal wear/tear


 
 
_____ Change of Information (Name,

     Classification, Department, Appearance)
 
 


 
 
_____ Replacement of Expired Card
 
 



 



Approved By:                                          
                               Date:              
                                 



        Department Head Signature



_______________________________________________________________________________
______________



To Be Completed By Human Resources



Badge Issued By:                                       
                      Badge Issue Date:                
                         



POLICY 3.  MEMORIAL POLICY



PURPOSE:



From time to time, requests are received from individuals and organizations
requesting memorials acknowledging individuals, groups or events on town
property.



The Town of Middletown is committed to protecting the parks, recreational
areas and open spaces of our community while providing opportunities for
memorials that honor an individual, group or event.



POLICY STATEMENT:



   1.   Donors of memorials are asked to consider the primary uses of
public open space in their request for a location or suitable site. While
appropriate memorials may enrich an experience, public open space is also a
very precious commodity. Possible memorials should be reviewed to balance
these benefits.



   2.   The quality of timelessness should be considered in the
significance of the individual, community or event being memorialized.
Memorial proposals should represent the community and be mindful of future
generations.



   3.   Memorial proposals honoring individuals or a personal event
should be represented in a form that has a broader community interest.



   4.   It is recognized that a particular location may reach a
saturation point and it would then be appropriate to consider limitations or
a moratorium of future memorial installations at a particular location or
area.



   5.   Maintenance concerns should be a primary consideration, with
adequate provision made for continued future maintenance.



   6.   Unless otherwise agreed, the donors of the proposed memorial
are required to pay for design, manufacturing, installation and maintenance
endowment to ensure adequate quality of care for the memorial.



   7.   The Town of Middletown may consider contributing funds to a
community monument only when the memorial is for a broad community purpose
that marks an event that has broadly affected the community.



   8.   It is recommended that a waiting period of at least one year
occur between the cause for and the request for a memorial.



   9.   This policy will serve as a guide to the town for memorials it
may wish to place in parks or public areas within its jurisdiction and is
subject to amendments and special exceptions as determined by the Town
Council.



CRITERIA:



All memorials, however, should be judged for appropriateness according to the
following criteria. These criteria are intended to serve as guidelines for
the reviewing body.



   1.   The memorial represents and has been embraced and supported by
the community.



   2.   The memorial has timeless qualities and makes a statement of
significance to future generations.



   3.   The location under consideration is an appropriate setting for
the memorial.



   4.   The location of the memorial will not interfere with existing
and proposed circulation and use patterns.



   5.   The location of the memorial should be consistent with the
Comprehensive Community Plan.



   6.   The memorial contributes to the setting from a functional or
design standpoint.



   7.   The memorial should be designed by a qualified professional in
the field.



APPROVAL PROCESS:



Phase I, Initial Feasibility Consultation: Before proceeding with the
subsequent steps of this process, applicants desiring a memorial should
request and complete a Memorial Feasibility Application available from the
Town Clerk. The completed application must be submitted to the Town Clerk who
will forward it to the Citizens Memorial Committee for review and evaluation.
The application will outline in sufficient detail the main purpose and
concept of the proposal. The Citizens Memorial Committee will then schedule a
feasibility consultation with the applicant and advise the submitter of the
contents of this policy, the appropriateness of the proposed memorial in
light of the policy, and the necessary courses of action required to complete
the application. Requests for tree memorials will be forwarded to the
Middletown Tree Commission for their review and approval. Provided the
request meets their criteria including cost, installation and stewardship
fees, tree memorials shall be accepted. The Citizens Memorial Committee will
take other requests under advisement and make a recommendation to the Town
Council. The Town Council will decide if the proposal meets the criteria of
this policy and decide if the proposal should enter Phase II.



Phase II, Written Proposal: Once the initial feasibility of applicant’s
proposed memorial has been approved, the applicant will be requested to
submit a written proposal with as much information as possible including:
contact name and address, construction and installation details, map
identifying the proposed site, plaque and sign wording, sketches, artists
renderings and/or models, maintenance plan and estimated costs as detailed
below. The Town Clerk shall provide the proposal application. The completed
proposal must be submitted to the Town Clerk for further distribution to the
Citizens Memorial Committee. The Citizens Memorial Committee shall seek input
from the Town Administrator, Town Planner, Department of Public Works
Director, Parks and Recreation Director, Town Solicitor, Town Finance
Director and the Open Space & Fields Committee in conducting its review. The
Citizens Memorial Committee will provide a recommendation to the Town Council
for its consideration.



Estimated Costs: The cost of design, fabrication, plaques, transportation,
installation, site preparation work, foundation, lighting, electrical,
permits, etc. must be financed by the requesting party including provisions
for costs exceeding the original estimates. The memorial proposal shall
include all-inclusive costs, including annual costs for maintenance and
proposed funding source, and any exclusion shall be stated clearly in the
proposal. Should the town contribute to the memorial all regulations required
of the town will be in effect.



   MEMORIAL FEASIBILITY APPLICATION



NAME AND ADDRESS OF APPLICANT                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
   



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



HONOREE - (Individual, Community, Event)                        
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
       



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



MAIN PURPOSE                                          
                                                   
                                                   
                                         



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



PROPOSAL (General concept and location)                        
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
       



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



   MEMORIAL, PROPOSAL APPLICATION



NAME OF APPLICANT                                        
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                       



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



ADDRESS OF APPLICANT                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                   



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



CONTACT PERSON - NAME & ADDRESS (If different than #1 & 2)            
                                                   
                                                   
                                 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



HONOREE (Individual, Community, Event)                          
                                                   
                                                   
                   



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
 



APPLICANT MUST PROVIDE THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENTATION:



   a)   Map identifying proposed site



   b)   Sketches, renderings and/or models



   c)   Plaque and sign wording



   d)   Maintenance plan



   e)   Estimated costs of construction including cost of design,
fabrication plaques, transportation, installation, site preparation work,
foundation, lighting, electrical, permits, etc.



   f)   Estimated cost of annual maintenance



   g)   Funding sources



POLICY 4.  GRANT APPLICATION & ADMINISTRATION POLICY




May 2, 2005




The following policy applies to all departments, boards and committees of the
Town of Middletown.



1.   The Town Administrator and/or Town Council must authorize all
applications for funding through any grant program.



2.   All grant applications that indicate that a town match of grant funds
will be provided, whether through in-kind services or cash, must be presented
to the Town Council for authorization.



3.   In order to provide time for review by the Town Council (if
necessary), requests for authorization to submit a grant application must be
provided to the Town Administrator at least three weeks (21 days) prior to
the grant submission deadline if possible. In the event that an application
deadline will not allow time for presentation to the Town Council, the Town
Administrator may authorize grant submission.



4.   Prior to the submission of any grant application, a request for
authorization must be provided to the Town Administrator. The following
information must be provided as part of the request for authorization:



      •   Project description



      •   Total project cost



      •   Granting agency and amount of grant request



      •   Source of town match funds/services (if any)



      •   Identification of the project manager (responsible for:
preparation of the RFP (if required), review of proposals, recommendation of
contractor, contractor oversight, record keeping, grant reporting as
required, preparation of reimbursement request for grant funds*)



5.   Following authorization and submission of the grant application a
copy of the grant application must be provided to the Planning Department and
the Finance Department. A copy of the application shall also be provided to
the Town Council for information purposes.



6.   In addition to the grant application, following award notification,
copies of the notification, and all reports and requests for reimbursement
must be provided to the Planning Department and Finance Department.



7.   In the event that a grant award requiring town match is presented to
the town, the Town Council must authorize acceptance of the grant.



8.   Upon award notification, the project manager is responsible for
complying with all policies and procedures of the Finance Department
regarding reporting and record keeping.



*Note: The Planning Department is available to assist with grant application
preparation, reporting, and facilitating communication between the town and
funding agencies. However, the project manager is the responsible party for
these, and all other tasks related to the project.



POLICY 5.  CIVIC APPROPRIATION




November 7, 2005




   CIVIC APPROPRIATION - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS



PURPOSE         To fund projects or programs of non-profit civic
organizations, which primarily benefit residents of the Town of Middletown.



ELIGIBLE
ORGANIZATION      Only 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organizations are eligible
for funding. To be eligible, organizations or projects must primarily serve
the residents of the Town of Middletown, Aquidneck Island, or Newport County.



APPLICATION      Each request for funding must be submitted on the
Middletown Civic Appropriation Funding Request Form, and shall be accompanied
by proof of agency’s 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status and agency’s budget from
the prior three years. Organizations that do not have a 501(c)(3) status must
provide documentation that identifies the status they operate under.



            Applications must be signed by an authorized officer
of the organization and received by the Finance Director no later than the
second Friday in March of each year.



            Requests for funding will not be considered unless a
complete application has been submitted in accordance with these requirements.



INELIGIBLE
ACTIVITIES         The following activities will not be funded with
civic appropriations:



               1.   Programs or services that serve
primarily non-Middletown residents



               2.   Political activities



               3.   Marketing and/or fundraising



AGREEMENT
& REPORTING      All recipients of civic appropriations, prior to
receiving funds, shall enter into an agreement with the town regarding the
use of said funds. The agreement shall require that a project status
report(s) be provided to the Town Council at specified intervals.



   CIVIC APPROPRIATION
   REQUEST FOR FUNDING



CONTACT INFORMATION



Agency/Organization:                                      
                      Application Date:                
                 



Project Title:                                          
                                                   
                                         



                     



Total Project Cost: $                                    
             Town Funds Requested: $                      
               



Contact person:   Name                                  
      Phone Number                                  
           



            Fax                                
            E-mail                                
                       



Mailing Address:                                        
                                                   
                                     



Project Address (if different):                              
                                                   
                             



AGENCY INFORMATION



Agency Purpose/Mission:



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
             



List agency officers and/or directors:



                                                   
                                               
                         



                                                   
                                               
                         



                                                   
                                               
                         



                                                   
                                               
                         



                                                   
                                               
                         



Year incorporated as a 501c(3)                        
       Taxpayer ID Number (TIN)                          
       



Main source(s) of funding:                                  
                                                   
                             



PROJECT DESCRIPTION (Attach additional sheets if necessary):



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
             



ADDITIONAL INFORMATION (Please attach)



   1)   Proof of agency 501(c)(3) status, or other



   2)   Agency’s budget, prior three (3)years



   3)   Prior Middletown civic appropriations requests: list year,
amount requested, amount received, and purpose of request.



   Applications and supporting information, and any questions regarding
the application process should be directed to Finance Director, Middletown
Town Hall, 350 East Main Rd., Middletown, RI 02842 - Phone: (401) 846-4478
Fax: (401) 849-6267.



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               



      Authorized
Signature                        Date



POLICY 6.  OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION ACQUISITION POLICY




December 5, 2005




I.   Purpose



   This policy establishes the principles and procedures to be used by the
Middletown Open Space and Fields Committee (“MOS&FC”) for the review and
recommendation to the Town Council of potential acquisition of real property
for open space and recreational purposes. In preserving open space, the goal
of the town is to preserve land which best meets the criteria listed herein.



   Eligible lands include those parcels in the Town of Middletown which
are primarily undeveloped and which consist of open, agricultural, or
littoral property, freshwater and saltwater wetlands and adjoining uplands,
beaches, wildlife habitats, land providing access to or views of the ocean,
harbors and ponds, land for hiking, bicycling and other recreational use,
land for agricultural use, and land for watershed protection.



   Acquisitions may include the purchase or donation of fee interests in
land, conservation easements or other restrictive easements on real property.



   Any potential acquisition of real property for open space and
recreational purposes that is reviewed by the MOS&FC will be ranked by the
criteria listed below. This process will ensure that the town gains the
greatest benefit from its open space and recreation funds by objectively
reviewing proposed land acquisition projects using established criteria.
Before a land acquisition project can be ranked, as described below, it must
be consistent with the town’s Comprehensive Community Plan.



II.   Project Ranking



   After the initial determination of consistency with the Comprehensive
Community Plan is made, each proposed open space project will be ranked by
the Open Space and Fields Committee on the following nine criteria:



      1.   Groundwater and watershed protection potential;



      2.   Ecologically significant habitat;



      3.   Proximity to other protected land;



      4.   Farmland preservation;



      5.   Historic/cultural/scenic qualities;



      6.   Size of parcel;



      7.   Potential to offset the impact of residential development;



      8.   Leverage of town funds in project acquisition; and



      9.   Potential for recreational use.



   Each parcel will be evaluated by the nine criteria listed above. For
each measure, a point score will be assigned, from 0 to 3. The maximum score
will be 27. The point system is intended to establish an objective way to
identify the best projects for acquisition or protection. Those projects
rating a score of 14 or above will be considered priority projects. Projects
rating a score less than 14 may still be considered for acquisition based on
exceptional circumstances.



   The final decision to acquire real property for open space or
recreation purposes will be made by the Town Council. All recommendations
made by the MOS&FC regarding potential land acquisitions are non-binding.
Additionally, all negotiations with the MOS&FC are non-binding and the MOS&FC
shall have no ability to obligate the town in any manner. A confidentiality
agreement shall be signed between any offerer and the MOS&FC prior to
commencing any discussions. An option shall be provided for any offerer to
donate their respective real property to the Middletown Historical Society.
Open space land and recreation acquisition decisions need not follow a strict
rank order, as the opportunities to acquire specific land will vary by
project.



III.   Jointly Funded Projects



   The Town of Middletown endorses jointly funded projects and will
actively participate in projects with other public and private organizations,
as such projects will maximize the total amount of protected land and
maximize the use of municipal funds.



 


TOWN OF MIDDLETOWN



OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION PROJECT RANKING - POINT SYSTEM




CRITERIA

 

NUMBER OF POINTS AWARDED



 

0

 

1

 

2

 

3





Potential to offset impact of development; number of housing units possible
 
<10
 
10-50
 
51-100
 
Over 100


Size of parcel
 
<10 acres
 
10-25 acres
 
26-50 acres
 
Over 50 acres


Groundwater and watershed protection
 
Minimal or none
 
Low
 
Medium
 
High


Ecologically significant habitat
 
Degraded habitat
 
Average habitat
 
Above average habitat
 
Prime habitat


Proximity to other protected land (distance from parcel to other protected
land)
 
More than 1/2 mile away
 
1/4 to 1/2 mile
 
<1/4 mile
 
Abutting or in linkage area


Leverage of town funds - amount of project funding from town
 
Over 75%
 
51 -75%
 
25 - 50%
 
<25%


Farmland
 
None
 
Inactive farm
 
Active farm <25 acres
 
Active farm >25 acres


Historic/cultural/scenic/ neighborhood value
 
Minimal or none
 
Low
 
Medium
 
High


Potential for recreational use
 
Minimal or none
 
Low
 
Medium
 
High




 



TOWN OF MIDDLETOWN



OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION PROJECT RANKING



SOURCE OF VALUES USED IN PROJECT RANKING



1.   Potential to Offset Impact of Development - Calculations based on
maximum residential dwelling units permitted by current zoning per the
applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and/or subdivision and land
development regulations. For land zoned for non-residential purposes, an
estimate of the intensity of development shall be used.



2.   Groundwater and Watershed Protection - Parcel contains significant
freshwater wetlands or significantly protects public and/or private water
supply sources.



3.   Ecologically Significant Habitat - Parcel contains endangered or
threatened species or species of state interest or is in close proximity to
areas that contain such species. Parcel is contiguous or in close proximity
to habitat corridors. Parcel contains unique, unusual, or important wildlife
habitat.



4.   Historic/Cultural/Scenic/Neighborhood Value - Parcel has significant
historical or cultural value. Parcel has significant scenic views or contains
distinctive scenic landscape features. Parcel is adjacent to or in close
proximity to neighborhoods that lack significant open space or recreation
areas.



5.   Potential for Recreational Use - Parcel contains areas that are
suitable for recreational use such as ball fields, trails, areas for
swimming, boating, or fishing, or other active or passive recreational
activities.



 


REQUEST FOR INFORMATION



The Town of Middletown Open Space and Fields Committee (“MOS&FC”) is
seeking to identify properties in Middletown Rhode Island for acquisition by
the town for open space and recreational purposes. Acquisitions may include
the purchase or donation of fee interests in land conservation easements or
development rights. Prospective properties shall be reviewed in accordance
with the MOS&FC’s Open Space Acquisition Policy. All communications
regarding potential land acquisitions shall be confidential. A copy of said
policy along with other terms and conditions and information on how to
respond to the Request for Information are available by contacting the Town
Clerk, Middletown Town Hall 350 East Main Road, Middletown, RI 02842 or (401)
847-0009.



 



POLICY 7.  WATER SERVICE EXTENSION REQUEST POLICY




February 6, 2006




A.   Any resident may request the extension of water services to a
subdivision or parcel by making such request to the Town Administrator on a
form supplied by the town.



B.   Said form shall be signed by the requesting resident and shall be
accompanied by the following:



   1.   Attachment One - A plat or map indicating the areas to which
extension of water service is requested and the location of the nearest water
main outside the service area.



   2.   Attachment Two - A listing by street address, tax assessors
plat and lot number of all owners of property in the requested service area.



   3.   Attachment Three - A sheet containing the signatures of all the
property owners listed on form 2 above, who are joining in the request for
water service.



   4.   Attachment Four - A summary of particular grounds, if any,
warranting extension of service to the area, i.e., recent failures of septic
systems, contamination of drinking water wells, future plans for development
of the area, existing need for increased water service, etc.



C.   Upon receipt, said form and attachments shall be reviewed by the Town
Administrator. If Attachment 3 does not contain the signatures of at least
one-half the property owners listed on Attachment 2, the Town Administrator
may decline to pursue expansion of service and so notify the requesting
party. If the Town Administrator determines the request merits further
consideration he or she shall direct the Town Engineer to circulate it among
the Director of Public Works, Town Planner, Fire Chief and Roads and
Utilities Advisory Commission with a request for review and comment, and such
agencies shall report back to the Town Engineer in writing. The Town Engineer
shall also forward such request to the City of Newport Water Department for
review and comment. The Town Engineer, with the advice of the City of Newport
Water Department, shall determine the size and type of water mains, pipes,
valves, fire hydrants and other necessary appliances, if any, to be installed
for the purpose of extending the distribution system to the requested service
area and shall make an estimate of cost of such installation.



D.   The Town Engineer shall report back to the Town Administrator in
writing concerning the proposed extension including projected costs, schedule
of construction, integration of extension with other projects and any other
factors reasonably related to the merits of the proposed extension. Said
report shall also be delivered to the Finance Director who shall prepare a
preliminary per property annual cost for installation pursuant to Chapter 52
of the Town Code, and forward said cost estimate to the Town Administrator.



E.   Upon receipt, the report and per unit cost projection shall be mailed
to all property owners listed on Attachment 2 along with a form advising the
property owner to indicate his or her desire to proceed with the extension
and directing said form to be returned within 30 days.



F.   Upon the expiration of 30 days, the Town Administrator shall submit
the initial request and Town Engineers report to the Town Council, along with
recommendation for action.



G.   This policy shall apply only to existing developed neighborhoods and
shall not be applicable to developments under the jurisdiction of the
Middletown Planning Board or Zoning Board or other instances in which water
service is to be extended at the sole cost and expense of the property owner
or developer.



POLICY 8.  MUNICIPAL USE OF RESTRICTED MUNICIPAL PROPERTY POLICY




May 1, 2006




Restricted Town Property



For the purposes of this policy the term “Restricted Town Property” shall
mean and include all real property transferred to the Town of Middletown, the
use of which is now or shall be restricted to a particular purpose by the
grantor’s will, deed of grant or accompanying document, whether by
easement, restriction, words of limitation, possibility of reverter or
otherwise, as well as all land owned and used or dedicated by the Town of
Middletown for conservation and open space purposes, (e.g. a municipal park).



Conversion or Use



Notwithstanding the fact that limitations on use of any restricted town
property shall in the future be released, expire or otherwise be declared
void and of no effect, the town may use said property for purposes other than
the conservation and open space purposes for which it is then used or
dedicated and/or as set forth in said limitation, only after the Council
makes the following findings after public hearing thereon:



   a.   That the public need for which the town desires to utilize the
property outweighs the public good afforded by continuing to utilize the
property as set forth in said limitation and/or for the conservation and open
space purposes for which it is then used or dedicated.



   b.   That no amount of restricted town and/or conservation and open
space property is utilized to meet the proposed need than is reasonably
necessary.



   c.   There is no other available and reasonably feasible site for
the proposed use.



   d.   That the town has acquired or arranged the acquisition of
replacement land of similar size and utility as the restricted and/or
conservation and open space town property. Said property shall be devoted to
the uses originally required of the restricted and/or conservation or open
space town property.



Recordation



A certified copy of the vote of the Council affirming such findings shall be
recorded in the land evidence records of the Town of Middletown.



POLICY 9.  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE AND
ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY FOR EMPLOYEE-CMV DRIVERS




July 1, 2006




This policy has been updated in order to comply with the U.S. Department of
Transportation (DOT), Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration Regulations
49 CFR Parts (382, 383, 392 and 395 as applicable).



This amended policy applies to specific members of the Department of Public
Works only and will be distributed once approved.



TABLE OF CONTENTS



PURPOSE STATEMENT



REGULATORY REFERENCES



SECTION I   APPLICABILITY



SECTION II   EFFECTIVE AND REVISION DATES



SECTION III   DEFINITIONS



SECTION IV   PROHIBITED CONDUCT



SECTION V   REQUIRED TESTING



SECTION VI   SUBSTANCES TO BE TESTED



SECTION VII   INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS



SECTION VIII   GENERAL PROVISIONS



SECTION IX   CONSEQUENCES OF PROGRAM VIOLATION(S)



SECTION X   AVAILABLE ASSISTANCE



SECTION XI   NOTIFICATION OF PROGRAM



SECTION XII   CONSENT TO TESTING



SECTION XIII   DISCLAIMER - SEPARABILITY & SAVINGS



SECTION XIV   DISCIPLINE



At the end of this policy you will find pages that are titled “Appendix”
as follows:



APPENDIX A   DRUG TESTED CUTOFF CONCENTRATIONS FOR VALIDITY TESTING



APPENDIX B   PERSONS IDENTIFIED TO ANSWER QUESTIONS



APPENDIX C   SOURCES OF ASSISTANCE AND HELP



APPENDIX D   ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RECEIPT & UNDERSTANDING



PURPOSE STATEMENT



WHEREAS Town of Middletown



   •   Is required by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration to establish programs designed to help
prevent accidents and injuries resulting from the misuse of alcohol or use of
controlled substances by drivers of commercial motor vehicles; and



   •   Values its employees and recognizes each employee’s need for
a safe and healthy work environment and is committed to maintaining a safe
workplace for its drivers and other users of the roadways that is free from
illegal controlled substance use and the misuse of alcohol; and



   •   Recognizes employees who use illegal controlled substances and
abuse alcohol tend to be less productive, less reliable, more prone to
accidents, and more prone to absenteeism, all of which potentially will
result in increased accidents, costs, and risk to the employer, its
employees, and the general public.



Accordingly, Town of Middletown has amended its “Controlled Substance and
Alcohol Testing Policy” in compliance with the following laws and
regulations.



REGULATORY REFERENCES:



U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration Regulations (FMCSA), 49 CFR Parts 382 et al., as originally
published February 15, 1994, revised August 1, 2002, and including any
subsequent amendments (including Parts 383, 392 and 395 as applicable).



U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) and the Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) Regulations, 49 CFR Part
40, as originally published December 1, 1989, revised August 1, 2001, and
including any subsequent amendments.



PREEMPTION of state and local laws.



   (a)   Except as provided in (b) below, federal regulations preempt
any state or local law, rule, regulation, or order to the extent that:



      Compliance with both the state or local requirement and federal
regulations is not possible; or compliance with the state or local
requirement is an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of any
regulatory requirement.



   (b)   The federal regulations shall not be construed to preempt
provisions of state criminal law that impose sanctions for reckless conduct
leading to actual loss of life, injury, or damage to property, whether the
provisions apply specifically to transportation employees, employers, or the
general public.



Except as expressly provided above, nothing in these regulations shall be
construed to affect the authority of employers, or the rights of drivers,
with respect to the use of alcohol or the use of controlled substances,
including authority and rights with respect to testing and rehabilitation.



I.  APPLICABILITY



The drivers subject to drug and alcohol testing under this policy are those
drivers required to have a Commercial Driver’s License (CDL), and operate a
Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV) which is a motor vehicle or combination of
motor vehicles used in commerce to transport passengers or property if the
CMV:



   •   has a gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds
inclusive of a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than
10,000 pounds; or



   •   has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds; or



   •   is designed to transport 16 or more passengers including the
driver; or



   •   is of any size and is used in the transportation of materials
found to be hazardous for the purposes of the Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act and which require the motor vehicle to be placarded, 49
CFR Part 172, Subpart F.



(Includes the Licencia Federal de Conductor (Mexico) requirements; and the
commercial driver license requirements of the Canadian National Safety Code.)



Exceptions: 49 CFR Part 382 shall not apply to employers and their drivers:
(1) Required to comply with the alcohol and/or controlled substances testing
requirements of 49 CFR Part 655 (Federal Transit Administration alcohol and
controlled substances testing regulations); or (2) Who a state must waive
from the requirements of 49 CFR Part 383. These individuals include active
military personnel; members of the Reserves; and members of the National
Guard on active duty, including personnel on full-time National Guard
training and National Guard military technicians (civilians who are required
to wear military uniforms), and active duty U.S. Coast Guard personnel; or
(3) Who a state has, at its discretion, exempted from the requirements of 49
CFR Part 383.



II.  EFFECTIVE & REVISION DATES:



Originally Adopted:    April 5, 1999         Revised:  July 1,
2006



III.  DEFINITIONS



The following terms and abbreviations used in this program are further
defined below:



BAT   Breath Alcohol Technician         EBT      
Evidential Breath Testing Device



CDL   Commercial Driver’s License         FMCSA   Federal
Motor Carriers Safety Administration



CFR   Code of Federal Regulations   



CMV   Commercial Motor Vehicle         MRO      Medical
Review Officer



DER   Designated Employer
Representative      SAP      Substance Abuse Professional



DHHS   Dept. of Health & Human
Services      STT      Screening Test Technician



DOT   Dept. of Transportation



For purposes of this program, the following definitions are adopted.



ACCIDENT means an occurrence involving a commercial motor vehicle:



   1.   resulting in the death of a human being (surviving driver(s)
must be tested);



   2.   when the operator receives a citation under state, or local law
for a moving traffic violation arising from the accident, AND the accident
involved:



      a.   bodily injury to a person, who, as a result of the injury
immediately receives medical treatment away from the scene of the accident; or



      b.   one or more vehicles incur disabling damage as a result
of the occurrence and are transported away from the scene by a tow truck or
other motor vehicle.



ADULTERATED SPECIMEN means a specimen contains a substance that is not
expected to be present in human urine, or contains a substance expected to be
present but is at a concentration so high that it is not consistent with
human urine. If a specimen is reported by the laboratory to the Medical
Review Officer to have been adulterated or substituted, the Medical Review
Officer will offer the employee/applicant the right to have his or her split
specimen tested. If the Medical Review Officer reports that the
employee/applicant has a verified adulterated or substituted test result, it
is considered a refusal to take a drug test. A refusal to take a drug test
results in consequences specified under DOT Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FMCSA) regulations.



ALCOHOL means the intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or
other low molecular weight alcohols including methyl or isopropyl alcohol.



ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION means the alcohol in a volume of breath expressed in
terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath as indicated by a breath
test in Part 40.



BREATH ALCOHOL TECHNICIAN (BAT) means a trained and certified individual who
instructs and assists individuals in the alcohol testing process and operates
an evidential breath-testing device (EBT).



CANCELED OR INVALID TEST means a test that is determined to be invalid by the
Medical Review Officer in the instance of a drug test or by a BAT in the
instance of an EBT alcohol test.



CHAIN OF CUSTODY/ PROCEDURES account for the integrity of each urine specimen
by tracking its handling and storage from point of specimen collection to
final disposition of the specimen.



CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations.



COLLECTION SITE means a place where individuals present themselves for the
purpose of providing a specimen of urine to be analyzed for the presence of
drugs or a breath or saliva specimen to determine alcohol concentration.



COMMERCE means:



   1.   Any trade, or transportation within the jurisdiction of the
United States between a place in a state and a place outside of such state,
including a place outside of the United States; and



   2.   Trade, traffic, and transportation in the United States which
affects any trade, traffic, and transportation described in #1 above.



COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means a motor vehicle or combination of motor
vehicles used in commerce to transport passengers or property if the motor
vehicle:



   1.   Has a gross combination weight rating of 11,794 or more
kilograms (26,001 or more pounds) inclusive of a towed unit with a gross
vehicle weight rating of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds); or



   2.   Has a gross vehicle weight rating of 11,794 or more kilograms
(26,001 or more pounds); or



   3.   Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the
driver; or



   4.   Is of any size and is used in the transportation of materials
found to be hazardous for the purposes of the Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act and which require the motor vehicle to be placarded under
the Hazardous Materials Regulations (49 CFR Part 172, subpart F).



CONFIRMATION (OR CONFIRMATORY) DRUG TESTING means a second analytical
procedure performed by the laboratory on a urine specimen to identify and
quantify the presence of a specific drug or drug metabolite which is
independent of the initial (screening) test, and which uses a different
technique and chemical principle from that of the initial test in order to
ensure reliability and accuracy. Currently, a confirmation drug test is
conducted by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS).



CONFIRMATION (OR CONFIRMATORY) VALIDITY TEST means a second test performed on
a urine specimen to further support a validity test result.



COUNSELING, TREATMENT, OR REHABILITATION PROGRAM is determined by a substance
abuse professional (SAP) knowledgeable in substance abuse disorders based
upon, but not limited to, an evaluation of the nature and extent of an
individual’s substance abuse, use, or problem, and includes a recommended
treatment program, if applicable.



DER - DESIGNATED EMPLOYER REPRESENTATIVE is an employer or an individual(s)
identified by the employer: (1) as able to receive communications and test
results directly from medical review officers, BATs, screening test
technicians, collectors, and substance abuse professionals; (2) who is
authorized to take immediate action to remove employees from safety-sensitive
functions; and (3) to make required decisions in the testing and evaluation
process. Service agents cannot serve as DERs.



DHHS means the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Regulations, 49
CFR Part 40 entitled, “Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug and
Alcohol Testing Programs.” These regulations provide a system of checks and
balances to eliminate errors and the possibility of false positive results,
etc., during collection and analysis of specimens, and review of results by a
Medical Review Officer.



DILUTE SPECIMEN means a urine specimen whose creatinine and specific gravity
values are diminished by the employee (donor) through the introduction of
fluid (usually water) into the specimen either directly or through excessive
consumption of fluids.



DIRECT OBSERVATION means observation of alcohol or controlled substances use
and does not include observation of employee behavior or physical
characteristics sufficient to warrant reasonable suspicion testing as defined
herein.



DISABLING DAMAGE means damage that precludes departure of a motor vehicle
from the scene of an accident in its usual manner in daylight after simple
repairs.



   1.   Includes damage to motor vehicles that could have been driven,
but would have been further damaged if so driven.



   2.   Excludes:



      a.   Damage which can be remedied temporarily at the scene of
the accident without special tools or parts.



      b.   Tire disablement without other damage even if no spare
tire is available.



      c.   Headlight or taillight damage.



      d.   Damage to turn signals, horn, or windshield wipers, which
make them inoperative.



DRIVER/EMPLOYEE means any person who operates a CMV and is designated in
FMCSA regulations as subject to drug and/or alcohol testing. The term
includes individuals currently performing safety-sensitive functions
designated in FMCSA regulations and applicants for employment subject to
pre-employment testing. This definition includes, but is not limited to: full
time, regularly employed drivers; casual, intermittent or occasional drivers;
leased/contract drivers and independent, owner operator contractors who are
either directly employed by, or under lease to a company, or who operate a
commercial motor vehicle at the direction of or with the consent of a company.



EMPLOYER means the Town of Middletown who employs one or more employees
subject to DOT/FMCSA agency regulations requiring compliance with 49 CFR Part
382 and 49 CFR Part 40. As used in this policy the term means the entity
responsible for overall implementation of DOT drug and alcohol program
requirements, including individuals employed by the Town of Middletown who
take personnel actions resulting from violations of this program.
“Employer” is used interchangeably with “company” in this policy.
Service agents are not employers for the purposes of DOT/FMCSA regulations.



EVIDENTIAL BREATH TESTING DEVICE (EBT) means an EBT approved by the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) for the evidential testing of
breath and placed on NHTSA’s “Conforming Products List” (CPL) as
conforming with the model specifications available from NHTSA, Office of
Alcohol and State Programs, and approved by DOT. This definition includes any
subsequent amendments to the CPL of evidential and non-evidential screening
or breath measurement devices approved by DOT.



LABORATORY means a testing laboratory which is certified by the Department of
Health and Human Services under the National Laboratory Certification
Program, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.



MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER (MRO) means a licensed physician (doctor of medicine
or osteopathy), responsible for receiving laboratory results generated by
this program, who has knowledge of substance abuse disorders, and has
appropriate training to interpret and evaluate a donor’s confirmed
laboratory positive or “unsuitable” drug test result together with the
donor’s medical history and any other relevant biomedical information. The
MRO is also required to have a working knowledge of the DOT FMCSA regulations
applicable to the employer for whom he or she evaluates drug test results.



ON DUTY means any period during which a driver is actually performing, ready
to perform, or is immediately available to perform, including four hours
prior to reporting to perform a safety-sensitive function. On duty time also
means any of those on duty functions set forth in Part 395.2 “On Duty”
paragraphs (1) through (7) of 49 CFR, and also listed under the definition
“safety-sensitive functions” in this policy.



PERFORMING A SAFETY-SENSITIVE FUNCTION means any period in which the driver
is actually performing, ready to perform, or immediately available to perform
any safety-sensitive functions.



POLICY means the initiative related to the Controlled Substance and Alcohol
Testing Policy of Town of Middletown for drivers in compliance with U.S.
Department of Transportation and Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
regulations for drug and alcohol testing.



PRIMARY SPECIMEN (in drug testing Bottle A) is the urine specimen that is
opened and tested by the original laboratory to determine whether the
employee has drug(s) or drug metabolite(s) in his or her system. The primary
specimen is distinguished from the split specimen, defined in this section.



RANDOM means that drug and alcohol tests are unannounced and every person
subject to testing will have an equal chance with all other persons of being
selected for testing. There is never a “safe period” for any driver in
the scheduling of random tests. The odds of being selected to provide a
specimen are equal for all drivers on each collection/testing day, regardless
of whether or not the driver was previously selected for testing.



REASONABLE SUSPICION means the employer believes the actions, appearance, or
conduct of a driver are indicative of the use of a chemical substance(s),
including alcohol. Such beliefs are based on the actions, appearance, odor or
conduct of a driver while performing, immediately available to perform, or
immediately after performing a safety-sensitive function.



REFUSAL TO TEST (DRUG OR ALCOHOL) means that a donor refuses to submit to
testing when directed; fails to provide an adequate specimen for testing
without a valid medical explanation after receiving notice of the requirement
to be tested; or, engages in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing
process.



SAFETY-SENSITIVE FUNCTION means any of the on-duty functions listed below:



   1.   All time at a carrier or shipper plant, terminal, facility, or
other property, waiting to be dispatched, unless the driver has been relieved
from duty by the employer.



   2.   All time inspecting equipment as required by the Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Regulations, or otherwise inspecting, servicing, or
conditioning any commercial motor vehicle at any time.



   3.   All time spent at the driving controls of a commercial motor
vehicle.



   4.   All time, other than driving time, spent on or in a commercial
motor vehicle (except for time spent resting in the sleeper berth).



   5.   All time loading or unloading a commercial motor vehicle,
supervising, or assisting in the loading or unloading, attending a vehicle
being loaded or unloaded, remaining in readiness to operate the vehicle or in
giving or receiving receipts for shipments loaded or unloaded.



   6.   All time spent performing the covered person’s requirements
associated with an accident.



   7.   All time repairing, obtaining assistance, or remaining in
attendance upon a disabled vehicle.



SAMHSA means the U.S. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, formerly the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). SAMHSA
was established by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to
regulate laboratories performing analytical drug tests on human body fluids.



SCREENING TEST (OR INITIAL TEST) (1) in drug testing, a laboratory test to
eliminate “negative” urine specimens from further analysis or to identify
a specimen that requires additional testing for the presence of drugs; (2) in
alcohol testing, an analytical procedure to determine whether an employee may
have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in a breath or saliva specimen.



SERVICE AGENTS are all parties who provide services to employers in
connection with DOT drug and alcohol testing requirements. This includes, but
is not limited to, collection site personnel, BATs and STTs, laboratories,
MROs, substance abuse professionals (SAPs), consortia, and third party
administrators.



SHY BLADDER means a donor is unable to provide a sufficient quantity of urine
for a drug test. When this occurs, the donor is offered up to 40 ounces of
fluid over a three-hour period to try to obtain an adequate urine specimen
for testing in one void. If the donor is still unable to provide a sufficient
quantity of urine, the donor must be evaluated by a physician, acceptable to
the MRO, to determine if there is a medical explanation for the inability to
provide the specimen.



SHY LUNG means an individual is unable to provide a sufficient amount of
breath to perform an evidential breath test for alcohol. When this occurs,
the donor must be evaluated by a physician, approved by the employer, to
determine if there is a medical explanation for the inability to provide
sufficient breath.



SPECIMEN means a body fluid that is analyzed to detect the presence of a drug
or determine the alcohol concentration level. This program may be amended to
include specimens other than urine, breath, or saliva that are approved by
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for federal workplace drug
testing programs and the U.S. Department of Transportation.



SPLIT SPECIMEN (Bottle B) is a part of the urine specimen that is sent to the
first laboratory and retained unopened, and which will be transported to a
second laboratory in the event that the employee requests it be tested
following a verified positive, adulterated, or substituted test of the
primary specimen.



STAND DOWN means the practice of temporarily removing an employee from the
performance of safety-sensitive functions based only on a report from a
laboratory to the MRO of a confirmed positive test for a drug or drug
metabolite, an adulterated test, or a substituted test, before the MRO has
completed verification of the test results. Employers are prohibited from
standing down employees unless a waiver has been requested and granted by
FMCSA, in accordance with 49 CFR Part 40.21. An employer does not need a
40.21 waiver to take other actions involving the performance of
safety-sensitive functions.



SUBSTANCE ABUSE PROFESSIONAL (SAP) means a licensed physician (Medical Doctor
or Doctor of Osteopathy), or a licensed or certified psychologist, social
worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor (certified
by the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors
Certification Commission or by the International Certification Reciprocity
Consortium/Alcohol & Other Drug Abuse). All must have knowledge of and
clinical experience in the diagnosis and treatment of alcohol and controlled
substances related disorders. The SAP is also required to have a working
knowledge of DOT/FMCSA applicable to the employer for whom he or she
evaluates employees who have engaged in a DOT drug or alcohol regulation
violation.



SUBSTITUTED SPECIMEN is a specimen not consistent with human urine that has
been submitted by the employee in place of his or her own urine.



SUBSTITUTED TEST means a specimen with creatinine and specific gravity values
that are so diminished that they are not consistent with human urine. If a
specimen is reported to the Medical Review Officer to have been substituted,
the Medical Review Officer will offer the employee/applicant the right to
have his or her split specimen tested. If the specimen is determined to have
been substituted, the Medical Review Officer will advise the
employee/applicant of specific additional procedural steps that may be taken
to challenge the result. If the Medical Review Officer reports that the
employee/applicant has a verified substituted test result, it is considered a
refusal to take a drug test. A refusal to take a drug test has the same
consequences as a verified positive test under FMCSA regulations.



SUPERVISOR means all operational supervisors employed by the Town of
Middletown to supervise driver employment activities, and who have received
60 minutes of training on the specific and contemporaneous physical,
behavioral, and performance indicators of probable drug use, and an
additional 60 minutes of similar training of probable alcohol use/misuse. A
supervisor does not have to be a supervisor by job description title.



VALIDITY TESTING is performed to determine whether a urine specimen is
adulterated or substituted. An adulterated specimen means that a specimen
contains a substance that is not expected to be present in human urine, or
contains a substance expected to be present but is at a concentration level
so high that it is not consistent with human urine. Substituted specimen
means that the creatinine and specific gravity values of the specimen are so
diminished that they are not consistent with human urine.



VERIFIED NEGATIVE DRUG TEST means the result of a confirmed laboratory
positive test has established the presence of a drug(s) or drug metabolite(s)
in a specimen at or above the threshold level, and has been determined
negative by the MRO after an evaluation of the donor’s medical history and
any other relevant biomedical information.



VERIFIED POSITIVE DRUG TEST means the result of a confirmed laboratory
positive test has established the presence of a drug(s) or drug metabolite(s)
in a specimen at or above the threshold level, and has been determined
positive by the MRO after an evaluation of the donor’s medical history and
any other relevant biomedical information.



WORKPLACE means a building, property or premise owned or utilized for
official business, jobsites, and any type of vehicles owned and/or operated
by an employee on behalf of the Town of Middletown.



IV.  PROHIBITED CONDUCT



In accordance with 49 CFR Part 382, subpart B, “Prohibitions” and the
Town of Middletown’s own authority, conduct listed in this section is
prohibited. A driver in violation of the provisions in this section is
subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination for gross and
willful misconduct.



   A.   A driver is prohibited from performing, and the employer is
prohibited from using a driver to perform safety-sensitive functions upon
notification of a verified positive, substituted or adulterated drug test
result or an EBT alcohol test result indicating a measured alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or greater, regardless of when the drug or alcohol was
ingested and regardless of whether or not the driver is under the influence
of alcohol or using drugs, as defined in federal, state or local law.



   B.   Refusal to Test (alcohol or controlled substance test). Refusal
to test means that the driver:



      1.   Fails to appear for any test (except a pre-employment
test) within a reasonable time, as determined by the employer, consistent
with DOT/FMCSA regulations, after being directed to do so by the employer;



      2.   Fails to remain at the testing site until the testing
process is complete. If the reason for the test is pre-employment, then a
driver who leaves the testing site before the testing process commences a
pre-employment test is not deemed to have refused to test;



      3.   Fails to provide a urine specimen for any drug test
required by Part 40 or FMCSA regulations. If the reason for the test is
pre-employment, then a driver who does not provide a urine specimen because
he or she has left the testing site before the testing process commences is
not deemed to have refused to test;



      4.   In the case of a directly observed or monitored
collection in a drug test, fails to permit the observation or monitoring of
the driver’s provision of a specimen;



      5.   Fails to provide a sufficient amount of urine when
directed, and it has been determined through a required medical evaluation
that there was no adequate medical explanation for the failure;



      6.   Fails or declines to take a second test the employer or
collector has directed the driver to take;



      7.   Fails to undergo a medical examination or evaluation, as
directed by the MRO as part of the verification process, or as directed by
the employer under 49 CFR Part 40.193. In the case of a pre-employment drug
test, the driver is deemed to have refused to test on this basis only if the
pre-employment test is conducted following a contingent offer of employment;



      8.   Fails to cooperate with any part of the testing process
(e.g., refuse to empty pockets when directed by the collector, behave in a
confrontational way that disrupts the collection process); or is reported by
the MRO as having a verified adulterated or substituted test result.



   C.   Controlled Substances



      The following conduct is prohibited when a driver is performing
safety-sensitive functions on the employer’s property, in the workplace, on
duty, or off duty when the conduct affects the driver’s fitness for duty.



      1.   Use of illicit drugs.



      2.   Having a verified positive, adulterated or substituted
drug test result. If a properly conducted urinalysis shows that the donor has
in his/her urine any amount of a drug(s) or drug metabolite(s) whose
possession or use is unlawful or in violation of this program; and, that
amount is not the result of medical treatment, prescribed by a licensed
medical practitioner for that individual, it will constitute a verified
positive drug test. Legally prescribed medications must be written ONLY for
the driver. Any driver taking a medication prescribed for another person
(including a spouse) will be considered to be taking an illegal substance.



      3.   Misuse or impairment by authorized drug use which may
affect work performance or pose a danger to the safety of the driver or
others. Drivers are required to inform the employer’s designated
representative of any therapeutic drug use.



      4.   Reporting for duty or remaining on duty requiring the
performance of safety-sensitive functions when the driver uses any controlled
substance unless the controlled substance is prescribed for the driver and is
used pursuant to the instructions of a licensed medical practitioner who has
advised the driver that the substance will not adversely affect the
driver’s ability to safely operate a commercial motor vehicle.



      5.   If the employer has actual knowledge that a driver has
used a controlled substance the driver shall not be permitted to perform or
continue to perform a safety-sensitive function.



      6.   When a driver fails to provide an adequate urine sample,
the employer, after consulting with Medical Review Officer (MRO) shall direct
the driver to obtain, within five days, an evaluation from a licensed
physician, acceptable to the MRO. The referral physician must have expertise
in the medical issues raised by the driver’s failure to provide a
sufficient specimen, to determine if a medical condition precluded the driver
from providing a sufficient amount of urine. The referral physician, if other
than the MRO, must provide a written report to the MRO. The MRO will
seriously consider and assess the referral physician’s recommendation in
making a determination of the reason for the inability to provide an adequate
specimen.



         a.   If the MRO determines the failure to provide an
adequate specimen was due to a medical condition, the test will be reported
as cancelled to the employer. A cancelled test will not constitute a
“refusal to test” and no disciplinary action will be taken.



         b.   If the MRO determines the failure to provide an
adequate specimen was not due to a medical condition, the MRO will report a
“refusal to test” to the employer.



      7.   Leaving the scene of an accident without a valid reason,
except to submit to a drug test or to receive or to obtain medical treatment,
will create a rebuttable presumption of a refusal to test.



      8.   Consuming any chemical substance within 32 hours after an
accident unless a post-accident drug test has been performed.



   D.   Alcohol



      The following conduct is prohibited when a driver is performing
safety-sensitive functions on the employer’s property, in the workplace, on
duty, or when the conduct affects the driver’s fitness for duty.



      1.   Use of alcohol, an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or
greater, or under the influence of alcohol while performing safety-sensitive
functions, operating or having physical control of a vehicle, or within four
hours before going on duty operating or having physical control of a vehicle.



      2.   Leaving the scene of an accident, except to submit to an
alcohol test or to receive or obtain medical treatment, or consuming any
alcohol within eight hours after an accident unless a post-accident alcohol
test has been performed.



      3.   Having ANY measured alcohol concentration or detected
presence of alcohol while on duty, operating or in physical control of a
vehicle (Ref: 49 CFR Part 392.5).



      4.   Be on duty or operate a vehicle if, by the driver’s
general appearance or conduct or by other substantiating evidence, the driver
appears to have used alcohol within the preceding four hours regardless of
whether an EBT alcohol test has been performed.



      5.   Report for duty, perform or continue to perform
safety-sensitive functions including driving a vehicle with an alcohol
concentration level of 0.02 or greater. No employer having actual knowledge
that a driver has an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater shall permit
the driver to perform or continue to perform safety-sensitive functions.



         a.   When a driver has a confirmed alcohol concentration
level of 0.02 but less than 0.04 the driver will be immediately removed from
performing any safety-sensitive function until the start of the driver’s
next regularly scheduled duty period, but not less than 24 hours following
administration of the test. No action, under DOT/FMCSA, may be taken against
a driver based solely on test results showing an alcohol concentration level
less than 0.04. The employer is not prohibited from taking action, under its
own authority, or as otherwise consistent with law.



         b.   When a driver has a confirmed alcohol concentration
level of 0.04 or greater the driver will be immediately removed from
performing any safety-sensitive function.



      6.   Any driver whose appearance, conduct, or other
substantiating evidence gives reasonable suspicion of alcohol use and a test
cannot be administered will be immediately removed from performing any
safety-sensitive function. Removal from duty for reasonable suspicion when
unable to administer a test for alcohol does not require evaluation by a
substance abuse professional.



      7.   When a driver fails to provide an adequate breath sample,
the driver will be referred to a licensed physician, approved by the
employer, for a medical evaluation to determine the reason for the inability
to provide an adequate sample.



         a.   If the physician determines the failure to provide
an adequate specimen was due to a medical condition, it will not constitute a
“refusal to test” and no disciplinary action will be taken.



         b.   If the physician determines the failure to provide
an adequate specimen was not due to a medical condition, it will constitute a
“refusal to test.”



V.  REQUIRED TESTING



This program provides for testing of applicants for employment and employee
drivers for the use of controlled substances, including alcohol, for the
following purposes:



      Pre-employment (Drug Test Only)



      Random



      Return to Duty and Follow Up, if applicable



      Reasonable Suspicion



      Post Accident



Employees will be compensated for time expended to provide test samples only
if testing is directed by the employer. Applicants are not compensated for
time expended to provide test samples.



   A.   PRE-EMPLOYMENT



      1.   As a condition of employment, all driver applicants are
required to comply with the provisions of the Town of Middletown Controlled
Substances and Alcohol Testing Policy and the requirements of 49 CFR Part 40,
and 49 CFR Part 382.



      2.   All driver applicants are subject to pre-employment drug
testing unless otherwise exempted by regulation. Testing must be completed,
and the employer must receive a verified negative test result for the driver
prior to the first time a driver performs a safety-sensitive function. The
employer is not required to administer a pre-employment controlled substances
test if the driver meets the exceptions of 49 CFR Part 382.301(b) as follows:



         a.   Has participated in a controlled substances testing
program that meets the requirements of 49 CFR Part 382 within the previous 30
days; and



         b.   Was tested for controlled substances within the
past six months (from the date of application with the employer), or
participated in the random controlled substances testing program for the
previous 12 months (from the date of application with the employer); and



         c.   The employer ensures that no prior employer of the
driver has records of a violation of the MCSA regulations or the controlled
substances use rule of another DOT agency within the previous six months.



      3.   If the employer exercises the exception to perform a
pre-employment controlled substances test, the employer must contact the
controlled substances testing program(s) in which the driver participated and
shall obtain and retain the following information:



         a.   Name(s) and address(es) of the program(s).



         b.   Verification that the driver participates or
participated in the program(s) and the program conforms to Part 40.



         c.   Verification that the driver is qualified under
FMCSA regulations, including that the driver has not refused to be tested for
controlled substances.



         d.   The date the driver was last tested for controlled
substances and the results of any tests taken within the previous six months
and any other violations of FMCSA regulations.



      4.   If the employer uses, but does not employ a driver more
than once a year to operate a CMV, the information enumerated above in #2
must be obtained at least once every six months.



      5.   Upon an offer of employment and as a condition of
employment: (1) An applicant will be asked to disclose, under affidavit,
whether he or she has had a positive drug or alcohol test result, or refusals
to test on any pre-employment test administered by an employer to which the
applicant applied for, but did not obtain safety-sensitive transportation
work covered by DOT during the past three years. If the applicant admits that
he or she had a positive or a refusal to test on a pre-employment test, the
applicant must satisfy the requirements of V.A.5.d. (l) through (6) below to
be considered for employment. (2) The applicant will also be required to sign
a release authorizing the Town of Middletown to obtain information on the
applicant’s alcohol tests with a concentration result of 0.04 or greater,
verified positive controlled substances test results, refusals to be tested,
and other violations of DOT/FMCSA drug and alcohol testing regulations from
DOT employers for whom the individual worked during the three years prior to
the date of application or transfer.



         a.   If feasible, the information required in V.A.5
above must be obtained from previous employers prior to the first time the
applicant performs safety-sensitive functions for the Town of Middletown.



         b.   If not feasible, the information must be obtained
and reviewed as soon as possible, but no later than 30 calendar days after
the first time the applicant performs safety-sensitive functions unless the
employer obtained or made and documented a good faith effort to obtain this
information.



         c.   The employer must retain this information
(including documentation of a good faith effort to obtain) for three years
from the date of the driver applicant’s first performance of
safety-sensitive duties.



         d.   Upon receipt of the information described in
V.A.5., above, if the information states or if the driver applicant admits
that he or she has had a verified positive drug or alcohol test, or refusal
to be tested, the employer is prohibited from using the driver applicant to
perform safety-sensitive functions until and unless the applicant documents
successful completion of the return-to-duty process by submitting evidence of:



            (1)   Evaluation by a substance abuse professional;



            (2)   Completion of any treatment, counseling,
rehabilitation, etc., recommended by the substance abuse professional;



            (3)   Reevaluation by a substance abuse
professional to determine the applicant has successfully and properly
complied with the treatment, counseling, rehabilitation, etc.



            (4)   Passed a return-to-duty test with a result
indicating an alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 and/or a controlled
substances test with a verified negative result;



            (5)   Completion of at least six follow-up tests
with negative results within 12 months after a return to duty; and



            (6)   The applicant has been medically certified
as qualified to drive. If the driver applicant refuses to provide written
consent to authorize release of the drug and/or alcohol testing history he or
she will not be permitted to perform safety- sensitive functions as a driver.



         e.   If the Town of Middletown is the employer from whom
information is requested, after reviewing a driver applicant’s specific,
written consent, the information must immediately be released to the employer
making the inquiry. All information provided must be in writing, and a
written, confidential record of the information, including the date, the
party to whom it was released, and a summary of the information provided,
documented and maintained on file.



   B.   REASONABLE SUSPICION



   This policy provides for the testing of drivers for controlled
substances, including alcohol, when a Town of Middletown supervisor, who is
trained in accordance with 49 CFR Part 382.603, has reasonable suspicion the
driver is unfit to perform his/her duties or has used or is using controlled
substances and/or alcohol prohibited under this program.



      1.   Reasonable suspicion arises from direct observation of
use (as defined in this policy),or based on specific, contemporaneous,
articulable observations concerning the appearance, behavior, speech or body
odors of the driver. A written record shall be made of the observations
leading to an alcohol or controlled substances reasonable suspicion test, and
signed by the supervisor or company official who made the observations,
within 24 hours of the observed behavior or before the results of the alcohol
or controlled substances tests are released, whichever is earlier.



      2.   Drivers may be directed by the Town of Middletown to
undergo reasonable suspicion testing while the driver is performing
safety-sensitive functions, just before the driver is to perform
safety-sensitive functions, or just after the driver has ceased performing
such functions.



      3.   Determinations to test will be made immediately before,
during or immediately after a driver is performing a safety- sensitive
function.



      4.   The supervisor who makes a determination to test a driver
for reasonable suspicion of drugs or alcohol shall not perform the specimen
collection for the drug test or perform the EBT test for alcohol.



      5.   Reasonable suspicion alcohol tests will be performed
within eight hours of the determination that such testing is required.



      6.   A driver will be removed from performing safety-
sensitive functions until a test can be performed confirming an alcohol
concentration less than 0.02; for a minimum of 24 hours if an alcohol test is
not performed.



      7.   Procedure - A driver directed to submit to a reasonable
suspicion controlled substances and/or alcohol test will be transported to a
collection/testing site by the employer’s designated representative for the
collection of urine and/or a breath specimen.



   C.   RANDOM



      1.   All covered employees are subject to random testing for
drugs and alcohol. The selection of drivers for random alcohol and controlled
substances testing is made by a scientifically valid method, using a computer
based random number generator that is matched with the drivers’ social
security numbers, and is fully documented. Selections are spread reasonably
throughout the calendar year, and each driver selected for testing must be
tested during the selection period.



      2.   Drivers selected for random testing will be notified and
shall immediately report to the collection/testing site upon notification to
be tested. If the driver is performing a safety- sensitive function, other
than driving a commercial motor vehicle, at the time of notification, the
employer will ensure the driver ceases to perform the safety-sensitive
function and proceed to the testing site as soon as possible. Failure to
immediately proceed to the collection/testing site may be deemed a refusal to
test.



      3.   Random alcohol tests will be performed while the driver
is performing or just before performing safety-sensitive functions or just
after the driver has ceased performing safety- sensitive functions.



      4.   Random controlled substances testing will be conducted at
any time the driver is working for the employer.



      5.   When a driver is off work due to long term layoffs,
illnesses, injuries or vacation more than 30 days, the pre-employment
controlled substances provisions apply prior to the driver performing
safety-sensitive functions.



   D.   POST ACCIDENT



      1.   Drivers are subject to post accident testing for drugs
and alcohol as defined in Section III, “Definitions” of this program.
Drivers will be provided with necessary post accident information,
procedures, and instructions so that testing can be performed.



      2.   Post accident drug and alcohol tests will be performed as
soon as practicable following an occurrence involving a commercial motor
vehicle operating on a public road in commerce. Drivers must remain readily
available for testing, in the absence of receiving or obtaining medical
treatment, and are prohibited from using any drugs or alcohol until testing
has been completed. The administration of legal drugs determined to be
medically necessary for treatment of injuries of the driver when prescribed
by a licensed medical practitioner will not be delayed pending a drug test.



      3.   Post accident controlled substance tests must be
performed as soon as possible but within 32 hours after an accident. If the
test is not administered within 32 hours following the accident, the
supervisor shall cease any attempt to administer the test, under DOT
authority, and document why it was not possible to perform it and maintain on
file. Records must be submitted to the FMCSA upon request.



      4.   Post accident EBT alcohol tests must be performed as soon
as possible but within eight hours after the accident.



         a.   If an EBT test is not administered within two hours
following the accident, the supervisor is required to document why it was not
performed and maintain on file. Records must be submitted to the FMCSA upon
request.



         b.   If an EBT test is not administered within eight
hours following the accident, the supervisor shall cease any attempt to
administer the test and document why it was not performed, and if it would
have been possible to perform a blood alcohol test.



      5.   Any “missed” tests, e.g., tests could not be
performed, shall be reported to FMCSA, upon request.



      6.   A breath or blood test for the use of alcohol and/or a
urine test for the use of controlled substances conducted by federal, state,
or local officials having independent authority for the test, shall be
considered to satisfy the post accident testing requirements, provided such
tests conform to the applicable federal, state, or local testing requirements
and that the results of the tests are obtained by the employer.



The following table notes when post-accident drug and alcohol tests are
required to be performed in accordance with DOT/FMCSA regulations.



 


Type of Accident Involved

 

Citation Issued to the CMV Driver

 

Test Must Be Performed By Employer



Human Fatality
 

YES

 

YES




NO

 

YES



Bodily  injury with immediate medical treatment away from the scene.
 

YES

 

YES




NO

 

NO



Disabling damage to any motor vehicle requiring tow away.
 

YES

 

YES




NO

 

NO




 



   •   The driver must receive a citation within 32 hours of the
occurrence under state or local law for a moving traffic violation arising
from the accident.



   E.   RETURN TO DUTY



      When a driver is in violation of the controlled substances or
alcohol prohibitions in this policy, before a driver returns to duty
requiring the performance of safety, he or she must:



      1.   Be evaluated by a Substance Abuse Professional (SAP);



      2.   Complete the recommended treatment, counseling plan, etc.



      3.   Be re-evaluated by the SAP to determine successful
completion of treatment; and



      4.   Submit to a return-to-duty test for drugs and/or alcohol.



         a.   The result for a controlled substances test result
must be negative; and/or



         b.   The alcohol test result must confirm an alcohol
concentration level less than 0.02.



   F.   FOLLOW-UP



      1.   After passing a return-to-duty test, the driver is
required to submit to at least six follow-up tests during the first 12 months
following return to duty.



      2.   Follow-up testing may be required for up to 60 months
unless the substance abuse professional makes a determination testing is no
longer warranted.



      3.   Follow-up tests are unannounced and may include testing
for drugs and/or alcohol.



      4.   Follow-up alcohol testing will be conducted only when the
driver is performing or just before performing safety-sensitive functions, or
just after the driver has ceased performing safety- sensitive functions.



VI.  SUBSTANCES TO BE TESTED



   A.   Under this program applicants and drivers will be routinely
tested for the substances listed below:



      Cocaine



      Opiates



      Phencyclidine (PCP)



      Cannabinoids (Marijuana)



      Amphetamines, and



      Alcohol



      The threshold levels (screening and confirmation) for the
substances specifically listed above have been established by DHHS/SAMHSA
Regulations, 49 CFR Part 40, and this program adopts, by reference, these
threshold levels for testing purposes as published and including any
subsequent amendments.



      The name of the Town of Middletown designated employee to contact
to answer any questions, third party administrator, testing laboratory, and
Medical Review Officer are listed in Appendix B.



VII.  INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS



   A.   The individual being tested will receive a copy of the Chain of
Custody Form upon completion of the specimen collection process for a urine
drug test.



   B.   A copy of the Chain of Custody Form, which includes the test
result, will be given to the individual tested for alcohol when performed
using an EBT.



VIII.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   A.   If a driver is using a legally obtained prescription or over
the counter drug which has actual mind or performance altering effects, he or
she must show the medication and/or prescription to the DER at the beginning
of the work period. Depending upon the nature of the drug and the driver’s
job duties, the DER may refuse to allow the driver to perform
safety-sensitive functions unless he or she refrains from taking the
medicine/drug:



      1.   Until such time as the effects will not be experienced
during the driver’s on-duty time; or



      2.   Upon presenting a note from the prescribing licensed
medical practitioner stating there are no adverse side effects from taking
the prescription, which would impair the driver’s ability to safely perform
safety-sensitive functions.



   B.   Witnessed urine specimen collection (specimens collected under
direct observation) shall or may be required when:



      1.   A donor alters or attempts to alter, substitute, or
contaminate a urine specimen.



      2.   A donor attempts to obstruct the testing process.



      3.   The temperature of the urine specimen is outside of the
established temperature range 90-100 degrees F.



      4.   A previous drug test report indicated an adulterated or
substituted specimen.



      5.   A donor has previously had a verified positive test
result.



   C.   Drivers shall notify the Designated Employer Representative
(DER) of any conviction of a violation, in any type of motor vehicle, of a
state or local law relating to motor vehicle traffic control (other than a
parking violation) but including a criminal drug or alcohol statute
conviction. Drivers are also required to notify the DER if his/her driver’s
license is suspended, revoked, or canceled by a state or jurisdiction; who
loses the right to operate a CMV for any period; or, who is disqualified from
operating a CMV. The notification must be made before the end of the business
day following the day the employee received notice of the suspension,
revocation, cancellation, lost privilege, or disqualification.



   D.   Legally prescribed medications must be written ONLY for the
driver. Any driver taking a medication prescribed for another person
(including a spouse) will be considered to be taking an illegal substance.
Medications and any food substance containing alcohol are prohibited for
drivers on duty and while performing safety-sensitive functions. Ingestion of
hemp foods or products is not a legal medical explanation as a defense to a
positive drug test under DOT.



   E.   The employer reserves the right to implement a policy, in
accordance with 49 CFR Parts 40.155(c) and 40.197, that requires an employee
to immediately take another drug test upon the receipt of a “negative
dilute” test result from the MRO. When an employee is directed to take
another test (but not under direct observation), the result of the second
test becomes the test of record. The employer is not permitted to make the
employee take a third test because the second test was also “negative
dilute.” If an employee does not take a second test, it becomes a refusal
to test and the employee will be subject to the same disciplinary action as
provided herein on a refusal to test.



IX.  CONSEQUENCES OF PROGRAM VIOLATION(S)



   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this policy, no driver shall
perform safety-sensitive functions, including driving a CMV, if the driver
has engaged in conduct prohibited by this policy or an alcohol or controlled
substances rule of another U.S. Department of Transportation agency. For
purposes of this section, “CMV” means a commercial motor vehicle in
commerce as defined herein and a CMV in interstate commerce as defined in 49
CFR Part 390.



   B.   No driver who has engaged in conduct prohibited by this policy
shall perform safety-sensitive functions, including driving a CMV, unless the
driver has successfully completed the referral, evaluation, and treatment
listed in this policy.



   C.   No driver tested under the alcohol testing requirements of the
DOT/FMCSA listed in this policy who is found to have an alcohol concentration
of 0.02 but less than 0.04 shall perform or continue to perform
safety-sensitive functions for the Town of Middletown including driving a
CMV, until the start of the driver’s next regularly scheduled duty period,
but not less than 24 hours following the administration of the test.



   D.   Drivers who have engaged in conduct prohibited by this policy
will be advised by the Town of Middletown of the resources available to the
driver in evaluating and resolving problems associated with the misuse of
alcohol and use of controlled substances, including the names, addresses, and
telephone numbers of substance abuse professionals and counseling and
treatment programs. (Appendix C)



   E.   Drivers who have engaged in conduct prohibited by this policy
will be evaluated by a SAP who will determine what assistance the employee
needs in resolving problems associated with alcohol misuse and controlled
substances use.



   F.   In the event a driver is returned to duty requiring the
performance of safety-sensitive functions after engaging in conduct
prohibited by this policy, and after successfully completing the
return-to-duty requirements, the driver shall undergo a return-to-duty
alcohol test with a result indicating an alcohol concentration of less than
0.02, and/or a controlled substances test with a verified negative result,
and be subject to the follow-up testing requirements.



   G.   The requirements of this policy with respect to referral,
evaluation and rehabilitation do not apply to applicants who refuse to submit
to a pre-employment controlled substances test or who have a pre-employment
controlled substances test with a verified positive, substituted, or
adulterated test result.



   H.   An employee cannot voluntarily self-identify that he or she
needs assistance to avoid testing or disciplinary action related to a
violation of this policy.



X.  AVAILABLE ASSISTANCE



   A.   A list of names, addresses, and telephone numbers of
counseling, treatment and rehabilitation providers is available in Appendix
C. The employer does not imply any endorsement of these services in
furnishing such a list.



   B.   An employee may contact the employer’s Designated
Representative listed in Appendix B to identify additional resources for
treatment.



   C.   Periodically the employer will disseminate drug abuse and
alcohol misuse information to drivers.



   D.   A driver identified as needing assistance in resolving problems
associated with alcohol misuse or controlled substances use must:



      1.   Be evaluated by a Substance Abuse Professional (SAP);



      2.   Complete the recommended treatment, counseling plan, etc.;



      3.   Be re-evaluated by the SAP to determine successful
completion of treatment; and



      4.   Submit to a return-to-duty test for drugs and/or alcohol;



         a.   The result for a controlled substances test result
must be negative; and/or



         b.   The alcohol test result must confirm an alcohol
concentration level less than 0.02;



      5.   After passing a return-to-duty test, the driver is
required to submit to at least six follow-up tests during the first 12 months
following return to duty.



      6.   Follow-up testing may be required for up to 60 months
unless the substance abuse professional makes a determination testing is no
longer warranted.



      7.   Follow-up tests are unannounced and may include testing
for drugs and/or alcohol.



      8.   Follow-up alcohol testing will be conducted only when the
driver is performing or just before safety-sensitive functions, or just after
the driver has ceased performing safety-sensitive functions.



XI.  NOTIFICATION OF PROGRAM



   A.   Applicants for driver positions may be notified of this policy
by letter, by posting the policy or a notice thereof prominently in the
applicant processing area or by including such notice on the application for
employment.



   B.   All incumbent employee drivers were notified of the policy
prior to implementation and will receive notice of any amendments to this
policy. Copies of the policy are available for inspection during regular
business hours in the Town of Middletown Human Resources office.



   C.   Questions regarding this program may be directed to the
employer’s Designated Representative listed in Appendix B.



XII.  CONSENT TO TESTING



Applicants and employee drivers are required to complete and sign a form that
includes, but is not limited to, the information listed below. The form will
be executed and maintained as part of the pre-placement/employment
procedures. As such, the requirements for confidentiality are the same as any
other record.



   A.   Acknowledges that notice of this policy, 49 CFR Part 382, U.S.
Department of Transportation/Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
regulations and testing procedures required in 49 CFR Part 40 has been
provided.



   B.   Acknowledges consent by the applicant or employee to be tested
for chemical substances, as defined herein, and comply with the provisions of
the policy.



   C.   Authorizes the employer’s Medical Review Officer and a breath
alcohol technician, when an EBT test is performed or STT when a saliva/breath
screening alcohol test is performed, to release results to the DER.



   D.   Acknowledges that no applicant or employee can be forced to
submit to a chemical substance-screening test, but that failure to submit
constitutes a refusal to test and shall create a rebuttable presumption that
a chemical substance was present.



XIII.  DISCLAIMER - SEPARABILITY AND SAVINGS



   A.   Federal regulations shall not be construed to preempt
provisions of state criminal laws that impose sanctions for reckless conduct
leading to actual loss of life, injury, or damage to property, whether the
provisions apply specifically to transportation employees, employers, or the
general public.



   B.   This policy does not imply any contractual employment
relationship and the employer explicitly reserves the right to “employment
at will.”



   C.   If any portion of this policy or any amendments hereto should
be held invalid by operation of law or by any tribunal of competent
jurisdiction, or if compliance with or enforcement of any portions should be
restrained by such tribunal pending a final determination as to its validity,
the remainder of this program and amendments, or the application of such
portion to persons or circumstances other than those to which it has been
held invalid or as to which compliance with or enforcement of has been
restrained shall not be affected.



   D.   This policy is not intended to and shall not constitute any
waiver of any rights possessed by the employer from any source whatsoever.
Nothing in this policy shall be construed as limiting the employer’s right
to take disciplinary action up to and including termination for willful
misconduct due to involvement with drugs or alcohol not specifically
addressed herein.



   E.   This policy may be amended as required by federal, state, or
local laws and regulations affecting drug and alcohol testing programs in the
workplace.



XIV.  DISCIPLINE



Any employee affected by this policy shall be subject to the following
disciplinary procedures:



   1.   Refusal by a driver to submit to a post-accident alcohol or
controlled substances test required by 49 CFR § 382.303, a random alcohol or
controlled substances test required under 49 CFR § 382.305, a reasonable
suspicion alcohol or controlled substances test required under 49 CFR §
382.307 or a follow-up alcohol or controlled substances test required under
49 CFR § 382.311, shall result in immediate termination.



   2.   Any driver submitting to any of the tests referenced above and
testing positive shall be immediately suspended without pay and immediately
referred to the town’s Employee Assistance Provider for mandatory
counseling. Refusal to participate in mandatory counseling shall result in
immediate termination.



   3.   A driver participating in mandatory counseling shall not be
assigned to a safety-sensitive function and shall be paid at a non-CDL rate
of pay for that period of time.



   4.   The suspension shall be lifted if the follow-up test results
are negative. Should any driver test positive a second time, they shall be
subject to immediate termination.



APPENDIX A



      DHHS/SAMHSA Certified Drug Testing Laboratories



      Drugs Tested/Cutoff Concentrations/Validity Testing/Retention of
Specimens



A laboratory must only test a specimen for the following five drugs or
classes of drugs in a DOT drug test. The laboratory is prohibited from
testing specimens for any other drugs including DNA testing.



 


Type of Drug/Metabolite

 

Initial Test

 

Confirmation Test



Marijuana

  Metabolite Delta-9-tertrahydrocannabinol-9 -carboxylic acid (THC)
 

50

 

15



Cocaine Metabolites

  (Benzoylecgonine)
 

300

 

150



PhencycIidine (PCP)
 

25

 

25



Amphetamines

  Amphetamine

  Methamphetamine
 

1000

 




   500



   500



(specimen must also contain amphetamine at a concentration of greater than or
equal to 200 ng/ml).



Opiates

  Morphine

  Codeine

  6-MAM
 

2000

 




2000



2000



10*



*A 6-MAM test is only performed when a specimen contains morphine at a
concentration equal to or greater than 2000 ng/ml.



 



1.   On an initial test: (1) If the result is below the cutoff
concentration level it is reported as negative. (2) If the result is at or
above the cutoff level, a confirmation test must be performed.



2.   On a confirmation test: (1) If the result is below the cutoff level
it is reported as negative. (2) If the result is at or above the cutoff
level, it is reported as a confirmed positive result.



3.   Quantitative values for morphine or codeine must be reported at
15,000 ng/ml or above.



   Alcohol testing performed by a Certified Breath Alcohol Technician
(BAT) using an Evidential Breath Testing (EBT) Device, which appears on the
CPL of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and approved by
DOT. Prohibited alcohol concentration levels are:



 


Screening

 
Confirmation


0.02> requires confirmation
 
0.02<0.04 requires 24 hours removal

0.04> requires removal and referral to SAP



 



APPENDIX B



Contacts/Providers



PERSON IDENTIFIED TO ANSWER QUESTIONS



As part of the Town of Middletown policy to ensure fair and equal treatment
of drivers, the Town of Middletown understands that there may be questions
and concerns involving the Controlled Substances and Alcohol Testing Policy.



To assist drivers in understanding the requirements placed on drivers and the
Town of Middletown, the Human Resources Manager has been designated to answer
any questions that may arise concerning the Controlled Substances and Alcohol
Testing Policy, and may be contacted at:



Phone: 401-846-5781         Fax:   
401-845-0412         E- mail: ldible@middletownri.com



         Address:  350 East Main Road, Middletown, RI 02842



 


THIRD PARTY ADMINISTRATOR







Health Resources
600 West Cummings Park, Suite 3400
Woburn,MA 01801
800-350-4511





DRUG TESTING LABORATORY







Laboratory Corporation of America
69 First Avenue
Raritan, NJ 08869
800-437-4986





MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER







Brian Morris, M.D., MRO et al
600 West Cummings Park, Suite 3400
Woburn,MA 01801
800-350-4511
Fax 781-938-4690





 



49 CFR Part 40 and 49 CFR Part 382 must be available upon request to covered
employees and representatives of employee organizations. 49 CFR Part 40 is
accessible online at http://www.dot.gov/ost/dapc , by fax on demand at
1-800-225-3784 requesting document 151, by phone at 1-866-512-1800, or by
writing to U.S. Department of Transportation, Office of Drug and Alcohol
Policy and Compliance, 400 Seventh Street SW, Room 10403, Washington, D.C.
20590.



APPENDIX C



Sources of Assistance and Help



SAMHSA Facility Locator http://fmdtreatment.samhsa.gov . This searchable
directory of drug and alcohol treatment programs shows the locations around
the country that treat alcoholism, alcohol abuse and drug abuse problems. The
Locator includes more than 11,000 addiction treatment programs, including
resource centers, outpatient treatment programs, and hospital inpatient
programs for drug addiction and alcoholism. Listings include treatment
programs for marijuana, cocaine, and heroin as drug and alcohol treatment
programs for adolescents, and adults.



 


National Clearinghouse for Drug and Alcohol Information







   Monday - Friday
   1-800-729-6686





National Council on Alcoholism







   7 days a week, 24 hours a day
   1-800-622-2255





 



APPENDIX D



Town of Middletown



CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY AND PROCEDURES



ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF RECEIPT AND UNDERSTANDING



   I HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGE that I have received read and understand the Town
of Middletown’s Controlled Substances and Alcohol Testing Policy and
procedures and understand that I must abide by the terms as a condition of
employment. I understand that during my employment I may be required to
submit to a controlled substances and/or alcohol test based on U.S.
Department of Transportation (DOT) and Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FMCSA) regulations.



   I also understand that refusal to submit to a controlled substances or
alcohol test is a violation of DOT regulations and my employer’s policy,
and may result in disciplinary action, including suspension (with or without
pay) or termination of employment for gross and willful misconduct. I further
understand the consequences related to controlled substances use or alcohol
misuse conduct as prohibited by my employer’s policy.



   I acknowledge that the provisions of the Town of Middletown’s
Controlled Substances and Alcohol Testing Policy and procedures are part of
the terms and conditions of my employment, and that I agree to abide by them.



THE UNDERSIGNED STATES THAT HE OR SHE HAS READ THE FOREGOING ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
AND UNDERSTAND THE CONTENTS THEREOF:



Date:                                            
               Date:                            
                   



______________________________               ___________________
___________



Signature of Employee/Applicant               Witness Signature



______________________________



Printed Name



______________________________



Social Security Number



 



Original Acknowledgment of Receipt and Understanding will be kept on file
with the Town of Middletown. A copy of the Acknowledgement of Receipt and
Understanding will be provided to the employee/applicant.



POLICY 10.  AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR (AED) POLICY




August 7, 2006




PURPOSE:



The purpose of this policy is to provide guidance in the management and
administration of a workplace AED program for the Town of Middletown



BACKGROUND:



Sudden Cardiac Arrest (SCA) is a condition that occurs when the electrical
impulses of the human heart malfunction causing disturbance in the heart’s
electrical rhythm called Ventricular Fibrillation (VF). This erratic and
ineffective electrical heart rhythm causes complete cessation of the
heart’s normal function of pumping blood resulting in sudden death. The
most effective treatment for this condition is the administration of an
electrical current to the heart by a defibrillator delivered within a short
time of the onset of VF. An AED is used to treat victims who experience SCA.
It is only to be applied to victims who are unconscious and do not have a
pulse, signs of circulation and normal breathing. The AED will analyze the
heart rhythm and advise the operator if a shockable rhythm is detected. If a
shockable rhythm is detected, the AED will charge to the appropriate energy
level and advise the operator to deliver an electric shock.



Accordingly, the Town of Middletown has adopted this policy to assist trained
lay rescuers to be better prepared in the event of a sudden cardiac arrest
situation.



AED PROGRAM COORDINATOR:



To assist all employees in understanding the requirements of the AED Policy,
the Middletown Fire Chief/EMA Coordinator has been designated as the AED
Program Coordinator and is available to answer any questions that may arise
concerning the AED Policy. The Fire Chief may be contacted as follows:



               Middletown Fire Department



               Address: 239 Wyatt Road  Middletown, RI 02842



               Phone: 401-846-7888  Fax: 401-845-0499
Website: www.middletownri.com



COORDINATOR RESPONSIBILITIES:



1.   Selection of equipment.



2.   Selection of employees for AED training.



3.   Distribution of AED-trained employee lists.



4.   Coordination of training for emergency responders.



5.   Coordinating equipment and accessory maintenance.



6.   Maintain on file a specifications/technical information sheet for
each approved AED model assigned or donated to the Town of Middletown.



7.   Consulting and coordinating of local Emergency Medical Services (EMS).



8.   Revision of this policy in coordination with the Town Safety
Committee, as required.



9.   Monitoring the effectiveness of this program.



10.   Communication with the medical advisor on issues related to medical
emergency response program including post-event reviews.



MEDICAL ADVISOR:



The medical advisor for the AED program is:



      Attending Physician, Newport Hospital Occupational Health Center



      19 Friendship Street, Newport RI 02840



      401-845-1245



The Newport Hospital Occupational Health Center will provide medical
oversight of the AED program including:



   1.   Writing prescriptions for AEDs.



   2.   Reviewing and approving guidelines for emergency procedures
related to the use of AEDs and CPR in accordance with state and local laws.



   3.   Evaluation of Post-Event with all rescuers involved.



LOCAL EMS NOTIFICATION:



EMS in the Town of Middletown is responsible for on-scene delivery of
emergency care. The AED Program Coordinator will notify rescue personnel of
deployment and location of AEDs.



AUTHORIZED AED USERS:



The following certified personnel may use the AEDs:



   1.   Any trained volunteer responder who has successfully completed
an approved AED/CPR training program and holds a current Health Care Provider
Card or a Heart saver/AED course completion card.



   2.   Any professional rescue personnel who are currently certified
according to the guidelines of a nationally recognized program such as the
American Heart Association, the American Red Cross or the National Safety
Council.



TRAINING:



Training classes should meet the guidelines of a nationally recognized
program, such as the American Heart Association, the American Red Cross, or
the National Safety Council. The Town of Middletown provides the American
Heart Association “Heart saver AED for Lay Rescuers and First Responders”
course, which teaches volunteers to recognize the warning signs of heart
attack, perform CPR and use an AED. All participants successfully completing
the course receive an American Heart Association Heart saver AED course
completion card with a recommended renewal date of two years from the date of
issue.



Employee retraining for AED/CPR shall occur at least every two years, or
sooner if the town’s equipment, policies or procedures change. Trained
volunteers are strongly encouraged to renew their AED/CPR training at least
every two years.



The Program Coordinator, in coordination with the Town of Middletown Safety
Committee, will identify all employees of the Town’s Response Team. (See
Program Coordinator for current list of Response Team Members including all
trained certified employees).



A mock “Cardiac Arrest Drill” will take place at each facility with an
AED. The annual drill will be scheduled and monitored by the Program
Coordinator. See Attachment A for the form to be used.



AED-TRAINED EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITIES:



In the event of an emergency medical situation, the trained employee is to
activate the external emergency response by directing someone to call 911.
Trained employees should recognize the signs of sudden cardiac arrest, start
CPR immediately, locate and use the defibrillator, and care for the victim
until the EMS team arrives.



EQUIPMENT:



The Town of Middletown Program Coordinator has chosen the LifePak 500 Plus
AED as the preferred AED. The town has also purchased Zoll AED Plus models
for use at Sachuest Beaches. These models have both been approved by the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) and include product features that add speed,
reliability, and confidence to the responder team. A list of FDA approved
AEDs is available at www.americanheart.org/cpr.



ADDITIONAL RESUSCITATION EQUIPMENT:



Each AED will have one set of defibrillation electrodes connected to the
device and one spare set of electrodes with the AED. It is also recommended
to include a set of infant/child electrodes in the kit. One resuscitation kit
will be connected to the handle of the AED. This kit contains two pairs of
latex-free gloves, one razor, one set of trauma shears, and one facemask
barrier device.



LOCATION AND QUANTITY OF AEDs:



Middletown Town Hall - 1st floor at the entry to the Council Chambers (1)



Middletown Public Library - 1st floor Circulation Desk (1)



Middletown Senior Center - 1st floor at the entry to the kitchen (1)



Middletown Police Station - 1st floor Dispatch Office (1)



Middletown Fire Station - On apparatus vehicles (3)



Middletown Department of Public Works - On Sewer Department vehicle (1)



Middletown Campground - Campground Office (1)



Sachuest Beaches - First Aid Office (1) / 2nd Beach “Rock” and 3rd Beach
ramp (2) portable units for use during the beach season (Memorial Day through
Labor Day).



EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE:



All equipment and accessories necessary for supporting medical emergency
response shall be maintained in a state of readiness. The AED Program
Coordinator or designee shall be responsible for having regular equipment
maintenance performed. All maintenance tasks shall be performed according to
equipment maintenance procedures as outlined in the manufacturer’s
operating instructions.



The AED will perform a self-diagnostic test that includes a check of battery
strength and an evaluation of the internal components. The Program
Coordinator or designee shall perform a monthly AED routine check following
the Maintenance Checklist provided by the manufacturer, initial the checklist
and post it with the AED.



   1.   If the OK icon is NOT present on the readiness display, contact
the AED Program Coordinator or designee immediately.



   2.   If the battery icon is visible, the CHARGE-PAK charging unit
needs to be replaced. You may continue to use the AED if needed.



   3.   If the wrench icon is visible, the AED needs service. You may
attempt to use the AED if needed. Continue to provide CPR until another AED
is brought to the victim or EMS arrives to take over care.



   4.   If the expiration date on the electrode is near, notify the AED
Program Coordinator or designee immediately.



Following the use of emergency response equipment, the Program Coordinator or
designee will ensure that all equipment is cleaned and/or decontaminated as
required, and replace pads, pocket masks and other peripheral supplies that
were used. In addition, the AED Maintenance Checklist will be completed and
the AED will be returned to a state of readiness.



POST-EVENT REVIEW AND DOCUMENTATION:



Following each AED deployment, a review shall be conducted to learn from the
experience. The AED Program Coordinator or designee shall conduct and
document the post-event review. All key participants in the event shall
participate in the review. Included in the review shall be the identification
of actions that went well, strategies for improvement, and critical incident
stress debriefing. A summary of the post-event review shall be sent to the
AED Program Coordinator or designee and the Newport Hospital Occupational
Health Center. The AED Program Coordinator or designee shall maintain a copy
of the post-event review summary.



ATTACHMENT A



Annual AED Program / Equipment Assessment



Once each calendar year, the AED Program Coordinator or designee shall
conduct and document a system readiness review, using this form. This review
shall include a team “mock drill” to be conducted with local Emergency
Medical Services (EMS) to fine-tune the effectiveness of the program. The
Program Coordinator shall retain this form.



Printed Name:                                          
               



Signature:                                            
                   



Date:                                                
                       



AED Location:                                          
               



Serial Number:                                          
               



Additional Resuscitation Equipment:                            
                                                   
                     



Expiration Date (pads):                                    
                                                   
                               



Medical Advisor:                                        
                                                   
                                   



Program Coordinator:                                      
                                                   
                             



AED Manufacturers: Equipment Information



LifePak 500 Plus                        Zoll AED Plus



Medtronic Physio-Control                     Zoll
Medical Corporation



11811 Willows Road NE                     269 Mill Road



P.O. Box 97006                        Chelmsford,
MA  01824-4105



Redmond, WA 98073-9706 USA



Telephone: 425.867.4000



Toll Free (USA ONLY): 800.442.1142



Fax: 425.867.4146



Website: www.aedhelp.com



The undersigned acknowledges the receipt and understanding of the Town of
Middletown Automated External Defibrillator (AED) Policy.



Printed Name:                                          
           Signature:                                
                             



Date:                                                
               



POLICY 11  HAZARD COMMUNICATION/RIGHT-TO-KNOW PROGRAM
OSHA 1910.1200




September 5, 2006




I.   PURPOSE



   The purpose of this program is to ensure that employees of the Town of
Middletown are able to recognize hazards in the workplace and to make them
aware of how to best protect themselves and others against these hazards. The
goal of this program is to reduce the incidence of chemical source illness
and injuries.



II.   POLICY



   The Town of Middletown shall provide necessary hazard information to
employees so that they can participate in, understand and support the
protective measures in effect at their workplace. This program shall include
provisions for container labeling, collection and availability of Material
Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs), and employee training.



III.   PROGRAM



   The Hazard Communication Program shall be maintained in the Town of
Middletown Risk Management Manual.



IV.   RESPONSIBILITIES



   A.   The Town of Middletown Safety Officer and the Town Safety
Committee shall be responsible for the development, implementation, and
maintenance of the Town’s Hazard Communication Program.



   B.   Department managers or their designees shall be responsible for
documenting employee training, maintaining departmental hazardous chemical
inventories and MSDSs, performing an annual hazardous chemical inventory, and
ensuring appropriate labeling of all hazardous substances in their department.



   C.   A central file of applicable MSDSs shall be maintained at the
DPW, Police Station, Fire Station, Library, Senior Center and Town Hall.



   D.   The department manager or their designee shall provide
employees with a copy of a requested MSDS during his or her work shift.



V.   REQUIREMENTS



   A.   Labels and Other Forms of Warning



      1.   Each container of hazardous chemical that is received at
the workplace shall be labeled, tagged or marked with the identity,
appropriate hazard warnings, and the name and address of the manufacturer or
other responsible party.



      2.   Labels or other forms of warning must be legible, in
English and prominently displayed on the container or readily available in
the work area throughout each work shift.



      3.   Labels on incoming containers of hazardous chemicals
shall not be removed or defaced. If the existing label is damaged, it shall
be immediately marked by the department supervisor/manager with the required
information.



      4.   Containers received without appropriate labels or other
forms of warning shall be labeled with the required information by the
designated staff member.



      5.   Labels are not required on portable, secondary containers
into which hazardous chemicals are transferred into from labeled containers
when:



         a)   they are intended only for the immediate use by the
employee who performs the transfer and



         b)   the contents of the portable, secondary containers
must be emptied by the end of the work shift.



      6.   If the above circumstances are not applicable, then the
portable, secondary container must be labeled with the appropriate
information by the individual performing the transfer from the labeled
primary container.



   B.   Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs)



      1.   A request to receive MSDSs shall accompany the initial
order for any hazardous chemical purchased by the Town of Middletown.



      2.   MSDSs shall be in English and shall be complete and meet
the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.1200 Standard.



      3.   Upon receipt of a MSDS, it shall be forwarded to the
appropriate department manager/supervisor or designee for review.



      4.   The user department manager/supervisor or designee shall
provide employees with appropriate recommendations and/or comments pertaining
to the use of the hazardous chemical. The MSDS shall be maintained in a
central filing system.



      5.   If the MSDS is not provided with a shipment that has been
labeled as a hazardous chemical, the department manager/supervisor or
designee shall immediately request the MSDS from the chemical manufacturer.



      6.   The department manager/supervisor or designee shall
maintain copies of the required MSDSs for each hazardous chemical in the
workplace, and shall ensure that they are readily accessible during each work
shift to employees when they are in their work area(s).



   C.   Employee Information and Training



      1.   Employees shall be provided with information and training
on hazardous chemicals in their work area at the time of their initial
assignment, and whenever a new hazard is introduced into their work.



      2.   Employees shall be trained annually on the following
topics:



         a)   methods and observations that may be used to detect
the presence or release of a hazardous chemical in the work area.



         b)   the physical and health hazards of the chemicals in
the work area.



         c)   measures employees can take to protect themselves
and others from these hazards:



            1.   environmental control practices.



            2.   appropriate work practices.



            3.   emergency procedures.



            4.   use of personal protective equipment.



         d)   details of the Hazard Communication Program.



         e)   explanation of the labeling system and MSDS.



   D.   Hazards of Non-Routine Tasks



      The hazards of non-routine tasks are to be communicated to
employees on a case-by-case basis by the employee’s supervisor. There are
written procedures for some tasks, such as a hazardous chemical spill.



   E.   Hazardous Chemical Inventory



      An inventory of hazardous chemical products shall:



      1.   be maintained by the department manager/supervisor or
designee for their respective department.



      2.   be reviewed/revised annually by the department
manager/supervisor or designee.



      3.   be verified against the corresponding MSDS for each
hazardous chemical listed on the department’s hazardous chemical inventory
annually.




Town of Middletown





Hazard Communication/ Right-To-Know Program





OSHA 1910.1200




_______________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________



The undersigned acknowledges the receipt and understanding of the Town of
Middletown Hazard Communication/Right-To-Know Program (29 CFR 1910.1200 OSHA
Hazard Communication Standard).



                                                   
                           
                                             
                               



Name                                    Dat
e



 



                                                   
                           



Signature



POLICY 12.  TECHNOLOGY POLICY




Policy # 2008 - IX





Effective Date: 1/22/2008




1.0   PURPOSE



   To authorize the Information Services Department to promulgate and
communicate Information Technology Security Standards (Security Standards)
concerning the use, protection, and preservation of computer information
systems, networks, and data processed or stored on any of the Town of
Middletown computing devices. These Security Standards may be updated from
time to time by the Information Services Department.



2.0   SCOPE



   This policy will apply to all full-time, part-time, seasonal, and
temporary employees; volunteers, interns, vendors, and contractors to the
Town of Middletown. All such people shall herein be referred to as
“users.”



3.0   POLICY



   Town computing devices, software, Internet, and e-mail access are
intended to increase productivity of users in their official duties. All
personnel who access or make decisions affecting the Town of Middletown
government’s computer based information assets play a role in protecting
those assets. Users are expected to use these resources in a manner
consistent with town policies, applicable law, and job responsibilities.
Users will be held accountable for protecting the town’s computer-based
information. Inappropriate or illegal use or failure to comply with this or
the Information Technology Security Standards may result in disciplinary
action up to and including termination.



4.0   EXPECTATION OF CONDUCT



   The town’s computing devices and information systems are intended for
business use in performing the duties of a user’s job. Users should utilize
electronic resources in a manner that reflects positively on themselves and
the Town of Middletown.



   A.   Personal Responsibility



      Users granted User IDs and access to the town’s computing
assets are responsible for any and all transactions, inquiries, e-mails, and
activities performed with their User IDs. Users shall secure their User IDs
to prevent unauthorized use. No user subject to this policy will use the User
ID of another user without express permission of the user assigned the User
ID.



   B.   Monitoring



      Users are given access to the town’s computer network to assist
them in performing their jobs. A user cannot have any expectation of privacy
in anything created, stored, sent, or received on the town’s computer
network. Computer files and electronic communications via the Internet or
electronic mail are subject to the Open Records Act and the town reserves the
express right to monitor, in any way, the activities of a user while engaging
in any electronic communications and to review any material created, stored,
sent or received using town computing assets.



   C.   Sanctions



      Violation of this policy or the Information Technology Security
Standards will lead to discipline, which may include restriction or
revocation of access, as well as other disciplinary action up to and
including termination. Users should also be aware that violation of this
policy or the Security Standards in some circumstances could lead to the
imposition of criminal sanctions.



5.0   Policy Standards



   The Information Services Policy Standards will address the following
areas:



   A.   Login IDs



      Users shall have an Information Services assigned login ID and an
associated login password. Login IDs should be cancelled immediately by
notifying Information Services in writing when access is no longer required
by the user.



   B.   Passwords



      It is the responsibility of the user to protect and secure the
town network. Giving passwords to other users or any other individual for any
system or remote access will be subject to the appropriate disciplinary
action.



   C.   E-mail



      All messages distributed via the Town of Middletown E-mail System
are the property of the Town of Middletown government. There should not be an
expectation of privacy in messages that are created, stored, sent, or
received by the town’s E-mail System. E-mails may be monitored without
prior notification, as the Town of Middletown government deems necessary.



      Caution:



         Special consideration should be given before communicating
confidential and/or sensitive information such as performance reviews,
disciplinary and/or correction actions, attorney-client privileged
information, personnel information, and health or medical information via
electronic communications.



      NOTE:



         Electronic messages are not recommended as an appropriate
form of communication with legal counsel when seeking advice or transmitting
information related to litigation or disputes that may result in litigation.



   D.   Internet



      It is the responsibility of the user’s department head to
authorize Internet access.



      Generally Acceptable Uses:



         A user who exercises the privilege of using the Internet or
e-mail will:



         •   Use Internet and e-mail technologies to conduct
town business.



         •   Ensure that all communications are professional,
truthful, appropriate, and lawful.



         •   Use language and subject matter that reflects
business purposes and is in compliance with town policies and procedures and
all state and federal laws.



         •   Ensure that the activity does not interfere with
the user’s productivity.



         •   Be responsible for the content of all
communications sent over the Internet. All communications should show the
user’s name.



         •   Be responsible for all computer transactions made
with the user’s user ID and password.



         •   Verify and ensure the accuracy of any information
obtained from Internet resources prior to using such information for a
business purpose.



         •   Engage in limited personal use only with prior
approval from the user’s department head or designee. If approved, such
personal use shall be incidental, occasional, of short duration, on the
employee’s break time and not result in expense to the town or violate a
prohibition under the policy standards, this policy or other town policies.



      Generally Prohibited Uses:



         Any user who exercises the privilege of using the Internet
or e-mail is accountable for his or her actions and communications related to
electronic transactions or messages and will not:



         •   Engage in communicating (creating, sending,
copying, or forwarding) any obscene, harassing, threatening, discriminatory,
fraudulent, or disruptive messages, e-mail, chain messages, chain e-mail, or
any other message or e-mail, which violates town policy.



         •   Access, view or download any non-business related
information from any website, chat room, newsgroup, messaging, e-mail or any
other electronic location of an adult nature (obscene, sexual, or
pornographic) unless pursuant to town business (i.e., law enforcement).



         •   Engage in any communication for personal gain,
solicit or promote commercial ventures, or engage in other non-job related
solicitations.



         •   Transmit any messages anonymously or using an
assumed name: attempt to obscure the origin of a message or misrepresent
user’s job title or position with the town.



         •   Send or forward e-mails containing libelous,
defamatory, offensive, racist, sexist or obscene remarks. If you receive an
e-mail of this nature, you should delete it and notify your
manager/supervisor, if appropriate.



         •   Send chain mail.



         •   Forge or attempt to forge e-mail messages, or
disguise or attempt to disguise your identity when sending mail.



         •   Send Spam messages, viruses, or worms.



   E.   Remote Access



      Remote access to the town-wide network can only be authorized by
the Information Services Department.



   F.   Direct Network Access



      Users and on-site contractors should use equipment approved by
the Town of Middletown Information Services Department to attach to the Town
of Middletown government network. The Town of Middletown Information Services
Department should be notified immediately of lost or stolen client machines
or network interface cards (NIC)



   G.   Wireless Access



      All access points or wireless clients to be installed on the Town
of Middletown network must be approved by the Information Services Department
and should be installed by staff of the Information Services Department. The
Information Services Department should be notified immediately of lost or
stolen client machines or network interface cards (NIC). These devices must
be immediately unregistered from all access points.



   H.   Network Designs/Firewalls



      All site network designs must be reviewed and approved by the
Town of Middletown Information Services Department prior to implementation.
All site network designs involving external access, such as a vendor, should
be reviewed and approved by the Town of Middletown Information Services
Department.



   I.   Hardware and Software



      The physical control and security of hardware and software assets
assigned to a department are the responsibility of the Department Head.
Computer equipment and computer software must be approved by a designated
Town of Middletown Information Services representative prior to purchase.
This includes:



         •   Desktop computers



         •   Laptops



         •   Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs)



         •   Communications equipment



         •   Personal computing software



         •   Non-purchased software



         •   Operating systems



         •   Application systems



         •   Network devices



   J.   Vendor Equipment



      All vendor-supported machines that are attached to the Town of
Middletown data communications network must have current anti-virus software
loaded.



   K.   Disposal of Assets Containing Town Data



      When computer equipment or storage media containing town data
becomes obsolete, all data should be erased from all electronic media before
disposal. This erasure should be accomplished by such means as physical
destruction or low-level media formatting by approved erasure software.



POLICY 13.  FACILITY USE POLICY




February 5, 2018




1.0   PURPOSE



   The purpose of this policy is to outline the circumstances under which
groups or organizations may use meeting spaces in town-owned facilities and
to provide guidance to those town employees responsible for scheduling and
coordinating the use of these meeting spaces. Further, it is the intent of
this policy to specifically limit the use of town facilities as a general
public forum in order to ensure that these facilities remain easily
accessible to citizens wishing to do business with the town and to give
priority for use of meeting spaces to the Town Council and its Committees,
appointed Boards, Committees and Commissions, and other groups and
organizations which are directly sponsored by the town or of which the town
is a member.



      1.1.1.   Town-owned facilities subject to this policy include
the Town Hall, 350 East Main Road, the Senior Center at 650 Green End Avenue,
the Middletown Police Station, 123 Valley Road, the Middletown Fire
Department Community Room, 239 Wyatt Road, and the Middletown Public Works
Conference Room, 9 Berkeley Avenue.



2.0   POLICY



   It is the general policy that town-owned facilities shall be made
available for use by not-for-profit organizations, other government agencies
and officials, and civic organizations only when such use can be accommodated
without interfering with the normal operation of the town-owned facilities,
citizens wishing to transact business at town-owned facilities or with the
needs of the town, its boards, committees and commissions, and affiliated
groups and organizations. In addition, such uses must meet the following
general guidelines:



   2.1   The priorities for the use of Town Hall meeting spaces, the
Police Station Community Room, the Fire Department Community Room and the
Middletown Public Works Conference Room shall be as follows:



      2.1.1   Town Council or Council committee meetings.



      2.1.2   Meetings of town staff.



      2.1.3   Meetings of town boards, committees or commissions.



      2.1.4   Meetings of groups of which the town is a sponsor or
member.



      2.1.5   Uses requested by agencies or officials of county,
state or federal governments.



      2.1.6   Not-for-profit and civic organizations where the
meeting is open to the general public or which are intended, through the
various media, to provide information to the general public.



      For the Senior Center, the following priorities will apply to use
of meeting space in that facility:



      2.1.7   Town Council or Council committee meetings.



      2.1.8   Use of the Senior Center facility by the general
membership of the Senior Center.



   2.2   In order to insure available space for town-related meetings
(2.1.1 through 2.1.4 above), meeting space for other uses will be scheduled
on a space-available basis. The town reserves the right to cancel or change
scheduled use of town meeting space by outside organizations if the space is
needed for town-related business.



   2.3   All town department heads and chairpersons of town boards,
committees and commissions will receive a copy of the Town Facility Use
Policy and review it with their departments or groups as needed. Guidelines
for Reserving Meeting Space in Town-Owned Facilities.



   2.4   All requests from outside groups (other government agencies,
town-affiliated or town-sponsored organizations, not-for-profit and civic
organizations) to use meeting space in Town Hall shall be approved by the
Town Clerk (847-0009). All requests from outside groups to use the Police
Station Community Room shall be approved by the Police Chief (842-6500 ext.
7076.) All requests from outside groups to use the Senior Center shall be
approved by the Executive Director of the Senior Center (849-8823). All
requests from outside groups to use the Fire Department Community Room shall
be approved by the Fire Chief (842-6588). All requests from outside groups to
use the Public Works Conference Room shall be approved by the Public Works
Director (846-2119). Any decision to deny use of a town meeting space may be
appealed to the Town Administrator by requesting an appointment (849-2898).
In the event that the Town Administrator denies the appeal, the decision may
be appealed to the Town Council.



   2.5   Authorized representatives of outside groups will receive a
copy of the Town’s Facility Use Policy at the time of scheduling the first
use of meeting space in a town-owned facility. This representative will agree
in writing to abide by the policy and will also provide contact information
in the event that the town needs to reschedule the meeting. The following
town employees will be responsible for scheduling approved groups to use
meeting spaces in town-owned facilities:



      2.5.1   The Town Clerk’s Office (847-0009) shall maintain a
schedule for the use of the Council Chambers.



      2.5.2   The Town Administrator’s Office (849-2898) shall
maintain a schedule for the use of the second floor conference room.



      2.5.3   The Executive Director of the Senior Center (849-8823)
shall maintain a schedule for the meeting space at the Senior Center.



      2.5.4   The Administrative Assistant to the Police Chief
(842-6500 ext. 7076) shall maintain a schedule for the Community Room at the
police station.



      2.5.5   The Administrative Assistant to the Fire Chief
(842-6588) shall maintain a schedule for the Community Room at the fire
station.



      2.5.6   The Administrative Assistant to the Public Works
Director (846-2119) shall maintain a schedule for the Conference Room at the
Public Works Department.



   2.6   If there is a problem with the condition of the meeting room
at the onset of a scheduled event, the group shall contact the Town Clerk’s
office (Town Hall), the Senior Center Executive Director or the Officer in
Charge (Middletown Police Department), the Administrative Assistant to the
Fire Chief, or the Administrative Assistant to the Public Works Director.



   2.7   The use of town-owned facilities by for-profit entities is not
authorized.



   2.8   In general, meeting space in town-owned facilities shall be
provided at no cost to town groups, boards, committees and commissions,
not-for-profit organizations, other government agencies and officials, civic
organizations and affiliated groups. Where the date and/or time of the
meeting requires additional expense (e.g., outside of normal business hours
where personnel must be brought in or held over), the town reserves the right
to bill an outside organization $25.00 for each hour of use for any
additional expenses incurred by the town as a result of the meeting space
being used outside of regular business hours (Monday - Friday, 8 a.m. to 4
p.m.) The Town Administrator is authorized to waive this fee where it is
deemed such a charge would create a hardship for the group using the meeting
room.



   2.9   Areas of town-owned facilities other than designated meeting
spaces are not open for use by outside individuals or organizations.



   2.10   Every meeting of all public bodies (any department, agency,
commission, committee, board, council, bureau, or authority or any
subdivision thereof of state or municipal government) will be open to the
public, and will abide by the Rhode Island Laws on Open Meetings (R.I. Gen.
Laws Ch. 42-46.)



   2.11   Any meetings held or information displayed by such
organizations must be open and available to the general public or be
intended, through the various media, to provide information to the general
public. Such meetings and information shall be non-partisan in nature; shall
be educational, civic or cultural in nature; and shall avoid advocacy of a
particular position in areas of public policy dispute or controversy.



   2.12   Such meetings and information shall be non-commercial in
nature.



   2.13   Such meetings and information should be reasonably related to
public interests of the Town of Middletown and its residents.



   2.14   Any meeting room must be left in a neat and clean condition,
and any excess trash removed by the organization booking the room.



   2.15   Organizations are responsible for notifying the town of
cancellations.



   2.16   Organizations are expected to follow basic rules, such as the
town’s no smoking policy, fire code (including room capacity), and parking
lot use.



   2.17   Organizations are prohibited from charging an admission fee,
soliciting donations, or restricting attendance.



   2.18   The town reserves the right to alter meeting arrangements if
necessary. In the event of a scheduling conflict, groups will be given as
much notice as possible, and will also be offered comparable meeting space or
a different time and/or date.



   2.19   Any violations of these policies may result in the suspension
of privileges to use meeting spaces in town-owned facilities.



3.0   RESPONSIBILITY FOR REVIEW



   The Town Administrator shall periodically review this policy and, when
necessary, recommend changes or revisions to the Town Council.



 


Town of Middletown
Facility Use Agreement




 



Name of Organization:                                    
                                                   
                               



Address:                                              
                                                   
                                         



Contact Person/Title:                                    
                                             Work
Phone:                    



E-mail address:                                        
                                               
   Cell Phone:                      



Purpose of meeting(s):                                    
                                                   
                               



 


Meeting space requested:



Fire Department Community Room                          
   Public Works Department Community Room                  


Town Hall Town Council Chambers                          
   Police Station Community Room                      

Town Hall Upstairs Conference Room                      
   Senior Center Meeting Space                            

Date(s):                                              
                   Time(s):                          
                             



 



I have read the attached Town of Middletown Facility Use Policy and agree
that my organization will abide
by this policy with regard to the use of any meeting space in facilities
owned by the Town of Middletown.
This agreement will be in effect for meetings that take place during the 20 
    calendar year.



Signature                                            
                             Date                  
                                         



Name (printed):                                        
                       Title/Position:                
                             



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------



FOR OFFICE USE ONLY



                                                   
                                                  
                                                   



Town of Middletown Authorized Signature         Date Approved



                                                   
                                                  
                                                   



Custodian Fees if applicable               Fees for damages if
applicable



POLICY 14.  STOP SIGN POLICY




October 6, 2014




Stop Signs



   The Town of Middletown investigates the need for a signal, stop sign or
other signs/measures to address traffic and safety issues. Stop signs are
installed at locations that meet a number of safety and traffic requirements.
Below is a list of factors considered in the placement of a stop sign:



      •   Classification of intersecting streets



      •   Traffic/pedestrian/bicycle volumes



      •   Accident history



      •   Intersection layout/restricted views (sight distances)



      •   Speeds



      •   Neighborhood – school/recreation zone, business
district



      •   Impacts to residents and businesses



      •   Neighborhood support



   Properly placed stop signs provide a safe and efficient intersection
for vehicular and pedestrian/bicyclist movements. Vehicle/vehicle and
vehicle/pedestrian/bicyclist accidents can be reduced with the installation
of stop signs.



Disadvantages of Stop Signs



   •   Speeding – Stop signs do not control speeding. In fact,
improperly placed stop signs result in higher speeds. Drivers tend to speed
between signs or intersections to compensate for time lost to stopping.



   •   Non-Compliance – Over time, drivers will begin to ignore
improperly placed stop signs, resulting in a more hazardous condition.



   •   Impacts to adjacent neighborhoods/streets – Some drivers
will seek to avoid stop signs by taking a different route. This results in
higher traffic volumes and speeds in adjacent neighborhoods and on connecting
streets.



   •   Air and noise pollution – Stop signs increase the level of
air and noise pollution at their locations. Unwarranted stop signs contribute
to air and noise pollution unnecessarily, due to stopped and idling vehicles.



Minor/Major Road Intersection



   Stop signs may be warranted if they meet the following criteria:



   •   The Average Daily Traffic (ADT) on the major road exceeds
6,000 vehicles.



   •   Intersection layout, landscaping, signage, etc., provides
restricted views for the minor or major road approaches.



   •   Accident history indicates three crashes in 12 months or five
crashes in two years that could be corrected with the installation of a stop
sign.



   •   Intersection is along designated/high volume
pedestrian/bicyclist routes.



Minor Road Intersections



   Stop signs may be warranted if they meet the following criteria:



   •   The combined Average Daily Traffic (ADT) of vehicles,
pedestrians, and bicyclists exceeds 2,000 for all legs of the intersection.



   •   Intersection layout, landscaping, signage, etc., provides
restricted views for the approaches.



   •   Accident history indicates three crashes in two years or five
crashes in three years that are attributed to failure to yield.



Four-Way or All-Way Stop



   •   An engineering study will be required for determining the need
for four-way or all-way stop signs at multi-way intersections.



Request for Stop Sign Warrant Analysis



   Individual/neighborhoods requesting a stop sign warrant analysis should
fill out the request form fully, and include any pertinent information, such
as photos, diagrams, maps, neighborhood petitions, etc. The completed form
should be submitted to the address listed in the request form.




Steps for Stop Sign Warrant Analysis




   1.   Resident/neighborhood fills out Request for Stop Sign Warrant
Analysis Form and submits to the Lieutenant of Administrative Services for
the Middletown Police Department. Request forms are available at the Police
Department or on the Town’s website, www.middletownri.com.



   2.   Police Department personnel review submission.



   3.   Police Department personnel meets onsite with
resident/neighborhood to review location.



   4.   Stop sign warrant analysis prepared with checklist of
Evaluating Factors.



   5.   Request reviewed by Roadway Safety Assessment Team (RSAT). RSAT
consists of representatives from each of the town’s Police, Fire,
Engineering and Public Works Departments.



   6.   RSAT determines if a stop sign is warranted or requests more
information/traffic counts/engineering analysis in order to determine if a
stop sign is/is not warranted.



   7.   RSAT may procure a traffic consultant to provide more extensive
review of request, including traffic counts and analysis.



   8.   If RSAT determines that a stop sign is warranted, the
assessment team shall forward its recommendation to the Town Administrator,
who will place the recommendation on the Town Council docket for
consideration. Two public readings are required before the Town Council would
vote on the stop sign request.



   9.   Pursuant to Town Council approval, the Department of Public
Works shall install the stop sign in its proper location.



   10.   Estimated time for stop sign review and approval is six months
from submission of request.



   Checklist for Roadway Safety Assessment Team (RSAT) (internal use only)



 


EVALUATING FACTORS

 

COMMENTS:





LOCATION:
 
 


1.   Intersecting Streets:
 
 


2.   Roadway Classifications - Classifications of intersecting roads.
 
 


   a.   Minor road intersections with a major road or numbered highway
should have stop signs installed for the minor road approach if:
 
 


      i.   Major road ADT>6,000 vehicles
 
 


      ii.   Restricted view for minor or major approaches. See Town
of Middletown’s Zoning Bylaws, Article 706.
 
 


      iii.   3 crashes in 12 months or 5 crashes in 2 years that
could be corrected with the installation of a stop sign
 
 


      iv.    Pedestrian/bicyclist routes
 
 


   b.   Minor road intersections
 
 


      i.   Combined vehicular/pedestrian/bicyclist ADT for all legs
at intersection >2,000 units
 
 


      ii.   Restricted view for approaches. See Town of
Middletown’s Zoning Bylaws, Article 706.
 
 


      iii.   3 crashes in 2 years or 5 crashes in 3 years that are
attributable to failure to yield
 
 


   c.   Multi-Way Stop
 
 


      i.   Requires an engineering study
 
 


3.   Approach Speeds
 
 


4.   Traffic/Pedestrian/Bicycle Volumes - Volumes for each approach.
Traffic counts warranted?
 
 


5.   Traffic Generators - Locations generating high volume of
vehicles/pedestrians/bicycles, i.e., businesses, shopping areas, schools,
recreation areas, etc.
 
 


6.   Site Distances - Angle of intersecting roads, landscaping or other
obstructions within the roadway layout. Site distances comply with the Town
of Middletown’s Zoning Bylaws, Article 706.
 
 


7.   Accident History - Number and types of collisions, i.e., side impact,
rear impact, pedestrian, etc.
 
 


8.   Adverse Impacts to Residents/Businesses - Will the installation of
stop sign(s) cause adverse impacts to local residents and/or businesses,
i.e., traffic volumes increased in adjacent neighborhoods, noise pollution,
air pollution, etc.?
 
 


9.   Impacts to Emergency Vehicles - Will the installation of stop sign(s)
impact emergency vehicle response time or access?
 
 


10.   Increase Delay/Mid-Block Speeding - Will the installation of stop
sign(s) cause mid-block speeding?
 
 


11.   Neighborhood Support
 
 


12.   Alternatives to Stop Sign - Removal of sight
obstructions/landscaping, relocate parking, pavement markings, other signage,
etc.
 
 




 



REQUEST FOR STOP SIGN WARRANT ANALYSIS



This form is for residents and neighborhoods to request a stop sign warrant
analysis based on the Town of Middletown’s adopted Stop Sign Policy. This
form must be filled out completely and submitted to the Town of Middletown at
the following address:



Middletown Police Department
123 Valley Road
Middletown, RI 02842
Attention: Lieutenant of Administrative Services



   1.   Requesting individual’s contact information



      Name:                                     
                                       



      Address:                                   
                                         



      Phone No.:                                   
                                       



      E-mail:                                    
                                         



   2.   Please describe the location of the traffic concern. Include a
photograph, map or diagram, if available.



                                                  
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                   



   3.   Please describe the nature of the traffic concern.



                                                  
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                   



   4.   Please describe the requested stop sign location and how you
feel it will eliminate or reduce the traffic concern.



                                                  
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                   



   5.   Is there neighborhood support for the stop sign at this
location? Please provide names of other residents who are concerned about
traffic issues in your neighborhood.



      Name:                                     
                             Name:                 
                                                 



      Address:                                   
               Address:                             
                               



      Phone/e-mail                                  
                         Phone/e-mail                
                                       



   6.   Are there nearby generators of high vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, i.e. schools, shopping malls, businesses?



                                                  
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                   



POLICY 15.  STREET LIGHT POLICY




December 15, 2014




I.   PURPOSE:



The purpose of this policy is to establish a consistent and standardized
process to be used by the Town of Middletown to determine the placement of
streetlights. The policy is intended to provide a procedure for review and
approval/denial of streetlight requests, and to provide an ongoing system of
prioritizing the need for future installation of streetlights.



Public streetlights are not designed to light private property, or to provide
home security improvements that are the private homeowner’s responsibility.
Streetlights requested for protection of private property should be made
directly to the appropriate utility company, and the applicant is responsible
for installation, operation and maintenance costs. Also, residents have the
option to install their own outdoor lighting systems for security.



II.   STATEMENT OF POLICY:



The purpose of public streetlights is intended to ensure the safety of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.



The Town of Middletown will determine the placement of streetlights according
to the following criteria:



   1.   Initial installation of public streetlights in new developments
is regulated by the Planning Board, and they are installed in accordance with
the Planning Board approved site plan.



   2.   Any streetlights requested outside of new developments shall be
as follows:



      Streetlights should be placed along streets and roads where
increased lighting is necessary for the safety of motor and pedestrian
traffic. In general, streetlights may be considered at the following
locations:



      i.   Intersections.



      ii.   Dangerous curves or significant changes in the roadway,
whether they are horizontal or vertical.



      iii.   Dead end streets and cul-de-sacs that are longer than
300 feet.



      iv.   Between intersections where the spacing of lights
exceeds 1,000 feet. Street lights between intersections should generally be
located at lot lines and near fire hydrants.



      v.   Street locations with a high motor vehicle accident
history.



      vi.   Street locations where potentially hazardous or unsafe
road conditions have been identified.



      vii.   Other areas with a high accident history.



      The Town will not be responsible for streetlights that are
installed to illuminate private property or private driveways.



III.   OBJECTIVE CRITERIA FOR CONSIDERATION:



Street lighting is a discretionary action. The Town of Middletown will
consider roadway safety, costs, excess lighting onto nearby homes, and energy
consumption when making recommendations and decisions about new streetlight
installations.



IV. POLICY FOR APPROVAL:



Requests for streetlights will be submitted to the Town Administrator, who
will review the initial request and decide if it needs to be further
evaluated by town administration for public safety need. If appropriate,
requests that have been evaluated by the administration will be forwarded to
the Town Council for their review. All requests will be approved or denied
based on the following objective criteria:



   1.   The streetlight is needed to improve the safety of the public
as described in sections I and II of this policy;



   2.   Other methods of increasing safety such as the use of signs,
reflectors and paint do not produce sufficient warning;



   3.   Improve safety of pedestrian crossings; and



   4.   Budgetary constraints.



V.   PROCEDURE FOR EVALUATION OF NEED AND APPROVAL:



The process for approval for installation of a streetlight or reactivation of
an existing streetlight by the Town Council will begin in one of two ways:
Citizen request and ongoing municipal review of need.



A.   Citizen Request:



   1.   Requests for streetlights may be made by residents, business
operators, institutions, and other interested parties.



   2.   All requests will be submitted to the Town Administrator, who
will review the request and when appropriate, assign it to town
administration to review for public safety evaluation of need. They will
conduct an evaluation of the streetlight application, prepare a report of the
location’s characteristics, motor vehicle accident history, and potential
hazards and unsafe road conditions of the location, and submit the report and
recommendation to the Town Council for action.



   3.   The citizen will be notified in writing if the request is
denied.



   4.   If the request is approved, the Town Council shall direct the
order for a new streetlight or reactivation of an existing streetlight, and
will inform the citizen making the request.



   5.   The actual date of installation will be determined by funds
budgeted annually for street lighting. The Department of Public Works will
oversee the installation and arrangements will be made with the appropriate
electric company.



B.   Municipal Review of Need:



   1.   The Police Department or Department of Public Works may
identify streetlight need at locations identified from routine patrol as
areas in need of future streetlight installation, and forward those reports
to the Town Administrator, who will review and submit to the Town Council for
consideration if appropriate.



   2.   The Town Council will consider the findings of the report,
weigh the criteria and considerations described above in this policy,
finalize a recommendation, and make a determination.



   3.   If the Town Council approves the addition of the location, they
will direct the Department of Public Works to arrange for the installation or
reactivation.



VI.   APPLICATION:



Any person requesting a streetlight shall do so by completing the attached
application and sending it to the Town Administrator, Town of Middletown, 350
East Main Road, Middletown, RI 02842 or to townadministrator@middletownri.com.



VII.   EQUIPMENT:



   1.   The Middletown Department of Public Works will determine the
type and installation details of the lighting, including determining the:
luminaire type, wattage, mounting height, light distribution pattern, and in
the case of multiple lights an installation pattern.



   2.   Public Works shall consult with the electric company to
determine feasibility of new lighting technologies to reduce operating and
maintenance costs.



   3.   Existing poles will be used whenever possible.



POLICY 16.  VOLUNTEER HANDBOOK




September 6, 2016




   TABLE OF CONTENTS



1.0   WELCOME



   1.1   Mission Statement



      Vision



      Values



   1.2   Town and Government Facts



   1.3   Town Departments



   1.4   Town Administrator Open-Door Policy Statement



2.   ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES



   2.1   Service at the Discretion of the Town



   2.2   Drug Free Workplace Policy



   2.3   Technology and Social Media Policy



   2.4   Volunteer Conduct



   2.5   Suspected Misconduct/Dishonesty



   2.6   Customer Service



   2.7   Personal Property/Workplace Privacy



   2.8   Harassment/Sexual Harassment Policy



   2.9   Smoke Free Workplace Policy



   2.10   Telephone Use



   2.11   Safety



   2.12   Anti-Violence Policy Statement



   2.13   Dress Code and Appearance



   2.14   Town Recycling Program



ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF RECEIPT



1.0   WELCOME



Welcome to the Town of Middletown. The purpose of this Volunteer Handbook is
to answer frequently asked questions and to set forth the Town’s
expectations for conduct and behavior while serving as a volunteer. This
Handbook will help you have the best possible experience as a volunteer.



Thank you for volunteering. I’m glad you’ve chosen to be a member of the
Town of Middletown team!



Shawn J. Brown
Town Administrator



1.1   Mission Statement



   Our mission is to preserve the character and quality of life in the
Town of Middletown. We strive to achieve our mission by improving the quality
of services and supporting well-balanced growth in the most cost-effective
and responsible manner possible. As we work towards our goals we will treat
all members of our community, town government, volunteers and employees with
respect and dignity.



Vision



   We envision being a leader in providing innovative efficient municipal
government operations deserving of public confidence, while demonstrating a
strong commitment to preserving our cultural traditions and pristine
resources, and respecting our diverse community. Our administration is
committed to the health, safety, and welfare of the public we serve and to
ensuring the quality of life for future generations. We will ensure that town
government is responsive and accessible, and that all sectors of the
population are welcomed and encouraged to participate in town governance. We
see a future committed to continuing to build valuable partnerships, and
collaborating with other communities, state agencies, and private
organizations in order to meet challenges. We endeavor to plan for and take
advantage of opportunities that will improve our community now and in the
future.



Values



   The Town of Middletown values:



      •   Honesty, integrity and accountability in our work and
treatment of all members within the community



      •   Commitment to employee development, excellence, and
recognition



      •   Innovation, creativity and expanding the use of
technology in the delivery of our services where it improves efficiency and
effectiveness to the benefit of the community



      •   Collaboration, communication, and encouragement of
community participation



      •   Conservancy of the environment and quality of life now
and for future generations



      •   Demonstrate exemplary standards of professional and
ethical conduct



      •   Safeguard and maintain responsible fiscal management
practices



      •   Commitment to employee and community health, wellness
and fitness



      •   Diversity in our employees and our community



Visit the town website at www.middletownri.com for the detailed Strategic
Plan of the town, including the current Goals and Objectives.



1.2   Town and Government Facts



   The Town of Middletown was established in 1639 and incorporated as a
Town in 1743. The town is governed by a seven member Town Council and an
appointed Town Administrator. Local elections are held every two years in
even years for all Town Council members. The town adopted a Home Rule Charter
on November 5, 1968, under which all powers of the town are vested in the
elected Town Council. The Town Council may enact local legislation subject
only to the limitations imposed by the Charter, the State Constitution and
the General Laws. Under the Charter, the Town Council determines policy,
enacts law and appoints the Town Administrator. The Town of Middletown
currently has a population of approximately 18,000 residents.



   More general and historical information on the Town of Middletown can
be found at the Middletown Historical Society website
www.middletownhistory.org and on the Newport County Chamber of Commerce
website www.newportchamber.com under Communities/Middletown.



1.3   Town Departments



   The Town of Middletown is organized into the following departments
serving under the Town Administrator:



 


Department

 
Department Head




Assessment/Collections
 
George Durgin, Assessor/Collections


Building/Zoning
 
John Kane, Jr., Building Official


Finance/Human Resources
 
Marc Tanguay, Finance Director

Cecilia Dursi, Human Resources Manager


Fire
 
Ron Doire, Fire Chief


Middletown Prevention Coalition
 
Lori Verderosa, Coordinator


Planning
 
Ron Wolanski, Planning/Economic Development Director


Police
 
Anthony Pesare, Police Chief


Public Works
 
Tom O’Loughlin, Public Works Director

Warren Hall, Town Engineer

Will Cronin, Facilities/Operations Manager


Senior Center
 
Arleen Kaull, Senior Center Director


Information Technology
 
Matthew Wainwright, IT Director


Town Clerk/Canvassing/
Probate/Municipal Clerk
 
Wendy Marshall, Town Clerk




 



   Middletown Town Hall hours of operation are 8:00 am - 4:00 pm M-F
year-round. Please visit the Town of Middletown website at
www.middletownri.com for specific information on departmental operations, the
Town Council, School Committee, and all town boards and commissions.



   The Middletown School Department is directed by a five member School
Committee, elected by the Town of Middletown, which determines and controls
all policies affecting the administration, maintenance, and operation of the
public schools. The School Committee appoints a superintendent of schools as
its chief administrative agent.



   The Middletown Public Library is supported by the town in many ways as
if it were a department of the town. Pursuant to state law, however, it is
managed and operated by an independent Board of Trustees who appoint an
Executive Director to serve as the Chief Executive Officer of the Library.



1.4   Town Administrator Open-Door Policy Statement



   The Town of Middletown has an open door policy for all volunteers. This
means that every supervisor’s and manager’s door is open to every
volunteer, subject to specific departmental rules and regulations, in order
to encourage open communication, feedback, and discussion about any matter of
importance to a volunteer. Although the town recognizes that most problems
can and should be solved in discussion with your immediate supervisor, it is
possible that this approach may be inappropriate, in which case you are free
to bring your issues and concerns in certain circumstances directly to the
Town Administrator.



   By listening to you, the town is better able to improve, address
complaints, and to foster understanding of town practices, processes and
decisions. While there may not be an easy answer or solution to every
concern, you will find that supervisors, managers, Human Resources and the
Town Administrator are willing to listen and to help bring about a solution
or a clarification whenever possible.



2.0   ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES



2.1   Service at the Discretion of the Town



   The Town of Middletown accepts the service of all volunteers with the
understanding that such service is at the sole discretion of the Town of
Middletown. Volunteers agree that the town may at any time, for whatever
reason, decide to terminate the volunteer’s relationship with the Town of
Middletown or make changes in the nature of the volunteer’s assignment.



2.2   Drug Free Workplace Policy



   The Town of Middletown is responsible for maintaining safe, efficient,
working conditions for its employees and volunteers by providing a drug-free
workplace, in compliance with the federal Drug Free Workplace Act of 1989.
The Town of Middletown is firmly committed to promoting high standards of
health, safety, and efficient service; thus our goal is to maintain a work
environment free from the effects of drug abuse.



   Municipal volunteers shall not engage in the unlawful manufacture,
distribution, sale, possession, dispensing or use of controlled substances
(drugs) while performing volunteer duties or on any municipal work site.



   Sometimes the use of legal drugs can endanger the safety of the
volunteer or others. Volunteers who feel or have been informed that the use
of such a drug may present a safety risk, are to report such drug use to
their immediate supervisor.



2.3   Technology and Social Media Policy



   The purpose of the town’s Technology Policy is to communicate
Information Technology security standards concerning the use, protection, and
preservation of computer information systems, networks and data processed or
stored on any of the Town of Middletown computing devices. This policy
applies to all full-time, part-time, seasonal, and temporary employees,
volunteers, interns, vendors, and contractors to the Town of Middletown
(users).



   The town computing devices, software, Internet, Intranet and E-mail
access are intended to increase the productivity of users in their official
duties. All personnel who access or make decisions affecting the Town of
Middletown’s computer-based information assets plays a role in protecting
these assets. Users are expected to use these resources in a manner
consistent with town policies, applicable law, and job responsibilities.
Users will be held accountable for protecting the town’s computer-based
information. Inappropriate or illegal use or failure to comply with this
policy or with the town’s security standards may result in disciplinary
action up to and including termination.



   The town’s computing devices and information systems are intended for
business use in performing the duties of a user’s job. Users should utilize
electronic resources in a manner that reflects positively on themselves and
the Town of Middletown. Users granted User IDs and access to the town’s
computing assets are responsible for any and all transactions, inquiries,
e-mails, and activities performed with their User IDs. Users shall secure
their User IDs to prevent unauthorized use. No user subject to this policy
will use the User ID of another user without express permission of the user
assigned to the User ID. Personal use of the town’s computers is permitted
on a limited basis, during non-working/break time.



   Users are given access to the town’s computer network to assist them
in performing their jobs. Except for confidentialities created by law (such
as attorney-client communications), a user should not have any expectation of
privacy in anything created, stored, sent, or received on the town’s
computer network. Computer files and electronic communications via the
Internet or electronic mail are subject to the State of Rhode Island Open
Records Act and the town reserves the express right to monitor, in any way,
the activities of a user while engaging in any electronic communications and
to review any material created, stored, sent or received using town computing
assets.



   Login IDs



   Users shall have an Information Services assigned login ID and an
associated login password. Login IDs should be cancelled immediately by
notifying Information Services in writing when access is no longer required
by the user.



   Passwords



   It is the responsibility of the user to protect and secure the town
network. Giving passwords to other users or any other individual for any
system or remote access will be subject to the appropriate disciplinary
action.



   E-mail



   All messages distributed via the Town of Middletown E-mail System are
the property of the Town of Middletown government. There should not be an
expectation of privacy in messages that are created, stored, sent, or
received by the town’s E-mail System. E-mails may be monitored without
prior notification, as the Town of Middletown government deems necessary.



      Caution:



      Special consideration should be given before communicating
confidential and/or sensitive information such as performance reviews,
disciplinary and/or correction actions, attorney-client privileged
information, personnel information, and health or medical information via
electronic communications.



   Generally Acceptable Uses:



   A user who exercises the privilege of using the Internet or e-mail will:



      •   Use Internet and e-mail technologies to conduct town
business.



      •   Ensure that all communications are professional,
truthful, appropriate, and lawful.



      •   Use language and subject matter that reflects business
purposes and is in compliance with town policies and procedures and all state
and federal laws.



      •   Ensure that the activity does not interfere with the
user’s productivity.



      •   Be responsible for the content of all communications
sent over the Internet. All communications should show the user’s name.



      •   Be responsible for all computer transactions made with
the user’s User ID and password.



      •   Verify and ensure the accuracy of any information
obtained from Internet resources prior to using such information for a
business purpose.



      •   Engage in limited personal use only with prior approval
from the user’s department head or designee. If approved, such personal use
shall be incidental, occasional, of short duration, and not result in expense
to the town or violate a prohibition under the policy standards, this policy
or other town policies.



   Generally Prohibited Uses:



   Any user who exercises the privilege of using the Internet or e-mail is
accountable for his or her actions and communications related to electronic
transactions or messages and will not:



      •   Engage in communicating (creating, sending, copying, or
forwarding) any obscene, harassing, threatening, discriminatory, or
fraudulent messages, e-mail, chain messages, chain e-mail, or any other
message or e-mail, which violates town policy.



      •   Access, view or download any non-business related
information from any web site, chat room, newsgroup, messaging, e-mail or any
other electronic location of an adult nature (obscene, sexual, or
pornographic) unless pursuant to town business (i.e., law enforcement).



      •   Transmit any messages anonymously or using an assumed
name; attempt to obscure the origin of a message or misrepresent user’s job
title or position with the town.



      •   Send or forward e-mails containing libelous, defamatory,
racist, sexist or obscene remarks. If you receive an e-mail of this nature,
you should delete it and notify your manager/supervisor, if appropriate.



      •   Send chain mail.



      •   Forge or attempt to forge e-mail messages, or disguise
or attempt to disguise your identity when sending mail.



      •   Send Spam messages, viruses, or worms.



   Social Media



   The Town of Middletown provides the following guidelines for the
personal usage of social media to ensure that volunteers use appropriate
discretion in relation to the use of references to the Town of Middletown and
related Town Departments so as to not discredit the town, its departments or
its employees.



   Volunteers should strive to ensure their social media posts are
respectful, fair and courteous to fellow co-workers and the public and avoid
inappropriate postings that may include discriminatory remarks, harassment,
threats of violence or similar inappropriate and unlawful conduct. Postings
that violate the Town of Middletown’s policies, such as anti-discrimination
and anti-harassment policies, will not be tolerated and may subject you to
disciplinary action up to and including termination.



   Barring state law or binding employment contracts to the contrary, the
Town of Middletown volunteers shall abide by the following guidelines when
using social media:



   a.   Volunteers are prohibited from accessing social media sites,
such as but not limited to Twitter, Facebook, Flickr, Myspace, Linkedin, and
YouTube, during volunteer hours. If a volunteer chooses to use social media
sites during non-volunteer hours, the volunteer must abide by this policy and
any other relevant Town of Middletown policies (i.e., anti-harassment, etc.).



   b.   Volunteers may not post anything on the Internet in the name of
the Town of Middletown or any town department or in a manner that could
reasonably be attributed to Town of Middletown or any town department without
prior written authorization from the volunteer’s supervisor. Any comments
directly or indirectly relating to the Town of Middletown or town department
must include the following disclaimer: “The postings on this site are my
own and do not represent the Town of Middletown’s positions, strategies or
opinions.”



   c.   Maintain the confidentiality of the Town of Middletown’s
trade secrets and confidential information, such as internal reports,
policies, processes, know-how, technology and internal business-related
confidential communications.



   d.   When using social media, Town of Middletown volunteers should
be mindful that their speech becomes part of the worldwide electronic domain.
Therefore, adherence to the Town of Middletown’s policies and procedures is
required in the personal use of social media. In particular, volunteers are
cautioned not to post the following:



      1.   Speech containing obscene or sexually explicit language,
images, or acts and statements or other forms of speech that ridicule,
malign, disparage, or otherwise bias against any race, any religion, or any
protected class of individuals.



      2.   Speech involving themselves or other Town of Middletown
personnel reflecting behavior that would reasonably be considered reckless or
malicious.



   e.   Volunteers should be aware that they may be subject to civil
litigation for purposefully:



      1.   Publishing or posting willfully false information that
harms the reputation of another person, group, or organization (defamation);



      2.   Using someone else’s name, likeness, or other personal
attributes without that person’s permission for an exploitative purpose; or



      3.   Publishing the creative work of another, trademarks, or
certain confidential business information without the permission of the owner.



   f.   Volunteers should be aware that privacy settings and social
media sites are constantly in flux, and they should never assume that
personal information posted on such sites is protected.



   g.   Volunteers should expect that any information created,
transmitted, downloaded, exchanged, or discussed in a public online forum may
be accessed by the Town of Middletown at any time without prior notice.



      Any volunteer becoming aware of or having knowledge of a posting
and/or website that is in violation of the provisions of this policy shall
notify a supervisor immediately for further review.



   Volunteers should be aware of the issues that may arise from the misuse
of social media. The use of social media should be managed according to the
guidelines presented in this policy. Volunteers must be made aware of the
fact that, regardless of privacy settings, pictures, videos, and text they
post online could be made available to individuals for whom it was not
intended.



2.4   Volunteer Conduct



   Volunteers must at all times conduct themselves in a courteous, civil
and professional manner. Conduct that may be characterized as uncivil,
abrasive, hostile or obstructive impedes the town’s business. Volunteers
shall always conduct themselves in the best interests of the town, its
employees and its citizens.



   In furtherance of these policies,



      1.   All volunteers are expected to conduct themselves
according to the highest standards of courtesy and professionalism and owe
each other, their supervisors and the citizens of the town respect, diligence
and protection against unjust and improper criticism or attacks. Demeaning,
intimidating or threatening behaviors that affect the ability of the town
employees and staff to conduct town business depart from the standard for
civility and respect and have no place in the community.



      2.   In recognition of the foregoing, if any volunteer
believes in good faith that a person’s conduct or behavior is contrary to
the objectives stated in these standards, he or she shall call attention to
the behavior to the offending party and request that the offending behavior
be stopped immediately and file a report with his or her supervisor.



2.5   Suspected Misconduct/Dishonesty



   Like all organizations, the Town of Middletown is faced with risks from
wrongdoing, misconduct, dishonesty, and fraud. The town must be prepared to
manage these risks and their potential impact in a professional way.



   The impact of misconduct and dishonesty may include the following:



      •   The actual financial loss incurred



      •   Damage to the reputation of our organization and our
employees



      •   Negative publicity



      •   The cost of investigation



      •   Loss of employees



      •   Loss of customers



      •   Damaged relationships with our contractors and suppliers



      •   Litigation



      •   Damaged employee morale



   Our goal is to establish and maintain an environment of fairness,
ethics, and honesty for our employees, volunteers, our residents, our
vendors, and anyone else with whom we have a relationship. The town is
committed to the deterrence, detection, and correction of misconduct and
dishonesty. The discovery, reporting, and documentation of such acts provides
a sound foundation for the protection of innocent parties, the taking of
disciplinary action against offenders, the referral to law enforcement
agencies when warranted by the facts, and the recovery of assets.



   For purposes of this policy, misconduct and dishonesty include but are
not limited to the following:



      •   Acts that violate the Town of Middletown’s Charter and
ordinances



      •   Theft or other misappropriation of assets, including
assets of the town, our residents, vendors or others with whom we have a
business relationship



      •   Misstatements and other irregularities in town records,
including the intentional misstatement of the results of the operations



      •   Wrongdoing



      •   Forgery or other alteration of documents



      •   Fraud and other unlawful acts



      •   Any similar acts



   The Town of Middletown specifically prohibits these and any other
illegal activities in the actions of its employees, volunteers, managers,
executives, and others responsible for carrying out the town’s activities,
including its volunteers.



   We ask that volunteers report in a timely manner any suspected
misconduct or dishonesty to his or her supervisor.



2.6   Customer Service



   The Town of Middletown is committed to excellence in customer service.
Through our continued efforts to improve the delivery of superior quality
services to the community, the town strives to be responsive, proactive and
in touch with the changing needs and expectations of the Middletown
community. By setting a high standard of professional and ethical conduct,
the town promotes an environment of open and honest government that takes
pride in responding to the needs of our customers.



2.7   Personal Property/Workplace Privacy



   Volunteers should have no expectation that their workplace and/or
materials contained within their workplace are private and not subject to
disclosure. From time to time, supervisors and other authorized persons may
have a legitimate business need to enter a volunteer’s workplace including,
but not limited to, offices, town vehicles, computers, cabinets, and desks
(including personal property brought to the workplace, which is used in the
course of day-to-day business) to search for documents, files and other work
related items. In addition, in cases of suspected misconduct or criminal
activity, the town may search the workplace for evidence of such misconduct
and will cooperate with law enforcement officials in any criminal
investigation.



2.8   Harassment/Sexual Harassment Policy



   The Town of Middletown is committed to maintaining a work environment
that is free of inappropriate or disrespectful conduct, where bigotry and
intolerance, including unlawful discrimination on the basis of gender, sexual
orientation, gender identity and expression, race, color, ethnicity,
religious beliefs, disability, or age, have no place, and where any form of
coercion or harassment that insults the dignity of others and interferes with
their freedom to work is unacceptable. Harassment of any kind may subvert the
mission of the town and threaten the careers, experience, and well-being of
employees, and therefore it is prohibited.



   Definitions



   (A)   Harassment:



      The Town of Middletown defines harassment as unwelcome verbal or
physical conduct which on the basis of gender, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, race, religion, national origin, age or physical
ability has the purpose or effect, from the point of view of a reasonable
person, either of:



      1.   Unreasonably interfering with an individual’s work
performance, or employment opportunity, or



      2.   Creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work
environment.



      Harassment can take many forms and can include slurs, comments,
jokes, innuendoes, pictures, cartoons, pranks or other verbal or physical
conduct, which is based upon a person’s protected status, (i.e., race,
religion, creed, color, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, age, or disability).



   (B)   Sexual Harassment:



      Sexual harassment is a type of harassment and occurs when the
verbal and physical conduct described above is sexual in nature or is
gender-based, that is, directed at a person because of their gender. Sexual
harassment does not refer to casual conversation or compliments of a socially
acceptable nature.



      Sexual harassment is a form of unlawful gender discrimination and
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal
or physical conduct of a sexual nature when:



      1.   Submission to the conduct is either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of employment.



      2.   Submission to or rejection of the conduct is used as a
basis for an employment decision affecting such individual.



      3.   The conduct unreasonably interferes with the
individual’s job performance or creates a work environment that is
intimidating, hostile, or offensive.



      Examples of sexual harassment include, but are not limited to the
following, when such acts or behavior come within one of the above
definitions:



      1.   Unwelcome verbal behavior such as comments, suggestions,
jokes, or derogatory remarks based on gender;



      2.   Physical behavior such as pats, squeezes, repeatedly
brushing against someone’s body, or impeding or blocking normal work or
movement;



      3.   Posting of sexually suggestive or derogatory pictures,
cartoons, or drawings, even at one’s work station;



      4.   Unwanted sexual advances, pressure for sexual favors
and/or basing employment decisions (such as an employee's performance
evaluation, work assignments, advancement) upon the employee’s acquiescence
to sexually harassing behavior in the workplace.



   (C)   Workplace Misconduct:



      Workplace misconduct, which does not meet the definition of
harassment as described above, is inappropriate or offensive conduct and is
unwelcome, unsolicited and disrespectful of the individual. Workplace
misconduct is prohibited by the Town of Middletown. Examples of workplace
misconduct would be joking, teasing, spreading rumors, yelling, cursing,
threatening, or conduct which has not become pervasive or egregious enough to
meet the legal definition of harassment or sexual harassment.



      Harassment, particularly sexual harassment, can be difficult to
define. Misconceptions abound. For this reason, the Town of Middletown
strongly urges employees and volunteers to use the harassment reporting
policy to report all incidents of suspected harassment, sexual harassment or
other inappropriate behavior as soon as possible. This policy is intended to
assist the Town in addressing not only illegal harassment, but also any
conduct that is otherwise offensive and inappropriate and to support the Town
of Middletown’s commitment to maintain a respectful and productive
workplace for all employees and volunteers.



   Complaint Reporting



   The Town of Middletown is committed to diligently enforcing its
harassment/sexual harassment policy by promptly and impartially investigating
all complaints. When any form of harassment is discovered, the town shall
take appropriate disciplinary action, up to and including termination. The
complaint procedure is designed to handle complaints in a fair, discreet and
timely manner to:



      1.   Decide if the behavior alleged in the complaint took
place and constitutes harassment, which violates federal and/or state law and
town policy or constitutes harassment in the form of inappropriate or
offensive behavior, which violates town policy.



      2.   Stop the offending behavior.



      3.   Restore the complainant’s working environment.



      4.   Take steps to prevent retaliation and repetition of the
harassment.



      5.   Educate, sanction, or discipline the harasser consistent
with the seriousness of the offense.



   Any volunteer who feels victimized by harassment or who witnesses
harassment should report verbally or in writing to his or her supervisor
immediately. If the volunteer’s immediate supervisor is the source of the
alleged harassment, or is so closely associated with the source of the
harassment that the volunteer does not feel comfortable reporting to that
person, the volunteer may report the complaint to the department head, or
department head designee, to the Chief of Police, or to the Human Resources
Director.



   Chief Of Police -      Middletown Police Department
               123 Valley Road
               Middletown, RI 02842
               401-846-1144



   Human Resources -      Human Resources Department - Town Hall
               350 East Main Road
               Middletown, RI 02842
               401-846-5781



2.9   Smoke Free Workplace Policy



   The Town of Middletown is a Smoke Free Workplace in accordance with the
Rhode Island “Workplace Smoking Pollution Control Act” and is committed
to providing a clean, healthy, productive, and safe environment for all
employees, volunteers, citizens and visitors.



   Smoking is prohibited inside all town municipal buildings, including
entrances, exits, lobbies, stairways, elevators and restrooms. Smoking is
also prohibited inside all town municipal parking and maintenance garages,
and all municipal vehicles owned and leased by the Town of Middletown.



   Smoking will only be permitted in outdoor areas on town property
outside of town municipal buildings as follows:



      •   Outdoor areas must be physically separated from the
enclosed workplace to prevent the migration of smoke into the workplace.



      •   Outdoor areas must be at least 50 feet from any exit and
entrance doorways to town municipal buildings.



2.10   Telephone Use



   Town telephones are important to our everyday operation and are
provided to facilitate official town business. The use of town telephones to
receive or make personal calls is not permitted except for reasonable local
incidental calls. Volunteers are required to reimburse the town for the cost
of any personal toll calls.



   Individual departments may establish rules further limiting or
monitoring the use of town telephones.



2.11   Safety



   It is the policy of the Town of Middletown to ensure that all
volunteers work under the safest possible conditions in each department. To
this end, every reasonable effort will be made to provide and maintain a safe
and healthy work environment, safe equipment, proper materials and to
establish and require safe work practices at all times. The town expects
every volunteer to make job safety a part of their daily concern. As a
volunteer of the Town of Middletown, it is your duty and responsibility to
observe rules of conduct and safety, to properly use any and all safety
equipment provided, and to stop and immediately report any unsafe activity to
your immediate supervisor. The Town of Middletown Safety Committee meets
regularly to review safety concerns of employees and volunteers and to
recommend health and safety initiatives and training for the town.



2.12   Anti-Violence Policy Statement



   The Town of Middletown does not tolerate any type of workplace violence
committed by or against employees or volunteers, including physical and/or
verbal threats. Employees and volunteers are prohibited from making threats
or engaging in violent activities. Possession of firearms or weapons of any
sort on town property or grounds by anyone other than sworn police officers
authorized to possess firearms is absolutely prohibited. The town maintains a
no tolerance workplace violence policy and violations of this policy
constitute misconduct and may lead to disciplinary action including
suspension or termination.



2.13   Dress Code and Appearance



   It is important for all volunteers to project a professional image of
the Town of Middletown. The town expects all volunteers to maintain a neat,
well-groomed appearance at all times.



2.14   Town Recycling Program



   The Town of Middletown is committed to preserving our environment and
therefore encourages recycling efforts town-wide. There are well-marked
recycling receptacles conveniently located in all office and meeting areas
within the town buildings so that all employees, volunteers, residents and
visitors can recycle appropriate materials.




ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF RECEIPT




I certify that I have received the Town of Middletown’s Volunteer Handbook.



I further understand that by signing this statement as required, I am
indicating that I have read the Volunteer Handbook and understand its
contents. I agree to follow the policies and procedures listed in this
Volunteer Handbook.



                                                   
                         



Print Name



                                                   
                                              
                                       



Signature                              Date



 



 



 



 



 



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------



FORWARD TO THE OFFICE OF HUMAN RESOURCES



Accepted by:                                          
                              Date Received:          
                     



                                                 
                   



POLICY 17.  MISCELLANEOUS BILLING POLICY




Policy # 2017-





Effective Date: 12/05/2016




1.0   PURPOSE



   To authorize the Finance Department to secure payment of all private
police, fire and public works service details in advance of such services
being rendered by town public safety and service personnel. These polices
will utilize best business practices.



2.0   SCOPE



   This policy will apply to all private police, fire, and public works
details.



3.0   POLICY



   The town’s provision of fire, police, and public works personnel to
ensure safe conduct within the town’s perimeter’s by residents and
visitor’s for special events and construction in and around public roads is
a recognized cost of the town. To ensure that these special costs are not
passed on to the taxpayers of the town, the users of such services will be
required to provide payment in advance to cover the estimated payroll and
vehicle costs of these services. Non-payment would result in the cancellation
of issued permits and the event or execution of services postponed until such
time as payment has been secured.



4.0   EXCEPTIONS



   The town will bill public utility companies, other local governments
and other RI state departments that utilize private details within the Town
of Middletown after services have been rendered.



POLICY 18.  CHANGE OF STREET NAMES POLICY




Effective Date: 5/2/2005




1.   Request for changes to names of town streets shall be submitted to
the Town Administrator in writing.



2.   Requests will be accepted only from property owners residing on the
subject street.



3.   Upon receipt of a proper request, the Administrator shall forward the
request to the Town Planner, Public Works Director, Police Chief and Fire
Chief for their respective recommendations.



4.   Based on those recommendations, the Administrator may:



      a.   Deny the request - if the request is denied the
Administrator shall inform the requesting party that he or she has a right to
request said change directly from the Town Council. In order to make a direct
request to the Council, the applicant must place the question of renaming the
street on a regular Council agenda, which shall not be less than two weeks
after the filing of the request, accompanied by a list of all owners of
property fronting on said street, a copy of the tax assessor map showing the
lots abutting on said street, and arrange, at his or her own expense, to
notify every property owner on the street by regular, first class mail,
postage prepaid of the date, place and time of the meeting at which the
Council will take up the question.



      b.   Approve the request - if the Administrator approves the
request, he or she shall so inform the requesting party and direct him or her
to submit a petition requesting the name change, signed by the owners of no
less than 75% of the lots fronting on said street and a separate list of all
owners of property fronting on said street, and a copy of the tax assessors
map showing the lots abutting on said street. Upon receipt of such petition,
the Administrator shall place said matter on a regular Council agenda for
decision and mail notices of such meeting to all property owners on the list
submitted.



5.   At such meeting, the Council shall take such action concerning the
designation of such street as it deems appropriate.



6.   The following criteria shall govern the street naming system:



      a.   No two roads shall be given the same name;



      b.   No two roads shall be given similar sounding names;



      c.   Each road shall have the same name throughout its entire
length;



      d.   Any road that is not continuous shall have separate names
for each section.



7.   In the event the Council changes the name of any street, official
notice of said name change shall be mailed by the town to all property owners
on said street, all town department heads and the U.S. Post Office.



8.   Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the Town Council from
changing the name of the street on its own initiative, upon the request of
the public safety official, provided it follows the notice provisions of
section 4(a) and the criteria set forth in section 6.



POLICY 19.  RULES OF THE COUNCIL



ALL COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS SHALL BE GOVERNED BY THE FOLLOWING PROVISIONS IN
KEEPING WITH ARTICLE II, SECTION 210 OF THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MIDDLETOWN



1.   Four members of the Council shall constitute a quorum.



2.   If there is no quorum, the members of the Council present may adjourn
from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such a
manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by rule of the Council.



3.   Standards for Professional Conduct for Council Members, as set forth
in Exhibit A.



4.   Civility and Mutual Respect Standards for the Conduct of Business in
the Town of Middletown, as set forth in Exhibit B.



5.   Upon its final passage each ordinance or resolution shall be
authenticated by the signature of the Town Clerk and shall be recorded in a
book kept for that purpose. Within seven days after final passage, each
ordinance shall be published at least once in such a manner as the Council
may prescribe by ordinance.



6.   After the introduction of any ordinance or resolution in the Council,
the Town Clerk shall keep available a copy of such proposed ordinance or
resolution, together with all amendments thereto, which copy shall be public
record.



7.   Upon election of the President, he/she shall call for the election by
the Council of a Vice President.



8.   The President of the Council shall take the Chair at the appointed
hour of each regular and special meeting and shall call the Council to order.



9.   Immediately after the President calls the Council to order, the Clerk
of the Council shall record the roll of the members present.



10.   Every member of the Council present must vote on any question coming
before it. A member may abstain from voting; however, provided that said
member publicly states the reason for so doing. No member may vote on any
issue in which said member has a personal interest or conflict, and said
member shall step down from the Council dais until said item is finished.



11.   The President shall preserve order and decorum. He/she may speak as
other members on all questions. He/she shall decide all questions of order
subject to appeal to the Council. On every appeal he/she shall have the right
in his/her place to assign his/her reasons for his/her decision. The majority
vote of those present shall be required to overrule the President.



12.   The President shall propound all questions in the order in which
they are moved.



13.   All matters coming before the Council shall be decided by a simple
majority vote, except where otherwise provided by state law or in the Town
Charter.



14.   The Vice-President shall preside over the sessions of the Council
during the absence of the President.



15.   When any member is about to speak in debate, or to deliver any
matter to the Council, he/she shall respectfully address himself/herself to
"Mr./Madame President" and shall not proceed until he/she has been recognized
by the Chairperson.



16.   When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by the
Chairperson, or being in writing, shall be handed to the Chairperson and read
before debate. Any motion shall be reduced to writing before debate, whenever
the President or any member shall so request.



17.   A question that is susceptible of division shall, at the request of
any member, be divided and put separately upon the propositions of which it
is compounded, but a motion to strike out and substitute shall not be divided.



18.   Any resolution of more than one part or section may be passed upon
section by section at the request of any member.



19.   No motion or proposition of the subject different from that under
consideration shall be admitted under color of amendment.



20.   When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received except
to adjourn, to lay on the table (which motions shall be decided without
debate), "the previous question", to commit, or to amend, which several
questions shall have precedence in the order in which they are here arranged.
The Council may adjourn to a day certain, or to the call of the Chair, or may
recess to a certain hour or to a certain day and hour, or to the call of the
Chair.



21.   The President while occupying the Chair may make or second any
motion.



22.   After a roll call has been ordered there shall be no debate
whatever, but a member may explain his/her vote.



23.   A motion to reconsider a motion that has passed is in order if made
at the same meeting or at the next regular Council meeting, but must be made
by one who voted with the majority.



24.   Any person not a member of the Council desiring to address the
Council concerning a matter on the docket of the Council not the subject of a
public hearing shall submit a written request to the Council Clerk or Deputy
Town Clerk stating the matter upon which he/she desires to speak. The Council
President may move that said person be permitted to address the Council for a
period not exceeding five minutes and this motion shall be put to the Council
without requiring a second.



25.   There shall be a public forum period at the beginning of each
meeting to allow citizens to address issues related to substantive town
business, said issues not included or discussed during the regular Council
agenda. No comments regarding personnel or job performance are allowed. The
entire public forum period shall be no longer than 15 minutes and citizens
may address the Council on one subject only and for no longer than five
minutes. Citizens shall complete a written request to speak, noting the
subject to be addressed during the public forum, and submit that form to the
Council Clerk, prior to the start of the meeting.



26.   Consent calendar as set forth by resolution, Exhibit C.



27.   There may be a town business update section on the Town Council
docket, the Town Administrator will review a list of outstanding projects
(project list will be provided to the Town Administrator by the Town Council,
one week prior to the closing of an agenda), giving a quick update on the
status of each project; the town business update section is limited to 15
minutes total; if a Town Council member would like more detail on any project
or topic, that Council member must submit an agenda item to be placed under
the Town Council portion of a future agenda.



28.   Any of these rules may be suspended temporarily by a two-thirds vote
of the Council present, but no rules shall be repealed or amended except by a
vote of a majority after notice given at a previous meeting.



29.   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on first and third
Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m., or at such other hour as the Council may
designate, and if any such date shall occur on a legal holiday, the meeting
for that week shall be held on the day following, or on such date as the
Council may determine at the previous meeting. Requests for special meetings
shall be filed with the Town Clerk.



30.   All items of business for the Council docket shall be filed with the
Council Clerk not later than 12:00 p.m. on the Tuesday prior to the following
Monday meeting of the Council. All items so submitted shall be specific in
nature, setting forth in at least one paragraph the exact topic to be
considered. The Council Clerk will review each item to determine its
acceptability and will consult, if necessary, with the Council President
concerning the same.



31.   The Council may from time to time elect such standing committees or
temporary committees as it shall deem necessary for the orderly conduct of
its business.



32.   Council Nomination and Appointment to Town Boards and Committees, as
set forth in Exhibit D.



33.   The Council will collectively interview applicants wishing to be
appointed to the Zoning and Planning Boards; Council may waive the
requirement for reappointments; all new applicants shall be interviewed prior
to appointment.



34.   Written interview questions will be used for the Planning and Zoning
Boards, which will be sent out and completed by the applicant prior to the
interview.



35.   Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the Council in all cases to
which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with these
rules.



36.   These rules shall take effect upon their passage.




DECEMBER 17, 2018
READ AND ADOPTED IN COUNCIL










  /s/ Wendy J.W. Marshall 
Wendy J.W. Marshall, CMC
Town Clerk





EXHIBIT A
STANDARDS FOR PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT FOR COUNCIL MEMBERS




   Council members are entrusted with the obligation to determine the
policy of the town and should exercise all the powers of the town consistent
with the Charter and the laws and constitution of the state. To meet that
responsibility, and to ensure the town’s business is conducted fairly and
efficiently, members must conduct themselves, at all times, in a courteous,
civil, and professional manner. Conduct that may be characterized as uncivil,
abrasive, hostile, or obstructive impedes the proper functioning of the
town’s business.



   A member’s conduct should, at all times, be characterized by personal
courtesy, professional integrity, and patience toward all participants.



   Civility and professionalism are hallmarks of a member’s dedication
to public service. Voluntary adherence is expected as part of this commitment
by all members.



   In furthering these stated goals:



   1.   All members are expected to conduct themselves according to the
highest standards of courtesy and professionalism and owe each other, and
anyone appearing before them, respect, diligence, and protection against
unjust and improper criticism or attacks.



   2.   All public interactions shall be conducted with regard for the
best interests of the town, town employees, and citizens of the town.



   3.   It is expected that anyone appearing before the members also
will conduct themselves with courtesy and respect and not engage in improper
criticism or attack of members or staff.



   4.   The Chairperson is charged with preserving order and decorum
and, in the event a member or anyone appearing before the Council engage in
behavior contrary to these policies and goals, the Chairperson, or any
Councilor, shall call attention to the offending behavior, request that it be
stopped immediately, and continue on with proper discussion by strict
adherence to these rules.




JANUARY 5, 2009
READ AND APPROVED IN COUNCIL





  /s/ Wendy J.W. Marshall 
Wendy J.W. Marshall, CMC
Town Clerk





EXHIBIT B
CIVILITY AND MUTUAL RESPECT STANDARDS FOR THE CONDUCT OF BUSINESS IN THE TOWN
OF MIDDLETOWN




   Town Councilors, through their Rules and Regulations, and town
employees, through their Employee Handbook, are charged with conducting
themselves in a courteous, civil, and professional manner. Consistent with
these purposes, it is expected that all persons conducting business in the
Town of Middletown will recognize that for town business to be conducted
fairly and efficiently, the general public must also act in a civil,
courteous, respectful, considerate, and professional manner and avoid
uncivil, abrasive, hostile, or obstructive conduct which impedes the town’s
business.



   Demeaning, intimidating, or threatening behaviors that affect the
ability of town employees and staff to conduct town business depart from the
standard for civility and respect and have no place in the community.



   Staff and employees are encouraged to call attention to any such
behavior by the offending party and request that the offending behavior be
stopped immediately and to file a report with their supervisor.




JANUARY 5, 2009
READ AND APPROVED IN COUNCIL





  /s/ Wendy J.W. Marshall 
Wendy J.W. Marshall, CMC
Town Clerk





EXHIBIT C
CONSENT CALENDAR




WHEREAS:      Many items of business require action by the governing
body of this town, but are themselves of a routine and non- controversial
nature; and



WHEREAS:      It is desirable to expedite the public business and
provide additional time for deliberation by the Council on matters requiring
such deliberation.



         THEREFORE BE IT



RESOLVED:      That when the Town Administrator determines that any
item of business requires action by the Council but is of a routine and
non-controversial nature, he may cause such item to be presented at a regular
meeting of the Council as part of a consent calendar.



         BE IT FURTHER



RESOLVED:      That the consent calendar shall be introduced by a
motion “to approve the consent calendar” and shall be considered by the
Council as a single item.



RESOLVED:      That there shall be no debate or discussion by any
member of the Council regarding any item on the consent calendar beyond
asking questions for simple clarification.



RESOLVED:      That on objection by any member of the Council to
inclusion of any item on the consent calendar, that item shall be removed
from the consent calendar forthwith. Such objection may be recorded at any
time prior to the taking of a vote on the motion to approve the consent
calendar and all such items shall be considered individually, in the order in
which they were objected to, immediately following consideration of the
consent calendar.



RESOLVED:      That approval of the motion to approve the consent
calendar shall be fully equivalent to approval, adoption, or enactment of
each motion, resolution, ordinance, or other item of business thereon,
exactly as if each had been acted upon individually.



                                       �
�              Sponsor:



                                       �
�              Kathleen N. Connell



                                       �
�              Councilwoman



 




JUNE 16, 1980
READ AND PASSED IN COUNCIL





  /s/ Frank Campagna 
Frank Campagna
Town Clerk





EXHIBIT D
NOMINATION AND APPOINTMENT TO TOWN BOARDS AND COMMITTEES




   The Town Council may, from time to time, establish committees or
subcommittees made up of Council members, which may include other
participants as well, for a specific task or project.



   The Town Council is also the appointing authority for various other
boards and committees under the Town Charter, state law, or at the discretion
of the Town Council. Certain appointments, such as partisan board
appointments, must be made consistent with the provisions of the Town Charter
or Town Code.



   Without limiting the authority of the Council to make appointments in a
time and manner that it deems appropriate, the Council adopts the following
guidelines.



   1.   If practicable, at least 45 days prior to the expiration of a
term of a board or committee member, the Town Clerk shall notify the Council
and the Chair of the board or committee that the term is about to expire. The
Town Clerk shall also notify the member whose term is about to expire and, if
the member is qualified for reappointment, inquire if such member is seeking
reappointment.



   2.   If practicable, the Town Clerk, at least 30 days prior to the
expiration of any such term, shall advertise the vacancy in a newspaper of
general circulation in the community and such other means as may be deemed
effective, including, but not limited to, mailings  to community
organizations, letters of invitation to apply to citizens who have expressed
interest throughout the year, and posting the advertisement for vacancies on
the town’s website.



   3.   Any interested person, either for reappointment or appointment,
shall be required to submit an application by the application deadline. The
application shall, in addition to basic information about the applicant,
contain information about the applicant’s educational background, work
experience, if any, related to the board or committee for which the
appointment is sought, and an explanation of the applicant’s interest in
the board or committee. Applicants for reappointment must also include their
attendance record for the previous term.



   4.   Eligible applications shall be forwarded to the Town Council
for their review.



The Town Council may choose to:



      a.   Appoint based upon the application process; and/or



      b.   Request that the board or committee requiring the vacancy
to be filled review the applications and recommend a candidate to the Council
for each vacancy. The Council is not required to follow any such
recommendation in making its appointment; and/or



      c.   If there is more than one applicant, request that the
applicants be interviewed by the Council or a subcommittee of the Council as
to their interest in appointment to such board or committee.



   5.   Vacancies to fill the expired term of a member do not require
special advertising unless requested by the Council, and may be filled from
applications on file.




DECEMBER 15, 2008
READ AND APPROVED IN COUNCIL





  /s/ Wendy J.W. Marshall 
Wendy J.W. Marshall, CMC
Town Clerk




APPENDIX A:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



RULES AND REGULATIONS
REGARDING THE SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT OF LAND



TOWN OF MIDDLETOWN, RHODE ISLAND



   1995



Adopted by the Middletown Planning Board



December 13, 1995



   Amendments through June 2013



TABLE OF CONTENTS



ARTICLE 1 - AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE



   SECTION 101 - AUTHORITY



   SECTION 102 - PURPOSES OF THE RULES AND REGULATIONS



   SECTION 103 - CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT



ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS



ARTICLE 3 - CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT



   SECTION 301 - APPLICABILITY



   SECTION 302 - PROCEDURES



   SECTION 303 - CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT DESIGN PROCESS



   SECTION 304 - BASIC MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS



ARTICLE 4 - PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL



   SECTION 401 - GENERAL



   SECTION 402 - PRE-APPLICATION MEETINGS AND CONCEPT REVIEW



   SECTION 403 - APPLICATIONS FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVALS



   SECTION 404 - REQUIRED FINDINGS



   SECTION 405 - PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION APPROVAL



   SECTION 406 - PROCEDURES FOR MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT AND MINOR
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL



   SECTION 407 - PROCEDURE FOR MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT AND MAJOR
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL



   SECTION 408 - PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS



ARTICLE 5 - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN



   SECTION 501 - STREET ARRANGEMENT



   SECTION 502 - PAPER STREETS



   SECTION 503 - ACCESS PROVIDED TO ALL LOTS



   SECTION 504 - DEAD END STREETS



   SECTION 505 - COLLECTOR STREETS



   SECTION 506 - RESTRICTION OF ACCESS



   SECTION 507 - STREET NAMES



   SECTION 508 - STREET FRONTAGE



   SECTION 509 - OVERALL PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT



   SECTION 510 - SIDEWALKS



   SECTION 511 - PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS



   SECTION 512 - SIDE LOT LINES



   SECTION 513 - MODIFICATION OF LOTS



      Extra Size Lot



   SECTION 514 - OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION FACILITIES



      Section 514.1 - Conservation Development



      Section 514.2 - Conventional Development



   SECTION 515 - CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF CONTROL



   SECTION 516 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



   SECTION 517 - FLOOD PRONE AREAS



   SECTION 518 - RETENTION OF ENVIRONMENTAL FEATURES



   SECTION 519 - MULTI-STAGE SUBDIVISIONS



   SECTION 520 - FEES FOR REVIEWS/EVALUATIONS CONDUCTED BY
CONSULTANTS/OTHER AGENCIES



   SECTION 521 - COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT



      Section 521.1 - Site Design



      Section 521.2 - Building Design and Architecture



      Section 521.3 - Landscaping



      Section 521.4 - Environmental Impacts



      Section 521.5 - Signage



ARTICLE 6 - SPECIFICATIONS FOR REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS



   SECTION 601 - CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES



   SECTION 602 - SPECIFICATIONS FOR REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS



   SECTION 603 - GEOMETRIC DATA FOR STREET CONSTRUCTION



   SECTION 604 - STREET INTERSECTIONS



   SECTION 605 - CLEARING AND GRUBBING



   SECTION 606 - EARTH EXCAVATION



   SECTION 607 - LEDGE AND ROCK EXCAVATION



   SECTION 608 - SUBSURFACE WATER



   SECTION 609 - RETAINING WALLS



   SECTION 610 - SUB-DRAINS (ON LOTS)



   SECTION 611 - SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREET CONSTRUCTION



      Section 611.1 - Materials



      Section 611.2 - General Conditions



      Section 611.3 - Construction Methods



      Section 611.4 - Traffic Limitation



      Section 611.5 - Seasonal Limits



   SECTION 612 - WATER MAINS



   SECTION 613 - SANITARY SEWERS



   SECTION 614 - ELECTRICAL UTILITIES



   SECTION 615 - CAPE COD BERM



   SECTION 616 - SIDEWALKS



   SECTION 617 - CURB CUTS INTO HOUSELOTS



   SECTION 618 - LOT SLOPES



   SECTION 619 - SURFACE GUTTERS AND SUB-SURFACE STORM AND DRAINAGE PIPES
AND FACILITIES



   SECTION 620 - SURFACE AND SUB-SURFACE DRAINAGE STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES



      Section 620.1 - Earthwork and Drainage



      Section 620.2 - Storm Drain and Sanitary Sewer Manholes/Catch
Basins



      Section 620.3 - Minimum Cover



      Section 620.4 - Compaction



   SECTION 621 - MONUMENTS



   SECTION 622 - STREET TREES



   SECTION 623 - STREET NAME AND TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS



   SECTION 624 - AS-BUILT DRAWINGS



   SECTION 625 - GATED COMMUNITIES AND LIMITED ACCESS GATES



ARTICLE 7 - IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES



   SECTION 701 - SECURITY FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS



   SECTION 702 - AMOUNT OF SECURITY



   SECTION 703 - DURATION AND RELEASE OF GUARANTEE



      Section 703.1 - Security Duration



      Section 703.2 - Security Release



      Section 703.3 - Town Engineer Inspection and Certification



      Section 703.4 - Phased developments



      Section 703.5 - Planning Board Recommendation to Town Council



      Section 703.6 - Maintenance Bond



      Section 703.7 - Release Of Responsibility



      Section 703.8 - Partial Release of Security



   SECTION 704 - EXTENSION OF TIME



   SECTION 705 - DEFAULT



      Section 705.1 - Condition of Default



      Section 705.2 - Certificate of Default



      Section 705.3 - Execution of Guarantee



      Section 705.4 - Payment by Surety



      Section 705.5 - Insurance



ARTICLE 8 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES



   SECTION 801 - PENALTIES



   SECTION 802 - RECOVERY OF DAMAGES



   SECTION 803 - BOARD OF REVIEW



   SECTION 804 - POWERS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW



   SECTION 805 - APPEAL PROCEDURE



ARTICLE 9 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS



   SECTION 901 - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER



   SECTION 902 - ADMINISTRATIVE FEES



   SECTION 903 - MEETINGS, VOTES, DECISIONS AND RECORDS



   SECTION 904 - PRECEDENCE OF APPROVALS BETWEEN PLANNING BOARD AND OTHER
LOCAL PERMITTING AUTHORITIES



   SECTION 905 - SIGNING AND RECORDING OF PLATS AND PLANS



   SECTION 906 - CHANGES TO RECORDED PLAT AND PLANS



   SECTION 907 - TIME REQUIREMENTS BETWEEN REVIEW STAGES, ENDORSEMENT AND
   RECORDING OF PLANS, COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF SUBDIVISION 
IMPROVEMENTS



   SECTION 908 - WAIVERS, MODIFICATIONS AND REINSTATEMENT OF PLANS



ARTICLE 10 - DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW



   SECTION 1001 - GENERAL



   SECTION 1002 - FAILURE TO ACT



   SECTION 1003 - PRE-APPLICATION MEETING REQUIRED



   SECTION 1004 - REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS AND DESIGN GUIDELINES



   SECTION 1005 - CERTIFICATION



   SECTION 1006 - REVIEW BY THE TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE



   SECTION 1007 - REVIEW BY PLANNING BOARD



   SECTION 1008 - EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL



   SECTION 1009 - SCOPE OF REVIEW



   SECTION 1010 - SPECIFIC AND OBJECTIVE GUIDELINES FOR REVIEW



   SECTION 1011 - WAIVERS FROM THE DESIGN STANDARDS OF ARTICLE 5



APPENDIX A - FORMS AND CHECKLISTS



   § 1   APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS



   § 2   ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST



   § 3   PRE-APPLICATION CHECKLIST



   § 4   MINOR SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST



   § 5   MAJOR SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST



   § 6   APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW CERTIFICATE OF
COMPLETENESS



   § 7   DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST



   § 8   ABUTTERS LIST



   § 9   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN CHECKLIST



   § 10   PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT FORM 1 - COST ESTIMATE



APPENDIX B - DRAWINGS



   § 1   TYPICAL STREET CROSS SECTION DETAIL



   § 2   TYPICAL DRIVEWAY CURB CUT DETAIL



   § 3   CUL DE SAC DETAIL



   § 4   RIVERINE FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



APPENDIX C - CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT DESIGN PROCESS



Article 1 - AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE



Section 101 - Authority



The Planning Board of the Town of Middletown, Rhode Island, in accordance
with the authority vested in the Town Of Middletown by Title 45, Chapter 23
of the General Laws of Rhode Island, 1992, as amended, and in accordance with
an ordinance entitled “An Ordinance Authorizing and Empowering the Planning
Board to Adopt, Modify and Amend Rules and Regulations Governing the
Restricting the Platting or Other Subdivision of Land” passed at a meeting
of the Town Council of said Town Of Middletown, duly held on February 17,
1969, does hereby declare its intention to exercise the power granted to it,
and hereby adopts the following Rules and Regulations.



These Rules and Regulations are declared effective as of December 13, 1995
and supersede all previous Rules and Regulations Regarding the Platting or
Other Subdivisions or Development of Land.



Section 102 - Purposes of the Rules and Regulations



These Rules and Regulations Regarding the Subdivision and Development of Land
are designed to:



   1.   Provide for the orderly, thorough and expeditious review and
approval of land developments and subdivisions;



   2.   Promote high quality and appropriate design and construction of
land developments and subdivisions;



   3.   Make adequate provisions for traffic to facilitate traffic flow
and lessen traffic accidents;



   4.   Furnish guidance for the wise and efficient expenditures of
funds for public works and to facilitate adequate, efficient and economic
provisions for transportation, water supply, sewage, storm drainage,
recreation and other public utilities and requisites.



   5.   Promote the protection of the existing natural and built
environment and the mitigation of all significant negative impacts of any
proposed development on the existing environment;



   6.   Promote design of land developments and subdivisions which are
well-integrated with the surrounding neighborhoods with regard to natural and
built features, and which concentrate development in areas which can best
support intensive use by reason of natural characteristics and existing
infrastructure;



   7.   Encourage local design and improvement standards to reflect the
intent of the Comprehensive Community Plans and the Zoning Ordinance with
regard to the physical character of the various neighborhoods and districts
of the Town;



   8.   Promote thorough technical review of all proposed land
developments and subdivisions by appropriate local officials;



   9.   Encourage local requirements for dedications of public land,
impact mitigation, and payment-in-lieu thereof, to be based on clear
documentation of needs and to be fairly applied and administered; and



   10.   Encourage the establishment and consistent application of
procedures for local record-keeping on all matters of land development and
subdivision review, approval and construction.



   11.   Further implementation of the goals and policies of applicable
elements of the Comprehensive Community Plan.



Section 103 - Conservation Development



The Middletown Planning Board finds that in most circumstances conservation
development fulfills the above stated goals to a greater extent than
conventional development, as conservation development is designed to: 



   1.   Encourage the preservation of open space for its scenic beauty
and the appropriate use thereof.



   2.   Preserve historical and archeological resources.



   3.   To protect natural resources, including but not limited to
those containing woodlands, unique vegetation, streams, floodplains,
wetlands, recharge areas, agricultural lands, wellheads, and vernal pools, by
setting them aside from development.



   4.   Protect the value of real property.



   5.   Promote more sensitive siting of buildings and roads, and
better overall site planning.



   6.   To provide a buffer between new development and existing
streets, neighborhoods, active farmland, and adjacent park or conservation
land.



   7.   Perpetuate the appearance of Middletown's traditional
rural/agricultural landscape.



   8.   Allow landowners a reasonable return on their investment while
also reducing the infrastructure costs for development.



   9.   Facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets,
utilities, and public services in a more economical and efficient manner.



   10.   Offer an alternative to conventional subdivision and land
development patterns.



   11.   To provide for a diversity of lot sizes, building densities,
and housing choices to accommodate a variety of age and income groups, and
residential preferences, so that the population diversity of the community
may be maintained.



   12.   To create neighborhoods with direct visual and/or physical
access to open land, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space,
and with a strong neighborhood identity.



   13.   To implement adopted land use, transportation and community
service policies, as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan.



Article 2 - DEFINITIONS



As used in these Rules and Regulations, the following definitions shall apply
where words or phrases used in this chapter are defined in the definitions
section of either the “Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use
Regulation Act,” section 45-22.2-4, or the “Zoning Enabling Act of
1991,” section 45-24-31, they shall have the meanings stated therein.  In
addition, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings.



Abutter.  One whose property abuts, that is, adjoins at a border, boundary,
or point with no intervening land, or being separated from such a common
border by a right-of-way, alley, or easement.



Administrative Officer.  The municipal official designated by these rules
and regulations to administer the land development and subdivision
regulations and to coordinate with local boards and commissions, municipal
staff and state agencies. For purposes of these Rules and Regulations, the
Town Planner is designated as the Administrative Officer.



Administrative subdivision.  Re-subdivision of existing lots which yields no
additional lots for development, and involves no creation or extension of
streets.  The re-subdivision only involves divisions, mergers, mergers and
division, or adjustments of boundaries of existing lots.



Applicant.  The applicant for subdivision approval by the Planning Board,
which also includes his/her authorized agents or representatives. For
purposes of these Rules and Regulations, the terms applicant, subdivider and
developer shall be synonymous.



Base Flood Elevation.  The water surface elevation of the base flood.



Base Flood.  The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year; i.e., flood resulting from a 100-year frequency
storm.



Board of appeal.  The local review authority for appeals of actions of the
Administrative Officer and the Planning Board on matters of land development
or subdivision, which is the local Zoning Board of Review constituted as the
Board of Appeal.  See R.I.G.L. 45-23-57.



Bond.  See improvement guarantee.



Buildable lot.  A lot where construction for the use(s) permitted on the
site under the local Zoning Ordinance is considered practicable by the
Planning Board, considering the physical constraints to development of the
site as well as the requirements of the pertinent federal, state and local
regulations.  See R.I.G.L. 45-23-60 (4).



Certificate of completeness.  A notice issued by the Administrative Officer
informing an applicant that the application is complete and meets the
requirements of the municipality's regulations, and that the applicant may
proceed with the approval process.



Concept plan.  A drawing with accompanying information showing the basic
elements of a proposed land development plan or subdivision as used for
pre-application meetings and early discussions, and classification of the
project within the approval process.



Conservation Development (CSD).  A site planning technique which bases the
layout of building lots and structures on the natural characteristics of the
land and reduces lot sizes so that the remaining land can be used for
recreation, common open space, and/or preservation of environmentally,
historically and culturally sensitive features and/or structures. The number
of developable lots created and the overall development density is no greater
than what is permitted under conventional development.



Conservation Development Design Process. The process used to determine the
layout of building lots, development, open space, and other improvements in a
Conservation Subdivision/Land Development Project.  Consists of five steps:
1) Understanding the site, 2) Evaluating Site Context, 3) Designating the
Required Open Space, 4) Locating Development Areas, and 5) Drawing in Lot
Lines.



Consistency with the comprehensive plan.  A requirement of all local land
use regulations which means that all these regulations and subsequent actions
are in accordance with the public policies arrived at through detailed study
and analysis and adopted by the municipality as the comprehensive community
plan as specified in R.I.G.L. 45-22.2-3.



Conventional Development.  A subdivision or land development project in
which an entire parcel of land is typically converted into privately owned
building lots and public street rights-of way.  Generally, lots are of equal
size and spread evenly throughout the parcel with little or no consideration
of the natural setting or environmental and cultural features of the land.



Dedication, fee-in-lieu-of.  Payments of cash which are authorized in the
local regulations when requirements for mandatory dedication of land are not
met because of physical conditions of the site or other reasons.  The
conditions under which the payments will be allowed and all formulas for
calculating the amount shall be specified in advance in the local
regulations.  See R.I.G.L. 45-23-47.



Development.  Any made-made change to improved or unimproved real estate;
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operation.



Development regulation.  Zoning, subdivision, land development plan,
development plan review, historic district, official map, flood plain
regulation, soil erosion control or any other governmental regulation of the
use and development of land.



Division of land.  A subdivision.



Endorsement.  The approval of a final subdivision plat by means of signature
on final plat drawings by the Chairman of the Planning Board or, in his
absence, the Secretary, allowing the recording of the plat in the land
evidence records of the Town.



Environmental constraints.  Natural features, resources, or land
characteristics that are sensitive to change and may require conservation
measures or the application of special development techniques to prevent
degradation of the site, or may require limited development, or in certain
instances, may preclude development.  See also physical constraints to
development.



Final plan.  The final stage of land development and subdivision review.



Final plat.  The final drawing(s) of all or a portion of a subdivision to be
recorded after approval by the Planning Board and any accompanying material
as described in these regulations and/or required by the Planning Board.



Flood area, gross.  See R.I. State Building Code.



Flood Plain.  The term “flood plain” means that the land area adjacent
to a river, stream, Narragansett Bay or other body of flowing or standing
water, which is susceptible to being inundated by water from the base flood
(100-year flood).



Floodway.  The term “floodway” means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge a 25-year frequency storm without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height.



Governing body.  The Town Council.



Improvement.  Any natural or built item which becomes part of, is placed
upon, or as affixed to, real estate.



Improvement guarantee.  A security instrument accepted by the Town to ensure
that all improvements, facilities, or work required by the land development
and subdivision regulations, or required by the Town as a condition of
approval, will be completed in compliance with the approved plans and
specifications of a development.



Local regulations.  The land development and subdivision review regulations
adopted under the provisions of R.I.G.L. 45-23.  For purposes of
clarification, here reference is made to local regulations, it is to be
understood as these Rules and Regulations for the Subdivision of Land in the
Town Of Middletown, Rhode Island and all related ordinances and rules
properly adopted pursuant to R.I.G.L. 45-23.



Maintenance guarantee.  Any security instrument which may be required and
accepted by the Town to ensure that necessary improvements will function as
required for a specific period of time.  See improvement guarantee.



Major land development plan.  Any land development plan not classified as a
minor land development plan.



Major subdivision.  Any subdivision not classified as either an
administrative subdivision or a minor subdivision.



Master plan.  An overall plan for a proposed project site outlining general,
rather than detailed, development intentions.  It describes the basic
parameters of a major development proposal, rather than giving full
engineering details.  Required in major land development or major
subdivision review.



Minor land development plan.  A development plan for a residential project
as defined in these rules and regulations, provided that the development does
not require waivers or modifications as specified in these rules and
regulations.  All non-residential land development projects are considered
major land development plans.



Minor subdivision.  A plan for subdivision of land consisting of five (5) or
fewer units or lots, provided that such subdivision does not require waivers
or modifications as specified herein. 



Modification of requirements.  See Section 908.



Open Space.  Any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated,
designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use
and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring



the open space, provided that the area may be improved with only those
buildings, structures, streets, and off-street parking, and other
improvements that are designed to be incidental to the natural openness of
the land.



Parcel.  A lot, or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under
single control, and usually considered a unit for purposes of development. 
Also referred to as a tract.



Parking area or lot.  All that portion of a development that is used by
vehicles, the total area used for vehicular access, circulation, parking,
loading or unloading.



Permitting authority.  The local agency of town government specifically
empowered by state enabling law and local ordinance to hear and decide on
specific matters pertaining to local land use.



Phased development.  Development, usually for large-scale projects, where
construction of public and/or private improvements proceeds by sections
subsequent to approval of a master plan for the entire site.  See Section
509  and Section 518.



Physical constraints to development.  Characteristics of a site or area,
either natural or man-made, which present significant difficulties to
construction of the uses permitted on that site, or would require
extraordinary construction methods.  See also environmental constraints.



Planning Board.  The Planning Board of the Town Of Middletown, Rhode
Island.  Also referred to as the “Board” in these Rules and Regulations.



Plat.  A drawing or drawings of a land development or subdivision plan
showing the location, boundaries, and lot lines of individual properties, as
well as other necessary information as specified in these regulations.



Pre-application conference.  An initial meeting between developers and
municipal representatives which affords developers the opportunity to present
their proposals informally and to receive comments and directions from the
municipal officials and others.  See Section 402.



Preliminary plan.  The required stage of land development and subdivision
review which requires detailed engineered drawings and all required state and
federal permits.  Section 407 C.



Public improvement.  Any street or other roadway, sidewalk, pedestrian way,
tree, lawn, off-street parking area, drainage feature, or other facility for
which the local government and other governmental entity either is presently
responsible, or will ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation upon municipal acceptance.



Public informational meeting.  A meeting for the Planning Board or governing
body preceded by a notice, open to the public and at which the public is
heard.



Re-subdivision.  Any change of an approved or recorded subdivision plat or
in a lot recorded in the municipal land evidence records, or that affects the
lot lines of any areas reserved for public use, or that affects any map or
plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of the local and development and
subdivision regulations.  For the purposes of these Rules and Regulations
any such action constitutes a subdivision.



Riverine.  The word “riverine” means relating to, formed by, or
resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.



Significant environmental impacts.  Any activity which is likely to
permanently or repeatedly degrade or destroy the quality of the air, water,
soil, wetlands, or wildlife habitat; or which presents unacceptable risks to
the public health. 



Site Analysis Map.  A map depicting natural, cultural, and recreational
resources, as well as topography and infrastructure of the lot or lots being
subdivided or developed.



Site Context Map.  An aerial photograph showing the area within a one-mile
radius of the property and delineating natural, cultural, and recreational
resources.



Storm water detention.  A provision for storage of storm water runoff and
the controlled release of the runoff during and after a flood or storm.



Storm water retention.  A provision for storage of storm water runoff.



Street.  A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for
passage or travel by motor vehicles.  Streets are further classified by the
functions they perform.  See street classification.



Street, access to.  An adequate and permanent way of entering a lot.  All
lots of record shall have access to a public street for all vehicles normally
associated with the uses permitted for that lot.



Street, alley.  A public or private thoroughfare primarily designed to serve
as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.



Street, cul-de-sac.  A local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate vehicular turnaround, either temporary or permanent, at the
closed end.



Street, limited access highway.  A freeway or expressway providing for
through traffic.  Owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and
other persons have no legal right to access, except at the points and in the
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the highway.



Street, private.  A thoroughfare established as a separate tract for the
benefit of multiple, adjacent properties and meeting specific, municipal
improvement standards.  This definition does not apply to driveways.



Street, public.  All public property reserved or dedicated for street
traffic.



Street, stub.  A portion of a street reserved to provide access to future
development, which may provide for utility connections.



Street classification.  A method of roadway organization which identifies a
street hierarchy according to function within a road system, that is, types
of vehicles served and anticipated volumes, for the purposes of promoting
safety, efficient land use and the design character of neighborhoods and
districts.  Local classifications shall use the following as major
categories:



   Arterial.  A major street that serves as an avenue for the circulation
of traffic into, out of, or around the municipality and carries high volumes
of traffic.



   Collector.  A street whose principal function is to carry traffic
between local streets and arterial streets but that may also provide direct
access to abutting properties.



   Local. Streets whose primary function is to provide access to abutting
properties.



Subdivider.  Any persons who (1) having an interest in land, causes it,
directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or who (2) directly
or indirectly sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or
develop, or advertises to sell, lease or develop, any interest, lot, parcel,
site, unit, or plat in a subdivision, or who (3) engages directly or through
an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for
sale, lease, or development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site,
unit, or plat in a subdivision.



Subdivision.  The division or re-division, of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels.  Any adjustment to existing lot
lines of a recorded lot by any means is considered a subdivision.  All
re-subdivision activity is considered a subdivision.  The division of
property for purposes of financing constitutes a subdivision.



Technical Review Committee.  A committee appointed by the Planning Board for
the purpose of reviewing, commenting, and making recommendations to the
Planning Board with respect to approval of land development and subdivision
applications.



Temporary improvement.  Improvements built and maintained by a developer
during construction of a development project and prior to release of the
improvement guarantee, but not intended to be permanent.



Town.  The word “Town” shall mean the Town of Middletown, Rhode Island.



Vested rights.  The right to initiate or continue to development of an
approved project for a specified period of time, under the regulations that
were in effect at the time of approval, even if, after the approval, the
regulations change prior to the completion of the project.



Yield Plan. Plan of a conventional subdivision or land development used to
demonstrate development potential, including the basic number of lots to be
allowed in a conservation subdivision plan, based on the zoning and
development requirements of the underlying zoning district.



Article 3 - CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT



This Article is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the purposes and
standards provided in Article 19 of the Zoning Ordinance.



Section 301 - Applicability



A.   When Conservation Development is permitted under the Zoning
Ordinance, all major subdivision/land development project applications shall
be submitted as Conservation Subdivision Developments (CSDs). 



B.   Conservation Development plan submission shall not be required for:



      1.   Minor subdivisions/land development projects



      2.   Administrative subdivisions



      3.   Subdivisions that create lots that are not for the
purpose of present or future development, provided that the lots are
preserved in perpetuity as open space.



C.   Nothing shall prohibit applicants exempted from CSD under Section
301(B) from applying under this article.



D.   Where a Conservation Subdivision Development plan is submitted, the
Planning Board shall have the discretion to consider for approval a
conventional plan of development provided that such determination is made at
the Master Plan stage of review for all major subdivisions, and prior to
Preliminary Plan approval for minor subdivisions. In order to make the
determination that it will consider a conventional subdivision plan for
approval, rather than the conservation plan, the Board must find that one or
more of the following statements is true:



      1.   Employing conservation development for the subject
property would not offer significant public and/or environmental benefits
compared to the conventional plan.



      2.   Compared to the conventional plan, employing conservation
development for the subject property would cause a nuisance to neighboring
uses, and would be detrimental to the appropriate use of neighboring
properties.



      3.   Compared to the conventional plan, employing conservation
development for the subject property will not result in the protection of the
unique natural features of the land, provide environmental benefits, such as
reduced storm water runoff, or reduce infrastructure construction and
maintenance costs.



      4.   The conservation plan would not create a neighborhood
with direct visual and/or physical access to the protected open space.



Section 302 - Procedures



Applications for CSD approval shall be made in accordance with procedures for
approval of a major or minor subdivision or land development project based on
the number of lots or dwellings in the development as provided in Section 403
of these Regulations.  In addition, applicants shall:



   A.   Schedule a pre-application meeting.



   B.   Submit all Conservation Development materials listed in
Appendix A.



   C.   Provide the information used to determine the basic number of
lots/units, and as applicable, evidence that all lots depicted on the Yield
Plan are capable of supporting development.



   D.   Demonstrate to the Planning Board that the Conservation
Development Design Process was used in siting open space.



Section 303 - Conservation Development Design Process



   A.   The design of a Conservation Development shall follow the
design process specified in Appendix C - Conservation Development Design
Process.  As a guide in designing Conservation Developments, applicants are
encouraged to review the provisions of the Rhode Island Conservation
Development Manual, RIDEM, June 2003 (as amended), in the preparation of
plans. The maps illustrated in this manual provide graphic examples of what
is required of applicants.



   B.   Applicants shall demonstrate to the Planning Board that this
design process was considered in determining the layout of proposed streets,
building locations, and open space by submitting the following items:



   (Minor and Major Subdivision/Land Development Projects)



 

MINOR SUBDIVISION/LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS


Step
 
Required Item
 
Stage at which item must be submitted


 
 

Pre-application

 

Preliminary Plan

 

Final Plan





1.  Understanding the Site
 
Site Analysis Maps
 


 


 




2.  Evaluate Site Context
 
Site Context Map
 


 


 




3.  Designate Potential Conservation Areas
 
Potential Conservation Areas
 


 


 




4.  Determine Maximum Number of Units
 
Yield formula calculation and/or Yield Plan
 


 


 




5.  Locate Development Areas
 
Sketch Plan
 


 


 




6.  Locate Building Sites
 
Site Plan
 


 


 




7.  Lay out Streets, Trails, and Other Infrastructure
 
Infrastructure & Utilities Plan
 


 


 




8.  Design and Program Open Space
 
Open Space Plan
 


 


 




9.  Draw in Lot Lines
 
Site Plan
 


 


 




10. Establish Ownership and Management of Open Space
 
Open Space Management Plan
 


 


 






 



 

MAJOR SUBDIVISION/ LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS


Step
 
Required Item
 
Stage at which item must be submitted


 
 

Pre- application

 

Master Plan

 

Preliminary Plan

 

Final Plan





1.  Understanding the Site
 
Site Analysis Maps
 


 


 


 




2.  Evaluate Site Context
 
Site Context Map
 


 


 


 




3.  Designate Potential Conservation Areas
 
Potential Conservation Areas
 


 


 


 




4.  Determine Maximum Number of Units
 
Yield formula calculation and/or Yield Plan
 


 


 


 




5.  Locate Development Areas
 
Sketch Plan
 


 


 


 




6.  Locate Building Sites
 
Site Plan
 


 


 


 




7.  Lay out Streets, Trails, and Other Infrastructure
 
Infrastructure & Utilities Plan
 


 


 


 




8.  Design and Program Open Space
 
Open Space Plan
 


 


 


 




9.  Draw in Lot Lines
 
Site Plan
 


 


 


 




10. Establish Ownership and Management of Open Space
 
Open Space Management Plan
 


 


 


 






 



Section 304 - Basic Maximum Number of Dwelling Units



   A. Yield Formula - The basic number of lots or units to be allowed in a
proposed CSD project is defined as the maximum number of lots or units which
could reasonably be expected to be developed upon the parcel based on the
requirements of the zoning district and other requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance. The following formula shall be used in determining the basic
number of lots/units:



   Lots/units =  (Developable Land Area * 0.8) ÷ Minimum lot or land
area required by the Zoning Ordinance for the proposed development. Results
of the formula calculation shall be rounded to the nearest whole number using
standard mathematical principles.(e.g. 5.50 , round up to 6; 5.44, round down
to 5.)



   B. Yield Plan - If the applicant believes that the yield formula does
not accurately reflect the actual development potential of the subject
property, a Yield Plan may be submitted for consideration by the Planning
Board in accordance with the requirements of this section. The proponent
shall have the burden of proof with regard to the reasonableness and
feasibility of the design and the engineering specifications for the Yield
Plan; provided, however, that the Planning Board's determination of the basic
maximum number of lots or units shall be conclusive.



   1.   Yield Plans shall be prepared as conceptual layout plans in
accordance with the Pre-application Checklist (Appendix A, § 2). Yield plans
shall show proposed streets, lots, rights-of-way, land unsuitable for
development and other pertinent features. The Yield Plan must be drawn to
scale, and must be a realistic layout reflecting a development pattern that
could reasonably be expected to be implemented, taking into account the
presence of land unsuitable for development (as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance), existing easements or encumbrances and the suitability of soils
for subsurface sewage disposal where required.



   2.   The Yield Plan shall also reflect the dimensional standards for
uses being proposed, as contained in the Table of Dimensional Regulations in
the Zoning Ordinance, or other applicable dimensional requirement of the
Zoning Ordinance and these Regulations. The Yield Plan must identify how
conventional lots or uses could be developed having the required area,
frontage and other dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. Although
lots shown in the Yield Plan may contain land unsuitable for development,
only developable land area as defined in the Middletown Zoning Ordinance
shall be counted towards the minimum lot area.



   3.   In determining the maximum number of lots allowed under the
Yield Plan the Planning Board shall require the applicant to present
evidence, certified by a registered professional engineer, that all lots
shown on the Yield Plan are suitable for development under applicable local
and state regulations.  This certification shall be provided at the master
plan stage in the case of a Major Subdivision, and at the Preliminary Plan
stage in the case of a Minor Subdivision.



   4.   On sites not served by public sewer, soil suitability for
individual septic systems for lots on the Yield Plan shall be demonstrated.
The Planning Board, with the assistance of the Town Engineer, may select a
sample of the lots for which the applicant will be required to present
specific evidence of septic system suitability.  The lots included in the
sample will generally be those that are considered to be marginal.  If all
lots in the selected sample are determined to be suitable then all lots on
the Yield Plan shall be deemed suitable for septic system development.  If
any lots in the selected sample fail, those failed lots shall be excluded
from the Yield Plan and the Planning Board shall select an additional number
of lots to be tested.  This process shall continue until all lots in a
selected sample  are deemed suitable.  The number of lots remaining on the
yield plan following the final round of testing shall be the basis for
determine the number of lots/units allowed in the CSD project.



   5.   Upon completion of their review, the Planning Board shall
determine the initial Basic Maximum Number of lots/dwelling units permitted
in a development. This initial determination shall be made at the master plan
stage of review for major subdivisions and major land development projects,
and at the preliminary stage of review for minor subdivisions and minor land
development projects. The applicant shall use this initial determination as
the basis for submission of more detailed information during subsequent
stages of review. Upon further investigation and upon receipt of more
detailed soils and environmental information as may be provided in subsequent
stages of review, the Planning Board may increase or reduce the number of
lots/dwelling units contained in the initial Basic Maximum Number. For all
developments, the final Basic Maximum Number shall be established by the
Planning Board at the final stage of review.



   6.   In developments that require alterations to be made to
freshwater wetlands, the Board may establish an initial Basic Maximum Number
contingent upon confirmation by the RI Department of Environmental Management
that such alterations are permitted under the provisions of the Freshwater
Wetlands Act.



Article 4 - PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL



Section 401 - General



   A.   Any person proposing to subdivide or develop any land in the
Town Of Middletown shall submit an application to the Planning Board or, in
the case of an administrative subdivision, to the Administrative Officer for
approval, or for referral to the Planning Board and/or its Technical Review
Committee, as appropriate.  No plat of a subdivision or development of land
in the Town shall be accepted for filing or recording in the land evidence
records of the Town until it shall have been approved by the Planning Board
or Administrative Officer, and such approval entered in writing on the plat
by the Chairman or Secretary of the Board or the Administrative Officer in
the case of an administrative subdivision or of a development requiring
Development Plan Review ("DPR").



   B.   Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any
development shall take place thereon, before any permit for the erection of a
structure shall be granted, and before any lot within said subdivision shall
be sold, the owner of said land, or his designated representative, shall
apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with
the following procedures.



Section 402 -  Pre-application meetings and concept review



   A.   General



   1.   Pre-application meetings allow the applicant to meet with
appropriate officials, boards and/or commissions, planning staff, and, where
appropriate, state agencies, for advice as to the required steps in the
approvals process, the pertinent local plans, ordinances, regulations, rules
and procedures and standards which may bear upon the proposed development
project.



   2.   Pre-application meetings aim to encourage information sharing
and discussion of project concepts among the participants. Pre-application
discussions are intended for the guidance of the applicant and are not
considered approval of a project or its elements.



   B.   Meeting required



   1.   One or more pre-application meetings shall be held for all
major land development or subdivision applications and all minor land
development or subdivision applications proposing the creation or extension
of a public road.



   2.   Provided that at least one (1) pre-application meeting has been
held for major land development or subdivision application or sixty (60) days
has elapsed from the filing of the pre-application submission and no
pre-application meeting has occurred within those sixty (60) days, nothing
shall be deemed to preclude an applicant from thereafter filing and
proceeding with an application for a land development or subdivision project
in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 45-23-36.



   3.   Pre-application meetings may be held where not otherwise
required upon request of either the municipality or the applicant.



   C.   Submittals



   1.   Where a pre-application meeting is required by this section,
applicants shall submit the materials required by Appendix A, § 2 -
Pre-application checklist.



   2.   Where a pre-application meeting is not required, applicants
seeking a pre-application meeting or an informal concept review shall submit
general, conceptual materials in advance of the meeting(s) as requested by
municipal officials.



   D.   Concept Review



   At the pre-application stage the applicant may request that the
Planning Board or the Technical Review Committee provide an informal concept
plan review for a development. The purpose of the concept plan review is also
to provide planning board or technical review committee input in the
formative stages of major subdivision and land development concept design.



Section 403 - Applications for Subdivision Approvals



   A.   Any person intending to subdivide land in the Town of
Middletown shall follow the procedure established in these Rules and
Regulations and shall provide all the material required in the checklists for
the appropriate subdivision contained in Appendix A. The Planning Board will
refuse to consider a plat of a subdivision until all items in the appropriate
checklists have been submitted by the applicant, and no subdivision shall be
considered as having been submitted to the Board unless the proposed plat is
accompanied by all the material required by the appropriate checklist.



   B.   Applications for subdivision approval shall be made to the
Administrative Officer, who shall review all applications for form and
content in conformity with the requirements set forth herein.  Complete
applications shall then be officially filed for review by the Planning Board,
and the Administrative Officer shall stamp all such applications with the
date of official submission to the Town.



   C.   The Administrative Officer shall advise the applicant as to
which approvals are required and the appropriate board for hearing an
application for land development or subdivision project.  The following
types of applications, as defined in Article 3, may be filed:



      1.   Administrative subdivision



      2.   Minor subdivision or minor land development plan



      3.   Major subdivision or major land development plan



   D.   An application shall be complete for purposes of commencing the
applicable time period for action when so certified by the Administrative
Officer.  In the event such certification of the application is not made
within the time specified in this article for the type of plan, the
application shall be deemed complete for purposes of commencing the review
period unless the application lacks information required for such application
as specified in this article and the Administrative Officer has notified the
applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application.



   E.   The Planning Board may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error and submission of additional information
specified in these Rules and Regulations but not required by the
Administrative Officer prior to certification, as is necessary to make an
informed decision.



   F.   Where the review is postponed with the consent of the
applicant, pending further information or revision of information, the time
period for review shall be stayed and shall resume when the Planning Board
determines that the required application information is complete.



   G.   All proposed subdivisions must meet at least the minimum design
requirements set forth in these Rules and Regulations. For conservation
subdivision developments (CSD), applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate
to the Planning Board that the Conservation Development Design Process
outline in Appendix C of these regulations was considered in determining the
proposed layout of open space, development areas and lots.



   H.   No streets or other improvements may be installed until the
Planning Board has approved the final plat.  No lots may be sold until the
final plat has been endorsed by the Planning Board Chairman or Secretary and
recorded in the land evidence records of the Town.



Section 404 - Required Findings



The approving authorities responsible for land development and subdivision
review and approval shall ensure that each proposal addresses the general
purposes listed in Section 102 of these Rules and Regulations and shall make
positive findings on the following prior to approving the proposed
subdivision/development:



   A.   The proposed development is consistent with the comprehensive
community plan and/or has satisfactorily addressed the issues where there may
be inconsistencies;



   B.   The proposed development is in compliance with the standards
and provisions of the Town Zoning Ordinance;



   C.   There will be no significant negative environmental impacts
from the proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all required
conditions for approval;



   D.   The subdivision, as proposed, will not result in the creation
of individual lots with such physical constraints to development that
building on those lots according to pertinent regulations and building
standards would be impracticable.  (See definition of buildable lot).  Lots
with such physical constraints to development may be created only if
identified as permanent open space or permanently reserved for a public
purpose on the approved, recorded plans; and



   E.   All proposed land developments and all subdivision lots shall
have adequate and permanent physical access to a public street. Lot frontage
on a public street without physical access shall not be considered compliance
with this requirement.



Section 405 - Procedure for Administrative Subdivision Approval



   A.   Submittals



Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed administrative subdivision,
as defined in these Rules and Regulations, shall submit to the Administrative
Officer the items required by the Administration Subdivision Checklist at
Appendix A.



   B.   Certificate of Completeness



The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the
Administrative Officer within a fifteen (15) day period from the date of its
submission according to the provisions of Section 403.



   C.   Review Process



   1.   Within fifteen (15) days of certification of completeness, the
Administrative Officer shall review the application and approve, deny or
refer it to the Planning Board with recommendations. The Administrative
Officer shall report his/her actions to the Planning Board at its next
regular meeting, to be made part of the record.



   2.   If no action is taken by the Administrative Officer within the
fifteen (15) days, the application shall be placed on the agenda of the next
regular Planning Board meeting.



   3.   If referred to the Planning Board, the Board shall consider the
application and the recommendations of the Administrative Officer and shall
either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within
sixty-five (65) days of certification of completeness.  Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval
of the administrative subdivision plan and a certificate of the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act within
the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of
the applicant.



   4.   Denial of an application by the Administrative Officer is not
appealable and requires the plan to be submitted as a minor subdivision
application.



   5.   Any approval of an administrative subdivision shall be
evidenced by a written decision which shall be filed and posted in the office
of the town clerk.



   6.   Approval of an administrative subdivision expires ninety (90)
days from the date of approval unless within that period a plat in conformity
with that approval is submitted for signature and recorded as specified in
Section 905.



Section 406 - Procedures for Minor Land Development and Minor Subdivision
Approval



   A.   Review Stages



Minor plan reviews consists of two stages, preliminary and final, provided
that if a street creation or extension is involved, a public hearing is
required. The Planning Board may combine the approval stages, provided
requirements for both stages have been met by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the Administrative Officer. Applications for CSD also require
a pre-application meeting.



   B.   Submission requirements



Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed minor subdivision or minor
land development, as defined in these Rules and Regulations, shall submit to
the Administrative Officer the items required by the Minor Subdivision
Checklist (Appendix A) at least three weeks prior to the Planning Board
meeting at which the applicant desires to be heard.



If a pre-application meeting is required or requested, the items required by
the Pre-application Checklist (Appendix A) shall be submitted prior to the
pre-application meeting.



   C.   Certification



The application shall be certified complete or incomplete by the
Administrative Officer within twenty-five (25) days, or within fifteen (15)
days if no street creation or extension is required, according to the
provisions of Section 402.  The running of the time period set forth in this
section will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of
incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and will
recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the
applicant.  However, in no event will the administrative officer be required
to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than
fourteen (14) days after its resubmission.



   D.   Administrative Review



The Administrative Officer shall review the application and shall comment and
make recommendations to the Planning Board. The application shall be referred
to the Planning Board for review and approval.



   E.   Re-assignment to Major Review



The Planning Board shall re-assign a proposed minor project to major review
only when the Planning Board is unable to make the positive findings required
in Section 404.



   F.   Decision



   1.   If no street creation or extension is required, the Planning
Board will approve, deny or approve with conditions the preliminary plan
within sixty-five (65) days of certification of completeness, or within any
further time that is agreed to by the applicant and the board, according to
the requirements of Section 903.



   2.   If a street extension or creation is required, the Planning
Board will hold a public hearing prior to approval according to the
requirements of Section 408 and will approve, deny or approve with
conditions, the preliminary plan within ninety-five (95) days of
certification of completeness, or within any specified time that is agreed to
by the applicant and the Board, according to the requirements of Section 903.



   G.   Failure to Act



Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act within
the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of
the applicant.



   H.   Final Plan



The Planning Board may delegate final plan review and approval to either the
Administrative Officer or the Technical Review Committee. The officer or
committee will report its actions to the Planning Board at its next regular
meeting, to be made part of the record.



   I.   Expiration of approval



Approval of a minor land development or subdivision plan shall expire ninety
(90) days from the date of approval unless within such period a plat or plan,
in conformity with such approval, and as defined in these rules, is submitted
for signature and recording as specified in Section 905.  Validity may be
extended for a longer period, for cause shown, if requested by the applicant
in writing, and approved by the Planning Board.



Section 407 - Procedure for Major Land Development and Major Subdivision
Approval



Prior to the Master Plan Review, one or more pre-application meetings shall
be held in accordance with Section 402.



   A.   Review Stages



   1.   Major Plan Review is required for all applications for land
development and subdivision approval subject to these Rules and Regulations,
unless classified as an administrative subdivision or a as minor land
development or a minor subdivision.



   2.   Major plan review consists of three stages of review, master
plan, preliminary plan and final plan, following the pre-application
meeting(s) specified in Section 402(C). Also required is a public
informational meeting and a public hearing.



   3.   The Planning Board may vote to combine review stages and to
modify and/or waive requirements as specified in Section 908.  Review stages
may be combined only after the Planning Board determines that all necessary
requirements have been met by the applicant.



   4.   Unless waived by the Planning Board consistent with the
provisions of Article 3 of these regulations, all major subdivisions must be
submitted as Conservation Subdivision Developments.



   B.   Master Plan Review



   1.   Submission requirements



      (a)   At least three weeks prior to the scheduled Planning
Board meeting, at which the applicant wishes to be heard, the applicant shall
first submit to the Administrative Officer the items required by the Major
Subdivision Master Plan Checklist (Appendix A).



      (b)   Requirements for the master plan and supporting material
for this phase of review shall include, but not be limited to:  information
on the natural and built features of the surrounding neighborhood, existing
natural and man-made conditions of the development site, including
topographic features, the freshwater wetland and coastal zone boundaries and
floodplains, as well as the proposed design concept, proposed public
improvements and dedications, tentative construction phasing, and potential
neighborhood impacts.



      (c)   The Administrative Officer shall solicit initial
comments from (a) local agencies including, but not limited to, the Planning
Department, the department of public works, fire and police departments, the
conservation, tree, and recreation commissions; (b) adjacent communities; (c)
state agencies, as appropriate, including the Departments of Environmental
Management and Transportation, and the Coastal Resources Management Council
(CRMC); and (d) federal agencies, as appropriate. The Administrative Officer
shall coordinate review and comments by local officials, adjacent
communities, and state and federal agencies.



   2.   Certification



The application must be certified complete or incomplete by the
Administrative Officer within sixty (60) days, according to the provisions of
Section 403. The running of the time period set forth herein will be deemed
stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the
application by the Administrative Officer and will recommence upon the
resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However in no event
will the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission
as complete or incomplete less than fourteen (14) days after its resubmission.



   3.   Informational meeting



      (a)   A public informational meeting shall be held prior to
the Planning Board decision on the master plan, unless the master plan and
preliminary plan approvals are being combined, in which case the public
informational meeting shall be optional, based upon Planning Board
determination.



      (b)   Public notice for the informational meeting shall be
given at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the meeting in the Newport
Daily News.  Written notice shall be mailed to the applicant and to all
abutting property owners.



      (c)   At the public informational meeting the applicant shall
present the proposed development project.  The Planning Board shall allow
oral and written comments from the general public. All public comments shall
be made part of the public record of the project application.



   4.   Decision



The Planning Board shall, within one hundred and twenty (120) days of
certification of completeness, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant, approve of the master plan as submitted,
approve with changes and/or conditions, or deny the application, according to
the requirements of Section 903.



   5.   Failure to act



Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the master plan and a certificate of the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act within
the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of
the applicant.



   6.   Vesting



      (a)   The approved master plan shall be vested for a period of
one (1) year with a one (1) year extension upon written request by the
applicant, who must appear before the Planning Board for the annual review.
Vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good cause shown, if
requested by the applicant in writing, and approved by the Planning Board.
Master plan vesting shall include the zoning requirements, conceptual layout
and all conditions shown on the approved master plan drawings and supporting
materials.



      (b)   The initial two year vesting for the approved master
plan shall constitute the vested rights for the development as required in
R.I.G.L. 45-24-44.



   C.   Preliminary Review



   1.   Submission Requirements



      (a)   The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer
the items required by the Major Subdivision Preliminary Review Checklist
(Appendix A) at least three (3) weeks prior to the scheduled Planning Board
meeting at which the applicant wishes to be heard.



      (b)   Requirements for the preliminary plan and supporting
materials for this phase of the review shall include, but not be limited
to:  engineering plans depicting the existing site conditions, engineering
plans depicting the proposed development project, a perimeter survey, all
permits required by state or federal agencies prior to commencement of
construction, including permits related to freshwater wetlands, the coastal
zone, floodplains, preliminary suitability for individual septic disposal
systems, public water systems, and connections to state roads.



      (c)   Final written comments and/or approvals shall be
provided from the Public Works Department, Town Engineer, Town Solicitor, and
other local government departments, commissions, or authorities as
appropriate.



      (d)   Prior to approval of the preliminary plan, copies of all
legal documents describing the property, proposed easements and rights-of-way
shall be submitted.



      (e)   In conservation subdivisions/land development projects,
proposed arrangements for ownership, use, and maintenance of the required
open space shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board.



   2.   Certification



The applications shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the
Administrative Officer within sixty (60) days, according to the provisions of
Section 403. The running of the time period set forth herein will be deemed
stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the
application by the Administrative Officer and will recommence upon the
resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no
event shall the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected
submission as complete or incomplete less than fourteen (14) days after its
resubmission.



   3.   Technical Review Committee



The Planning Board may request Technical Review Committee review of all Major
Subdivision/Land Development Project preliminary plan materials.



   4.   Development Impact Review



Unless waived by the Planning Board, all Major Subdivision/Development
applications shall undergo Development Impact Review, consistent with the
provisions of Section 310 of the Zoning Ordinance.



   5.   Public hearing



Prior to a Planning Board decision on the preliminary plan, a public hearing,
which adheres to the requirements for notice described in Section 408, must
be held.



   6.   Public Improvement Guarantees



Proposed arrangements for completion of the required public improvements,
including construction schedule and/or financial guarantees, shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board, after receiving concurrence from
the Town Administrator at preliminary plan approval.



   7.   Decision



A complete application for major subdivision or development plan shall be
approved, approved with changes and/or conditions or denied, within one
hundred and twenty (120) days of the date when it is certified complete, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.



   8.   Failure to act



Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act within
the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of
the applicant.



   9.   Vesting



The approved preliminary plan shall be vested for a period of one (1) year
and vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good cause shown, if
requested in writing by the applicant, and approved by the Planning Board.
The vesting for the preliminary plan approval shall include all general and
specific conditions as shown on the approved preliminary plan drawings and
supporting material.



   D.   Public Hearing and Notice



A public hearing in accordance with Section 408 of these regulations is
required.



   E.   Final Plan Review



   1.   Submission requirements



      (a)   The applicant shall first submit to the Administrative
Officer, at least three (3) weeks prior to the scheduled Planning Board
meeting at which the applicant wishes to be heard, the items required by the
Major Subdivision-Final Plan Checklist, as well as all material required by
the Planning Board when the application was given preliminary approval.



      (b)   Arrangements for completion of the required public
improvements including the construction schedule and/or financial guarantees.



      (c)   Certification by the tax collector that all property
taxes are current.



      (d)   For phased projects, the final plan for phases following
the first phase shall be accompanied by copies of as-built drawings, not
previously submitted, of all existing public improvements for prior phases.



      (e)   For CSDs, an Open Space Management Plan and any other
necessary legal documentation relating to ownership and management of open
space. 



   2.   Certification



The application for final plan approval shall be certified complete or
incomplete by the Administrative Officer within twenty-five (25) days,
according to the provisions of Section 402. The time period may be extended
to forty-five (45) days by written notice from the Administrative Officer to
the applicant where the final plans contain changes to or elements not
included in the preliminary plan approval. The running of the time period set
forth herein shall be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certification of
incompleteness of the application by the Administrative Officer and shall
recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant.
However, in no event shall the Administrative Officer be required to certify
a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than fourteen (14) days
after its resubmission. If the Administrative Officer certifies the
application as complete and does not require submission to the Planning Board
as per Subsection (3) below, the final plan shall be considered approved.



   3.   Referral to the Planning Board



After certifying the final plan, the Administrative Officer shall refer the
final plans to the Planning Board for review.  The Planning Board shall,
within forty-five (45) days after the certification of completeness, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, approve,
approve with modification and/or conditions or deny the final plan as
submitted.



   4.   Failure to act



Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the final plan and a certificate of the Administrative
Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act within the required
time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant.



   5.   Recording



The final approval of a major subdivision or land development project shall
expire one (1) year from the date of approval unless, within that period, the
plat or plan shall have been submitted for signature and recorded as
specified in Section 905 or, if the applicant has chosen to complete the
required improvements in lieu of posting a Guarantee of Performance, within
the time requirements outlined in Section 907. The Planning Board may, for
good cause shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period.



   6.   Acceptance of public improvements



Signature and recording, as specified in Section 905, shall constitute the
acceptance by the Town of any street or other public improvement or other
land intended for dedication.  Final plan approval shall not impose any duty
upon the Town to maintain or improve those dedicated areas until the Town
Council accepts the completed public improvements as constructed in
compliance with the final plans.



   7.   Validity of recorded plans



The approved final plan, once recorded, shall remain valid as the approved
plan for the site unless and until an amendment to the plan is approved under
the procedure set forth in Section 906, or a new plan is approved by the
Planning Board.  If construction of the subdivision improvements does not
begin within one (1) year of the date of final approval, the developer shall
return to the Planning Board to bring the Required Minimum Standards of
Design and the Specification for Required Improvements of the approved plans
into conformance with any changes which may have been made to these rules and
regulations.



Section 408 - Public Hearing and Notice Requirements



   A.   A public hearing shall be held for all major land development
projects and major subdivisions and when a street extension or creation is
proposed for a minor land development project or minor subdivision.



   B.   Public notice of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen
(14) days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Town following the Town's usual and customary
practices for such advertising. Notice shall be sent to the applicant and to
each abutter, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the time and
place of the hearing not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing. Said notice shall also include the street address of the subject
property, or if no street address is available, the distance from the nearest
existing intersection in tenths (1/10's) of a mile.



   C.   Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by first class mail
to the city or Town Planning Board of any municipality where there is a
public or quasi-public water source, or private water source that is used or
is suitable for use as a public water source, located within two thousand
(2,000') feet of Middletown's boundaries.



   D.   Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body
of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district,
or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource
and/or surface watershed that is used, or is suitable for use, as a public
water source located within either Middletown or two thousand (2,000') feet
of the Middletown's boundaries, provided, that a map survey has been filed
with the Building Inspector as specified in section R.I.G.L. 45-24-53 (E).



   E.   Notice of the public hearing shall be sent to an adjacent
municipality if (1) the adjacent municipality is an abutter or (2) the
development site extends into the adjacent municipality, or (3) there is a
potential for significant negative impact on the adjacent municipality.



The cost of all notices for Public Hearings shall be borne by the applicant.



Article 5 - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN



Any subdivision, Land Development Project (LDP) or development subject to
Development Plan Review (DPR) approved shall adhere to the following minimum
standards of planning and design.



Section 501 - Street Arrangement



   A.   Unless deemed inappropriate by the Planning Board, streets
shall be arranged so as to provide for the continuation of existing or
platted streets in abutting properties, whether such streets are public or
private.  Especially in retail and commercial developments, streets and
driveways shall be designed to minimize the number of curb cuts and to allow
the free flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the development or
developments, without having to enter and exit arterial connectors.



   B.   Where a plat submitted covers only a part of the applicant's
land, the street arrangement shall be such that it can be coordinated with
the remainder of said land. If abutting property is not subdivided or
developed, streets within the plat being subdivided or developed shall
project to the property line of abutting land.



   C.   If it is physically impossible to extend streets to adjacent
property or existing streets, new proposed streets shall provide continuous
flow of traffic being connected together to eliminate dead ends.



   D.   Whenever possible, all developments shall be provided with at
least two (2) means of access.



Section 502 - Paper Streets



Where access to property being subdivided is proposed to be from streets
which are platted, but not constructed (i.e., paper streets), the applicant
shall be required to construct said access streets in full accordance with
the construction standards of these Rules and Regulations from the public
street(s) to his/her property and as specified by the Planning Board.



Section 503 - Access Provided to All Lots



There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to a street from lots
abutting said street, nor shall land be reserved at the end of a dead-end
street preventing access to abutting property, except as specifically allowed
or required by the Planning Board.



Section 504 - Dead End Streets



   A.   All permanent dead-end streets shall terminate in a cul-de-sac
constructed according to these Rules and Regulations. The Planning Board may
prohibit the use or limit the length of dead-end street(s) where necessary in
order to ensure adequate and safe circulation of vehicular traffic and to
efficiently provide for public utilities and services. In considering a
request to allow a dead-end street, the Planning Board shall evaluate the
potential impact on the neighborhood, including public safety; the provision
of Town services and utilities; and the potential for road connectivity to
existing and potential future development.



   B.   Whenever possible, cul-de-sacs shall be temporary and provide
for future access to adjacent property.  Where streets are terminated
temporarily, and may be further extended at a future time, a temporary
cul-de-sac shall be constructed as specified in these Rules and Regulations.
A defeasible easement shall be granted to the Town for that portion of a
cul-de-sac right-of-way which would be abandoned when temporary cul-de-sac is
extended.  See Appendix B for a diagram of the cul-de-sac detail.



Section 505 - Collector Streets



Where collector streets are proposed, or where high traffic volumes are
anticipated, the Planning Board may require the construction of a street to a
right-of-way width up to sixty (60) feet, and a pavement width up to thirty
(30) feet.  Collector streets are streets which function as main interior
streets, and which collect traffic from local or minor streets to State or
Federal highways, or function as streets serving industrial and commercial
developments.



Section 506 - Restriction of Access



When a tract fronting a public street for a distance of 500 feet or more with
the average depth of 350 feet is to be subdivided into more than ten (10)
residential lots, the Planning Board may require that:



   A.   Residential lots adjoining the public street be provided with
frontage on a marginal access street, and



   B.   Access to the public street be restricted.



Section 507 - Street Names



The extension of an existing street shall have the same name as the existing
street. Names of other proposed streets shall be substantially different from
any existing street name in the Town of Middletown, and shall be subject to
the approval of the Planning Board and the Middletown Fire Department.



Section 508 - Street Frontage



All lots shall have a frontage on a public street equal to the minimum lot
width specified in the Middletown Zoning Ordinance. With the permission of
the Planning Board, a single-family residential lot may have a minimum of
fifty (50) feet of frontage on a cul-de-sac provided that the distance from
the side lot lines on opposite sides of the lot, as measured at the front
yard depth, is no less than one hundred (100) feet.



Section 509 - Overall Plan of Development



   A.   Where a development is proposed to be developed in more than
one phase, i.e., only a portion of the overall parcel to be developed is
subdivided or developed and recorded at one time, the applicant shall be
required to file an Overall Plan of Development. Such plan shall be filed at
the Master Plan stage and shall indicate the future stages of development and
their relationship to the stage being considered for approval by the Board. 
The Board will consider, among other things, the overall pattern of
circulation, provisions for adequate drainage, arrangement of lots and open
spaces, the surrounding land uses, and relationship to the Comprehensive
Community Plan.



   B.   No portion of any multi-phase development shall be approved by
the Planning Board unless an Overall Plan of Development shall have been
filed and approved, and no change in an approved Overall Plan of Development
shall be made by the applicant without approval of the Planning Board.



Section 510 - Sidewalks



Sidewalks shall be installed where sidewalks already exist and where
extension of new sidewalks would be desirable; or in areas where deemed
necessary by the Planning Board to provide safe pedestrian access.



Section 511 - Pedestrian Walkways



The Planning Board may require a ten (10) foot wide public pedestrian walkway
between blocks or lots when required in the design to provide for safe
pedestrian access. Such walkways may be left in a natural condition or
provided with paved sidewalks as specified in Article 6.



Section 512 - Side Lot Lines



Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street line.



Section 513 - Modification of Lots



   Extra Size Lot



The minimum lot area requirements may be increased by the Planning Board if
percolation tests indicate the need for additional area for the safe and
efficient installation of individual sewage disposal systems.



Section 514 - Open Space and Recreation Facilities



   Section 514.1 - Conservation Development



The Planning Board shall specifically authorize plans for the use, ownership,
management and maintenance of all open space areas within any Conservation
Development, pursuant to Section 1905 of the Zoning Ordinance. 



The required open space shall be established as a lot or lots separate and
distinct from the lots intended for residential or commercial development,
and land dedicated as street rights-of-way, and shall comply with the terms
of this section.



   A.   Resources to be conserved



The design of open space lands in any Conservation Development shall reflect
the standards set forth in this subsection and, to the fullest extent
possible, incorporate any of the resources listed below if they occur on the
parcel (not listed in order of significance).



   1.   Stream channels, floodplains, hydric soils, swales, springs,
and other freshwater wetland areas, including adjacent buffer areas that may
be required to ensure their protection;



   2.   Wellhead protection areas;



   3.   Special aquatic sites, vernal pools and significant natural
areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern,
such as those listed in the Statewide Natural Heritage Inventory;



   4.   Moderate to steep slopes, particularly those adjoining
watercourses and ponds, where disturbance and resulting soil erosion and
sedimentation could be detrimental to water quality;



   5.   Healthy woodlands, particularly those performing important
ecological functions such as soil stabilization and protection of streams,
wetlands, and wildlife habitats;



   6.   Areas where precipitation is most likely to recharge local
groundwater resources because of topographic and soil conditions affording
high rates of infiltration and percolation;



   7.   Hedgerows, groups of trees, location and species of large
individual trees of botanic significance, specimen vegetation and other
vegetation features representing the site's rural past;



   8.   Active agricultural uses, pastures, croplands;



   9.   Prime farmland soils and farmland soils of statewide importance;



   10.   Historic structures and archaeological sites;



   11.   Visually prominent topographic features such as knolls,
hilltops and ridges;



   12.   Geologic features such as eskers or kettle holes;



   13.   Scenic viewsheds as seen from public roads (particularly those
with historic features);



   14.   Existing or potential trails connecting the parcel to other
locations in the Town;



   15.   Any other natural, cultural or recreational resources
determined by the Planning Board.



   B.   Location



The location of the open space shall be determined during the initial design
phase of the project and with the input of the Planning Board. The
configuration of proposed open space lands set aside for common use in a
Conservation Development shall comply with the following standards:



   1.   Open space shall be placed in undivided preserves which will be
adjacent to the largest number of lots within the development as possible.



   2.   Open space shall be directly accessible to the largest
practicable number of lots or dwellings within the development. Non-adjoining
lots shall be provided with safe and convenient pedestrian access to open
space land;



   3.   Required open space shall adjoin open space on adjacent
parcels, forming an interconnected network.  Areas of open space open to the
public in the form of trails and access to significant and natural and
cultural features are encouraged. Open space shall be interconnected wherever
possible to provide a continuous network of greenway lands within and
adjoining the subdivision;



   4.   Whenever possible, open space shall be undivided by public or
private streets, except where necessary for proper traffic circulation;



   C.   Use & Development



Open Space shall:



   1.   Be free of all structures except historic buildings or
structures, stone walls, and structures related to open space uses. The
Planning Board may grant approval of structures and improvements required for
storm drainage and privately owned and maintained water supply within the
open space provided that such facilities would not be detrimental to the
purpose for which the open space is proposed. Placement of individual sewage
disposal systems (ISDS) within the open space shall be permitted only by the
granting of a waiver by the Board.



   2.   Be suitable for active or passive recreational uses to the
extent deemed necessary by the Planning Board, without interfering with
adjacent dwelling units, parking, driveways, and roads;



   3.   Be interconnected wherever possible to provide a continuous
network of greenway lands within and adjoining the subdivision;



   4.   Provide buffers to adjoining parks, preserves or other
protected lands;



   5.   Provide for pedestrian pathways for use by the residents of the
development. 



   6.   Provisions made for access to the open space lands by municipal
personnel, as required for land management and emergency purposes;



   7.   Be suitably landscaped either by retaining existing natural
cover and wooded areas and/or according to a landscaping plan to protect open
space resources;



   D.   Ownership



   1.   Ownership of open space lots shall be vested in a legally
viable entity pursuant to Section 1905(A) of the Zoning Ordinance, which
shall be responsible for the use and maintenance of the open space. 
Documents specifying the form of ownership for the open space parcel(s) shall
be submitted to the Planning Board for approval. The Planning Board shall
have the right to approve, modify or reject the proposed form of ownership if
the proposed form of ownership does not adequately provide for control and
maintenance of the open space. 



   2.   If ownership of open space is conveyed to lot owners within the
CSD, at a minimum the following standards of ownership and management of open
space shall be met:



      a.   If the required open space is to be owned in common by
all the lot owners within the CSD, the deed to each lot shall include a
fractional interest in the common open space in an amount inversely
proportional to the number of lots or dwelling units in the development. The
deed shall also include all covenants, restrictions and easements which shall
be imposed upon the use, management or maintenance of the open space in order
to provide for the necessary control and requisite upkeep of the open space.



      b.   The applicant or developer shall provide for and
establish a homeowners association or indicate an alternate method for the
use, care and maintenance of all open space lands and improvements.  Unless
otherwise allowed by the Planning Board, membership in the homeowners
association shall be mandatory for all landowners within the CSD, and each
lot shall be entitled to equal representation. The Planning Board shall
review the by-laws of the homeowners association to ensure adequate provision
for the maintenance of open space is provided.



      c.   If the condominium form of ownership is proposed, the
open space shall be a common element or a portion of the common elements of
the condominium, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 34 36-1 of the
General Laws of Rhode Island.



   E.   Maintenance



The Planning Board may require specific provisions for maintenance of open
space, private streets, drainage systems and utilities including requirements
for security and including maintenance bond, as provided in the Rules and
Regulation Regarding the Subdivision of Land. At a minimum, a Management Plan
for the open space detailing ownership, use and maintenance responsibilities
shall be developed for the Open Space and must be approved by the Planning
Board; such plan may be modified with Planning Board approval. In the event
of failure of a homeowners' association to maintain any common open space,
recreation areas, landscaping features, or other required improvements, the
Town may enter into said development and perform such necessary maintenance
work and charge the cost, including attorney fees, to the owner.



   F.   Excavation, Grading, and Disturbance



   1.   Areas proposed to fulfill the minimum open space requirement
within a Conservation Development shall not be excavated or regraded, except
as permitted by the Planning Board. Clearing and excavation of open space
areas may be permitted only for the installation of stormwater retention or
detention facilities, other drainage facilities, or for permitted utilities,
park, open space, recreational, agricultural or forest management uses in
accordance with a plan approved by the Planning Board.



   2.   No commercial earth removal, even if permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance, in the zoning district in which the development is proposed, shall
be permitted within any open space areas. In approving an open space use
plan, the Board may permit grading that includes removal of earth materials.
The Board shall, however, clearly indicate, as a condition of preliminary
approval, the approximate quantities of material and the general areas from
which earth removal is authorized, and shall only authorize the minimal
amount of earth removal required to grade the land for the intended purpose.



   3.   Disturbance to the natural contours of the land shall be
minimized to the greatest extent possible. Existing natural vegetation and
any significant natural or man made features shall be preserved except as
permitted by the Planning Board to create or enhance areas of landscaping,
parks, recreation, conservation, forestry or wildlife habitat. These
disturbances shall be specifically shown on the open space use plan.



   Section 514.2 - Conventional Development



   A.   The Planning Board may require the applicant to dedicate a
portion of the land being subdivided for the purpose of providing recreation
areas, open space, conservation areas, or areas of historic significance or
natural beauty for the benefit and enjoyment of the present and/or
anticipated future residents of the plat.  Requirements for the dedication
of recreation land are set forth in the Comprehensive Community Plan. The
minimum amount of recreation land so dedicated must be at least eleven (11)
acres per one thousand (1,000) of the estimated population of the plat.



   B.   Requirements for the dedication of conservation areas, natural
or scenic areas of historic sites shall be based upon the specific features
of the land and dedication of land reasonably necessary to accomplish the
intended purpose.



   C.   Land dedicated in accordance with this section may be dedicated
to the Town of Middletown, to the State of Rhode Island, to a recognized
public, quasi-public, non-profit or private organization, or may be privately



owned. If retained in private ownership, said land shall be covered by an
easement granted to the Town of Middletown sufficient to ensure its perpetual
maintenance as conservation, open space or recreation land, and to render the
land permanently available for the use and enjoyment of the residents of the
subdivision. Where land is to be maintained in private ownership, a
maintenance plan detailing the ongoing responsibilities for use and
maintenance of the land shall be submitted for Planning Board approval, and
shall be incorporated by reference in the maintenance easement.



   D.   Where, by virtue of the location, size or character of the
proposed subdivision, such as a dedication of land would not serve the
intended purposes, the Planning Board may waive such requirement.



Section 515 - Construction Site Runoff Control



Measures to minimize construction site runoff shall be employed, where
applicable, and shall, at a minimum, meet the standards and specifications
set forth in the Town's Construction Site Runoff Control Ordinance, 2005, as
amended (Town Code Chapter 151). A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan,
prepared in accordance with the Ordinance, shall be submitted at the
preliminary plat stage for review.  If no construction is proposed at time
of subdivision, the plan shall include a note requiring implementation of
construction site runoff controls at time of construction.



Section 516 - Stormwater Management



All development approved by the Planning Board shall comply with the
requirements of the Middletown Stormwater Management Ordinance, 2005, as
amended (Town Code Chapter 153). To the extent practical, low impact
development (LID) storm water best management practices shall be employed in
the storm water management plan. At the preliminary plan stage, a Stormwater
Management Plan meeting the requirements of the Ordinance shall be submitted
for review. If no construction is proposed at time of subdivision, the plan
shall include a note requiring implementation of stormwater management
measures at time of construction. Provision for maintenance of all components
of the Stormwater Management system, in accordance with the Town's Stormwater
Management Ordinance, shall be made prior to approval of the subdivision.



Section 517 - Flood prone areas



Subdivision and development proposals will be reviewed to determine whether
such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed
subdivision or development project is in a flood-prone area, defined as the
100-year floodplain as established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA):



   A.   Such proposal will be reviewed to assure that:



   1.   It is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within
the flood prone area.



   2.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage, and



   3.   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards by insuring, at a minimum, that there shall be no increase in the
rate of water runoff from the site. The Planning Board may, at its
discretion, require that the rate of runoff be decreased from the condition
existing prior to subdivision development.



   B.   The Board shall require that the following provisions apply to
subdivisions within the 100-year floodplain:



   1.   Future-condition storm water runoff discharge does not exceed
present condition discharges into a floodway as calculated up to a 25-year
frequency storm.



   2.   Development be prohibited within the floodway which will result
in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of a 25-year frequency
storm discharge.



   3.   That there is no reduction in the holding capacity of the
100-year flood plain.



   4.   All construction of drainage and flood protection systems and
all development within areas subject to flooding are adequately designed so
as to accommodate flows resulting from up to a 25-year frequency storm.



   5.   Every lot be located so as to provide an area for construction
of a residential building which is not within a riverine floodway.



Section 518 - Retention of Environmental Features



Environmental features such as stone walls, specimen trees, water bodies or
other outstanding natural or man-made features shall be retained insofar as
possible, and incorporated into the design of the subdivision or land
development project so as to preserve the character of the land. The Planning
Board shall ensure that, to the extent practicable, plans accomplish the
following:



   A.   Protect 100-year floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes
(greater than 25%) from clearing, grading, filling, or construction.



   B.   Preserve and maintain mature woodlands, existing fields,
pastures, meadows, and orchards;



   C.   Create sufficient buffer areas to minimize conflicts between
residential and agricultural uses.



   D.   In cases where development must take place on open fields or
pastures because of greater constraints in other parts of the site, site
dwellings at the far edge of a field as viewed from existing road(s).



   E.   Maintain naturally vegetated wetland buffers of sufficient
width to protect the wetland from adjacent land use.  In general such buffer
shall be no less then 100 feet, but may be more or less depending on
topography, soils, and wetland characteristics.



   F.   Preserve existing stonewalls, hedgerows and treelines.



   G.   Leave scenic views and vistas unblocked or uninterrupted,
particularly as viewed from public roads.



   H.   Avoid siting new construction on hilltops.



   I.   Protect wildlife habitat areas.



   J.   Preserve sites of historic, archaeological or cultural value.



   K.   Protect rural roadside character.



   L.   Provide landscaping for common use areas comprised of native or
non-invasive plant species.



   M.   Provide active recreation areas in suitable locations.



   N.   Include a pedestrian circulation system which provides access
to open space from lots not directly adjacent to the open space as well as to
open space on adjacent properties where possible.



   O.   Provide open space that is reasonably contiguous, both within
the development and with open space on adjacent land.



Section 519 - Multi-Stage Subdivisions



Where a proposed subdivision contains more than thirty (30) lots, the
Planning Board may, at its discretion, limit the number of lots to a maximum
of thirty (30) lots in any stage. The Board may require that no subsequent
stages be submitted for subdivision approval until construction of all
required improvements of each prior stage has been completed. Provided,
however, the Board may allow more than thirty (30) lots per stage where
development of more than thirty (30) lots would be consistent with the intent
and purposes of these Rules and Regulations.



Section 520 - Fees for Reviews/Evaluations Conducted by Consultants/Other
Agencies



Fees for reviews required by the Planning Board in connection with a specific
development shall be paid by the applicant prior to final approval of the
subdivision.



Section 521 - Commercial Development



This section describes the general objectives and intent of Commercial
Development Design Standards. (CDDS).  The provisions in this section are
provided for applicant, Technical Review Committee (TRC), and Planning Board
guidance.  Specific regulations implementing these objectives and their
intent are set forth in the following sections (521.1 - 521.4). The purpose
of these standards is to establish and maintain a uniform set of standards
that promote the use of high quality design, consistent with the traditional
architectural styles of Aquidneck Island and New England.



   A.   Site Design



Buildings and their adjacent spaces, including parking, establish a design
landscape rhythm. This rhythm of spaces and buildings should be considered
when determining design compatibility, whether between a building or a
building and street. Parking should be considered an integral part of site
design and should be coordinated with overall site development. Site design
shall encourage pedestrian activity through the placement of buildings close
to the street, with off-street parking dispersed into small landscaped lots
located to the rear or side of buildings and trees, foliage and grassy areas
interspersed among buildings.



   B.   Building Design and Architecture



In general, buildings shall be designed to include traditional New England
architectural elements. This includes, but is not limited to, peaked roof,
wood-frame, and other styles consistent with colonial through early
twentieth-century period architecture. Facades of a building, particularly
the front facade, should consist of or resemble traditional building
materials such as clapboard, shingles, brick, or stone.  Facades, windows,
and doors should be visually proportionate.



   C.   Landscaping



Landscaping, including plantings, should be designed to define, soften or
screen the appearance of the off-road parking areas and structures from the
public right of way and abutting properties. The objective of landscaping
should be to enhance the design and minimize the encroachment of the proposed
use on neighboring land uses.  The species and planting techniques for
street-side trees and other plantings should be selected to create a unified
image for the street, provide an effective canopy, avoid sidewalk damage, and
minimize water consumption.



   D.   Environmental Impacts



Commercial Development shall be designed to control erosion and
sedimentation, stormwater runoff, and minimize impacts on surface water and
air quality.  Erosion and stormwater runoff control shall comply with town
regulations, including Town Code Chapters 151 and 153, as amended. If
feasible, efforts should be made to decrease runoff rates and volumes from
pre-development conditions.



   E.   Signage



Signage shall be visually compatible with the scale and character of the
surrounding architecture, and should promote traditional architectural
elements. The size, location, design, lighting and materials of all exterior
signs and outdoor advertising structures shall be compatible with the design
of proposed building(s) and structure(s).



   Section 521.1 - Site Design



   A.   General Location and Layout



Buildings should be located so as to create a safe, pleasant walking
environment and efficient pedestrian circulation pattern. Building placement,
orientation and massing should be planned to promote more active
pedestrian-scaled commercial design, with ample opportunities for walking and
bicycling, as well as private motor vehicles and to promote the use of public
transportation.



   B.   Off-Street Parking and Circulation



   1.   Location



In all districts, except Light Industrial, parking lots should be located to
the rear or side of buildings. If site configuration does not allow for the
placement of all required parking spaces to the rear or side, a limited
number of parking spaces may be located between the front of the building and
the public street. Such lots shall be limited to one row of parking, except
that for Large-scale Shopping Centers and other situations where site
conditions warrant, the use of two rows of parking may be permitted. In
either case, the number of parking spaces in such lots shall not exceed fifty
(50) spaces, and additional landscaping and screening elements may be
required.



In light industrial districts, parking is permitted between building and
front lot line only where the front lot line does not abut a public arterial
street.



   2.   Parking Lot Size



The standards of this section are in addition to the requirements of Article
13 of the Middletown Zoning Ordinance regarding off-street parking and
loading. No individual parking lot, located between the building and street,
may exceed fifty (50) total parking spaces. For a project requiring more than
fifty (50) parking spaces, parking shall be broken up into smaller lots; each
accommodating no more than fifty (50) vehicles and directly connected with
the other lots. Adjacent parking lots must be buffered from each other with a
minimum ten (10) foot landscaped strip, which may also be used as a walkway.



   3.   Access & Circulation



Circulation shall be designed to provide safe and efficient access for
pedestrians, automobiles, and emergency vehicles into and throughout the
site, including designated pedestrian walkways and crosswalks.  Pedestrian
access to the site from the public way and neighboring properties shall be
provided.



   4.   Ingress & Egress



      (a)   Adequate and safe ingress and egress shall be
provided.  The number and width of curb cuts shall be minimized.



      (b)   Consolidation of existing curb cuts may be required.



      (c)   Provision for vehicular and pedestrian connections to
adjacent developments shall be provided, whenever possible. 



      (d)   Site design which requires the use of a public street to
maneuver in and out of a parking or loading space located on private property
shall not be permitted.



   C.   Utilities



All utility lines serving the site shall be installed underground. To the
maximum extent possible, power lines and utilities in frontage areas shall be
installed underground.



   D.   Exterior Lighting



   1.   Exterior lighting shall be designed to minimize impact on
neighboring properties and night light pollution.



   2.   Fixtures illuminating building facades shall be shielded and
directed toward the building and all other lighting fixtures shall be
shielded and directed to the ground. Building-mounted decorative light
fixtures and pole-mounted decorative fixtures, provided that they are less
than twelve (12) feet in height, should also be shielded to the extent
possible.



   E.   Infrastructure



Dumpsters, storage areas, exposed machinery installation including but not
limited to HVAC units, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings
and similar structures shall be designed and screened or located to provide
an audio-visual buffer sufficient to minimize their adverse impact on other
land uses within the development area and surrounding properties. Air
conditioning and ventilation units, security devices, and other service
equipment shall be screened from public view, either by being set back from
the roof edge for roof mounted units, or by being screened by landscaping for
ground mounted units.



   Section 521.2 - Building Design and Architecture



   A.   Façade and Walls



The first impression of a building is that of its front façade, the side of
the building facing the most frequently used public away. Accordingly,
facades and walls shall incorporate the following features:



   1.   The primary ground floor public entrances must be oriented
directly to streets, interior pedestrian plazas, or walkways.  If oriented
toward parking lots, such lots must contain said pedestrian plazas and
walkways.



   2.   The street side façade of a building shall not consist of an
unarticulated blank wall or an unbroken series of garage doors. In no case
shall the unbroken plane of a wall exceed forty (40) linear feet without a
break of at least forty-eight (48) inches in plane



   3.   Except in the GB and LI Zones, commercial garage doors and
loading docks shall not be visible from any public way.



   4.   Loading docks shall not be located on the building façade
facing the public way. Commercial garage doors and loading docks shall be
screened from public view.



   B.   Windows & Doors



Windows and doors are encouraged on all building elevations, and should be
visually compatible with the architectural style of the building. 



   1.   Windows should occupy not less than twenty (20) percent or more
than sixty (60) percent of any façade visible from the public way. In LI
Zones, windows should occupy not less than twenty percent (20%) or more than
sixty percent (60%) of any façade that faces a public arterial street.



   2.   Windows shall be of true divided-light or simulated
divided-light design when consistent with the overall building design; except
in LI Zones. Double-hung windows are preferred, where consistent with the
overall design of the building.



   C.   Materials



Traditional architecture employs authentic materials on building facades and
roofs. Traditional façade materials include wooden clapboards, shingles,
patterned shingles, brick, and stone and cast stone, depending on the
architectural style and location of the building. Traditional roof materials
include cedar shingles and slate. The façade and roof of a building,
particularly the front façade, shall be visually compatible with these
traditional building materials.



   1.   Building exteriors and roofs shall be constructed of, or
resemble, traditional materials such as wooden clapboards, shingles,
patterned shingles, brick, or stone.



   2.   Synthetic materials or substitutes may only be used subject to
Planning Board approval. Samples of all primary materials shall be submitted
to the Planning Board for approval.



   D.   Roof Forms and Roof Design



A roof can have a dramatic effect on the appearance of a building. The shape
and proportion of the roof shall be visually compatible with the
architectural style of the building and shall incorporate the following
features:



   1.   Traditional roof forms such as hip, gambrel, or gable shall be
required.



   2.   The gradient from level of any sloped roof shall be at least
4:12.



   3.   Flat roofs may be permitted if decorative details are
incorporated into the roof design and/or the roof is designed to incorporate
a sloped design for the portion of the roof visible from the public way, and
provided that any mechanical equipment installed on the roof is not visible
from the public way and abutting properties.



   E.   Architectural Elements



Architectural elements such as arcades, porches, bays, windows, balconies,
dormers and cupolas shall be in reasonable proportion to the overall building.



   Section 521.3 - Landscaping



The landscape plan shall incorporate the following features:



   A.   Existing Vegetation



Whenever possible, existing trees and vegetation shall be used to satisfy
landscaping requirements. Trees having greater than 18-inch caliper dbh shall
be preserved, whenever possible. If such trees cannot be preserved, each must
be replaced with two (2) trees of at least four (4) inch caliper dbh. The
Planning Board may seek an advisory opinion from the Tree Commission,
regarding the removal of trees.



   B.   Amount Required



Planted landscaping shall occupy a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of
the project area.



   C.   Screening



Screening elements such as plantings, stone walls, berms and/or fences, or a
combination of these is required along all property lines.



   D.   Buffers



Buffers shall be provided as follows:



   1.   A landscaped buffer of at least ten (10) feet is required along
all property lines. This may be reduced if stone walls are used as the
screening element.



   2.   When abutting a residential district or use, the buffer must be
at least twenty (20) feet wide and include screening at least six (6) feet in
height, measured from finished grade, at time of installation.  For large
scale shopping centers, the required buffer shall be fifty (50) feet wide.



   3.   A landscaped buffer of at least ten (10) feet wide shall be
provided between buildings and parking lots/driveways. The buffer shall be
defined by curbing, and may include sidewalks, but must include a minimum
five (5) foot planting strip.



   E.   Plantings



Plantings shall be noninvasive species, and native to Aquidneck Island, if
possible. The Planning Bard may seek an advisory opinion from the Tree
Commission, regarding the selection of tree species and locations for
planting.



   F.   Trees



   1.   Street Trees - Deciduous “street trees” shall be planted
along the street side property boundary and along any private streets or
internal driveways in planter strips or tree wells located between the
sidewalk and curb. Trees shall be spaced no further apart than thirty (30)
feet on center, and shall be a minimum of four (4) inch caliper dbh at time
of planting.



   2.   Parking Lots -  A minimum of one (1) tree shall be provided
for every five (5) parking spaces. Trees shall be at least four (4) inches
caliper dbh and seven (7) feet tall at time of planting. Each tree must be
surrounded by at least 25 square feet of permeable unpaved area.



   G.   Scenic Views



Scenic views and historically significant landscape features (including, but
not limited to, stone walls, picket fences, and large trees) shall be
preserved to the maximum extent reasonably possible. This requirement is in
addition to the requirements set forth in the Middletown Town Code Chapter
96: Tree Preservation and Protection, and Chapter 97: Stone Walls.



   H.   Maintenance



Ongoing maintenance of landscaping shall be a continuing requirement of
compliance with the Regulations, and failure to maintain landscaping may be
cited as a violation. For large projects, or significant landscape features,
a maintenance agreement and/or bond may be required.



   Section 521.4 - Environmental Impacts



   A.   Construction Site Runoff/Erosion & Sedimentation Control



   1.   Erosion and sedimentation shall be controlled so that
neighboring property and public facilities or services are not adversely
affected during and/or after construction.



   2.   Erosion control shall meet the standards of the Town of
Middletown, including Chapter 151 of the Town Code of Ordinances, and the RI
Erosion and Sediment Control handbook, as amended.



   B.   Stormwater Management



   1.   Storm-water runoff provisions shall maximize on-site
absorption/recharge and minimize runoff and to the extent feasible, should
reduce runoff rates and volume from the pre-development conditions.



   2.   Direct discharge of untreated storm-water run-off to a wetland
or watercourse from impervious surfaces is prohibited.



   3.   Storm-water run-off controls shall meet requirements of the
Town of Middletown, including Chapter 153 of the Town Code of Ordinances, and
the standards of the RI Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual.



   Section 521.5 - Signage



Signage shall meet the requirements of Article 12 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Signs and any exterior illumination must be architecturally compatible with
the development. Signage for multi-use projects, including industrial/office
parks and shopping centers, shall be of uniform design, with similar scale
and fabrication.



Article 6 - SPECIFICATIONS FOR REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS



The applicant, at his/her own expense, shall construct all improvements
required by the Planning Board as part of its approval of any subdivision, in
accordance with the specifications of these Rules and Regulations. Prior to
construction, the applicant shall attend a pre-construction conference with
the Public Works Director and the Town Engineer.  Any modifications to the
final approved subdivision plan shall be referred to the Planning Board for
consideration.



Section 601 - Construction Procedures



Each phase or step in the construction of required improvements listed below
shall be inspected and approved, in writing, on the site by the Public Works
Director and the Town Engineer or their representative. The Public Works
Director and the Town Engineer may, at their sole discretion, retain the
services of a consultant(s) to perform the required inspections. No
subsequent phase or step shall commence until such inspection and approval of
the prior phase or step has been completed. At a minimum, the applicant shall
notify the Public Works Director that the installation of improvements is
ready for inspection at the stages of construction listed below.



   A.   Following installation of all underground drainage and
utilities, prior to backfilling.



   B.   Following preparation of the sub-base, backfilling and the
installation of curbing or shoulders, prior to the application of the base
course.



   C.   Following spreading and compaction of the base course of the
roadway, prior, to the application of the binder course.



   D.   Immediately prior to, and during, the application and
compaction of the surface course on the roadway and sidewalks.



   E.   Following completion of all improvements and installation of
monuments.



The Public Works Director or Town Engineer, at their sole discretion, may
require inspection at such other intervals which may be deemed necessary to
assure proper construction of improvements.



Whether performed by the Public Works Director, Town Engineer, or consultant,
all costs associated with inspections shall be borne by the developer. All
such costs shall be documented by the Town Engineer or Public Works Director
and presented to the developer for payment. Payment of the inspection costs
to date is required prior to approval of each stage in the construction
process, as described above. Final payment for all inspection costs must be
received by the Town of Middletown prior to Town Engineer certification of
the completion of required improvements, as provided in Section 703.3 - of
these regulations.



Section 602 - Specifications for Required Improvements



Construction of all required improvements shall be in accordance with all
specifications set forth herein, and shall, at a minimum, meet the
construction specifications contained in Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction, published by the State of Rhode Island, Department of
Public Works, Division of Roads and Bridges, revision of 1971, and any
subsequent corrections and addenda.



Section 603 - Geometric Data for Street Construction



   A.   All streets, including private streets (those not dedicated to
the Town), shall meet the dimensional requirements set forth below unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board. In instances where there is
insufficient land available or in order to promote low impact development,
the Planning Board may modify these requirements to suit the situation. In
all cases, street dimensions must provide adequate access for emergency
vehicles.



Typical Street Cross-Section (see Appendix B)



Right of Way (ROW) Width   50 feet



Pavement Width, Including Curbs   26 feet



Maximum Grade of Street   9 percent



Minimum Grade of Street   1 percent



Maximum Grade of Cul-de-sac   4 percent



Minimum Center Line Radius with Horizontal Curve   150 feet



Cul-de-sac (Permanent and Temporary)



Minimum ROW Diameter   100 feet



Minimum Pavement Diameter   90 feet



Street Intersection Fillet Curve   



Minimum Radius of Pavement   37 feet



Minimum Radius of ROW   25 feet



   B.   Streets within a Conservation Development may be publicly or
privately owned and maintained and shall conform to the standards of these
Regulations. Streets shall be designed to conform to the standards of the
Town where the street is intended for dedication and acceptance by the Town.
Private streets shall be adequate for the intended use and vehicular traffic
and shall be maintained by an association of unit owners or such other means
or entity as may be approved by the Planning Board.



   C.   The Planning Board may allow for reduced width of streets in
order to reduce traffic speeds and the amount of stormwater runoff generated
by impervious surfaces, provided that a finding is made that public safety
would not be adversely impacted.



Section 604 - Street Intersections



Street center line intersections shall either be aligned precisely or be
offset by at least 200 feet from other intersections. Intersections shall be,
as nearly as possible, at right angles and none shall intersect at an angle
of less than 75 degrees.



Section 605 - Clearing and Grubbing



The entire right-of-way areas, as shown on the approved plat, shall be
cleared and grubbed. All root systems, trees, stumps, bushes and other
objectionable material shall be removed and transported away from the
subdivision.  Healthy trees within the right-of-way, may be left standing,
provided they are no more than two (2) feet from the right-of-way line.



Section 606 - Earth Excavation



All earth excavations shall conform to the lines and grades as shown on the
approved final plan. Any change in approved excavations, due to unforeseen
sub-surface conditions, shall first be approved by the Public Works Director
and the Town Planner to ensure the change does not conflict with any
expressed concerns of the Planning Board. Earth excavation shall include, but
not be limited to, the removal of clay, sand, gravel, loam, soft or
disintegrated rock, which can be removed without blasting, boulders of less
than one (1) cubic yard in volume, or one-half (½) cubic yard in all
trenches, and other unacceptable materials within the limits of the roadway
drainage, or other excavation. Earth excavation shall also include removal of
all stumps, backfilling of stump holes and other surface irregularities with
suitable fill materials.



Section 607 - Ledge and Rock Excavation



Rock and ledge excavations shall include all hard rock which can be removed
by drilling or splitting by hand, by mechanical means or by blasting, and
shall be removed to a depth of at least twelve (12) inches below sub-grade,
and, where applicable, ledge side slopes shall be at least four (4) feet
vertical to one (1) foot horizontal.



Section 608 - Subsurface Water



Where ground water is encountered within three (3) feet of finished grade,
adequate drainage, approved by the Public Works Director (after consultation
with the Town Planner), shall be constructed to lower ground water levels to
a depth of at least four (4) feet below finished grade within the street
right-of-way.



Section 609 - Retaining Walls



Where street and shoulder grades require more than two (2) feet of cut or
fill, retaining walls may be required along abutting property lines unless an
alternative is approved by the Planning Board.



Section 610 - Sub-Drains (On Lots)



Installation of conduits such as tile, pipe, or tubing beneath the ground
surface on a lot for the purpose of lowering the ground water, to intercept
or prevent water movement into a wet area, to relieve artisan pressure, to
remove surface runoff, to serve as an outlet for other drains, or to replace
natural subsurface drainage patterns that are interrupted or discontinued,
due to construction operations, shall be allowed only with the permission of
the Planning Board. The location and design of lot sub-drains shall be
indicated on the Stormwater Management Plan as required in Section 516 - of
these Rules and Regulations, and shall be designed according to
specifications contained in the Rhode Island Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook, 1989, as amended.



Section 611 - Specifications for Street Construction



The following specifications for constructions of streets shall be in
addition to the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, and
shall serve to further clarify and explain specific construction requirements
in the Town Of Middletown. See Appendix B for a cross section diagram of a
typical “standard” street in Middletown.



   Section 611.1 - Materials



   A.   The Base Course shall consist of bank run gravel borrow which
conforms to the requirements of subsection M.01.09 Table I, Column I of the
R.I. Standard Specifications or as approved by the Town Engineer and Public
Works Director.



   B.   The Base Surface shall consist of processed gravel which
conforms to the requirements of subsection M.01.09, Table I, Column II of the
R.I. Standard Specifications or as approved by the Town Engineer and Public
Works Director.



   C.   The Binder Course shall consist of Bituminous Concrete Pavement
(hot mix) Class I, Type I - 1 conforming to the requirements of subsection
M.03.06 of the R.I. Standard Specifications or as approved by the Town
Engineer and Public Works Director.



   D.   The Surface Course shall consist of Bituminous Concrete
Pavement (hot mix) Class I, Type I - 1 conforming to the requirements of
subsection M.03.06 of the R.I. Standard Specifications or as approved by the
Town Engineer and Public Works Director.



   Section 611.2 - General Conditions



The developer shall, at all times during construction, ensure that all roads
in which he is installing utilities are maintained in passable condition and
shall take appropriate measures to eliminate the creation of a dust nuisance
during construction. Prior to the construction of any building, the abutting
road shall have, at a minimum, the Binder Course installed.



   Section 611.3 - Construction Methods



   A.   Sub-Base



All underground sewer and water lines, utilities, laterals, service lines and
related facilities shall be installed prior to any street construction.
Following filling and compaction of all utility trenches, the sub-base shall
be thoroughly compacted with a ten (10) ton roller or its equivalent, true to
the lines, grades and cross sections shown on the approved drawings.



   B.   Manholes and Catch Basins



If the surface course will not be applied within 90 days following the
placement of the Binder Course, sanitary manholes and catch basins shall be
installed so that their tops are at Binder Course grade level.



   C.   Base Course



After the sub-base has been properly prepared and the curbs or shoulders set,
the Base Course of bank run gravel shall be spread for the full width and in
such volume as to provide an eight (8) inch cross section after compaction
with a ten (10) ton roller or equivalent. 



   D.   Base Surface



Following thorough compaction of the Base Course, processed gravel shall be
spread for the full width and in such volume as to provide a four (4) inch
cross-section after compaction with a ten (10) ton roller or equivalent. 



   E.   Binder Course



The Binder Course shall consist of an application of Bituminous Concrete
Pavement (hot mix) Class I, Type I-1 applied as follows:



   1.   The Base Surface shall be clean of all debris, protrusions
shall be removed from any holes, ripples or unevenness in the surface shall
be brought back to true line and cross section, prior to Binder Course
application.



   2.   The Binder Course shall be applied at a temperature of 250 -
350 degrees Fahrenheit by means of an approved paving spreader. Such material
shall be placed in sufficient quantity to provide a minimum of compacted
cross section of one-half (½) inch.



   3.   Compaction - The Binder Course shall be compacted as specified
in section 401.03.11 of the R.I. Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications.



   F.   Surface Course



The surface course shall consist of an application of Bituminous Concrete
Pavement (hot mix) Class I, Type I-1, applied as follows:



   1.   The Binder Course shall be swept clean of all sand and debris.
Ripples or unevenness in the surface shall be brought back to true line and
cross section by the spot application and proper compaction of Class I mix.



   2.   The Surface Course shall be applied at a temperature of 250 -
350 degrees Fahrenheit by means of an approved paving spreader. Such material
shall be placed in sufficient quantity to provide a minimum of compacted
cross section of one and one-half (1 ½) inches.



   3.   Compaction - The surface course shall be compacted as specified
in Section 401-03-11 of the R.I. Standard Specifications. Upon completion of
the application and compaction of the Surface Course, the street shall be
allowed to stand for a minimum of eight (8) hours without traffic.



   Section 611.4 - Traffic Limitation



Traffic passing over constructed streets shall be limited to wheeled
vehicles. No tracked equipment shall be permitted.



   Section 611.5 - Seasonal Limits



No bituminous material shall be laid when the temperature of the area is
forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit and falling or during other unfavorable weather
conditions, as may be determined by the Public Works Director.



Section 612 - Water Mains



   A.   When a public water system is to be utilized, water lines shall
be installed, and water stops shall be provided for each lot, in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Newport Water Department, unless
otherwise specified by the Planning Board. Fire hydrants shall be installed
with a minimum spacing distance of 250 feet in commercial and industrial
areas, and 500 feet in residential areas, 18 ft from the center of a standard
(26 ft) street or 5 ft from the edge of the roadway when a standard (26 ft)
street does not apply, or as directed by the Middletown Fire Department,
unless the Planning Board approves otherwise.



   B.   All water mains shall be public and looped, unless otherwise
authorized by the Planning Board. Water serving the subdivision will be
obtained from two sources (two different water mains), whenever possible.



Section 613 -  Sanitary Sewers



   A.   Sanitary sewers shall be installed by permission of the
Middletown Town Council in accordance with the procedures set forth in An
Ordinance Regulating the Use of Public Sewers, August 18, 1982, and
subsequent amendments thereto.



   B.   The use and installation of all sewer (lateral mains) drains
and connections to existing sewer lines also shall be in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations for the Use and Installation of Sewers, August 18,
1982, and subsequent amendments thereto. Sewer mains constructed of PVC pipe
located in Town roads shall have a minimum of three (3) feet of ground cover
over the pipe. In areas where three (3) feet of cover is not available,
ductile iron pipe shall be used. This requirement is imposed to ensure that
the sewer line will not be damage by heavy equipment.



Section 614 - Electrical Utilities



   A.   All electric, telephone, street lighting and communication
lines shall be installed underground. In cases where underground installation
is not feasible, due to the physical condition of the site of other limiting
factors, an alternative location for these lines, including above ground, may
be approved by the Planning Board.



   B.   Installation of all underground utilities shall be performed
according to the rules and regulations of the appropriate utility company.
Prior to preliminary approval of any subdivision the applicant shall furnish
a letter from the appropriate utility companies indicating concurrence with
the plan for installation of the utility.



Section 615 - Cape Cod Berm



Where deemed necessary by the Planning Board for proper control of traffic or
drainage, Cape Cod berm, formed of asphaltic concrete, shall be placed in all
streets where concrete or granite curbing is not required.  Such curbing
shall be installed in accordance with the Typical Street Cross Section,
Appendix B, of these Rules and Regulations.



Section 616 - Sidewalks



When located within the street right-of-way, sidewalks shall be located as
shown in Appendix B. All materials and methods used in the construction of
sidewalks shall be in conformance with the Rhode Island Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. Sidewalks shall be
constructed of a four (4) inch thickness of Portland Cement pavement to a
minimum width of four (4) feet and shall be set on a minimum sub base of
eight (8) inches compacted bank run gravel and a base of four (4) inches of
processed gravel.



Section 617 - Curb Cuts Into Houselots



   A.   On the side of the road which has the sidewalk, a cement curb
cut shall be constructed from the rear of the sidewalk to the edge of the
road. This will require a twelve (12) foot section of cement at the curb cut
from the road edge to the line. The base of the curb property cut shall be
the same as that required for the road. The surface of the curb cut shall be
constructed of a four (4) inch thickness of Portland Cement pavement
conforming to the sidewalk.



   B.   On the side where no sidewalk is constructed, asphalt shall
extend into the driveway curb cut to the property line. This will require a
twelve (12) foot extension of asphalt to the property line. The cross section
of the curb cut shall be the same as that required for the road.



See Appendix B for a diagram of the curb cut requirements.



Section 618 - Lot Slopes



No earth, gravel or sand slope shall exceed a three (3) horizontal to one (1)
vertical ratio without the use of cribbing, a retaining wall or similar
structure.



Section 619 - Surface Gutters and Sub-Surface Storm and Drainage Pipes and
Facilities



The Planning Board may require that surface and sub-surface storm drainage
pipes and facilities be installed and connected to dry wells or watercourses,
retention, detention or holding ponds, or an existing public storm drainage
system. Any connection to an existing public storm drainage system shall be
allowed only with the approval of the Planning Board.



Section 620 - Surface and Sub-Surface Drainage Structures and Facilities



   Section 620.1 - Earthwork and Drainage



All necessary surface and sub-surface storm drainage structures and
facilities shall conform to the R.I. Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction. Such Standard Specifications may be modified at the
discretion of the Planning Board.



   Section 620.2 - Storm Drain and Sanitary Sewer Manholes/Catch Basins



   A.   Catch basins shall be R.I. Standard 4.31 Type "R" or as
directed by the Public Works Director. Storm Drain Manholes or Catch Basins
shall be installed as follows:



   1.   At maximum distances of three hundred (300) feet between
manholes;



   2.   At all angles in the storm sewer line;



   3.   At street intersections and all points where catch basins,
inlets or laterals are to be connected;



   4.   At points where the pipe sizes change;



   5.   At points where the grade of the storm sewer changes.



   B.   All manholes shall be constructed to R.I. Standard 4.32, 4.33
and 4.34, as directed by the Public Works Director. Sanitary Sewer Manholes
shall be installed as follows:



   1.   At maximum distances of three hundred (300) feet between
manholes;



   2.   At all angles in the storm sewer line;



   3.   At points where the pipe sizes change;



   4.   At points where the grade of the sanitary sewer changes.



   Section 620.3 - Minimum Cover



All subsurface storm drainage pipes within street rights-of-way shall have a
minimum cover of three (3) feet. Where three (3) feet of cover is not
feasible, reinforced concrete or cast iron pipes shall be used. All drainage
structures and facilities shall be inspected and approved by the Public Works
Director before covering.



   Section 620.4 - Compaction



Compaction shall be in accordance with R.I. DOT Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction.



Section 621 - Monuments



Stone, concrete or granite monuments not less than thirty (30) inches in
length and four (4) inches X four (4) inches dimension shall be placed along
the street right-of-way line at all street intersections, where streets
intersect plat boundaries, at all points where there is a change in
direction, angle points, or changes in curvature, and at such other locations
as the Planning Board may designate. The top of the bound shall be set at the
new finished grade.



Section 622 - Street Trees



Where no natural tree growth exists within ten (10) feet of the street
right-of-way, the applicant shall be required to plant street trees in
accordance with the following standards:



   A.   Location



Street trees shall be planted within street rights-of-way along the sides of
the street pavement and located within the planting strip as shown in
Appendix B.



   B.   Materials



Trees shall be of nursery stock grown under local climatic conditions. Such
trees shall be of desirable stock, such as Honeylocust, London Plane, Oak,
Selkova, Bradford Pear and Shadblow.



Trees shall be of symmetrical growth, free of insect pests and disease,
suitable for street use and durable under normal maintenance. The average
trunk diameter measured at a height of six (6) above the finished grade shall
be a minimum of two and one-half (2½) inches. Loam shall be clean, of good
quality and such fertility and composition that it will continuously support
plant growth.



   C.   Spacing



Trees shall be planted at a distance of not less than fifty (50) feet and not
more than seventy-five (75) feet apart along each side of the street
pavement, except as allowed by the Planning Board. At street corners, trees
shall not be planted within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersecting
right-of-way lines.



   D.   Tree Pits



The diameter of tree pits (if required) shall be at least six (6) inches
greater than that of the root spread; shall have vertical bricked-in sides
and shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches below finished grade.



   E.   Planting



Each tree shall be planted plumb slightly lower than when it stood in the
nursery (in relation to the finished grade) and shall be thoroughly watered
when the hole is two-thirds (2/3) full of loam. After watering the filling
shall be completed and the loam thoroughly stamped. After planting, a three
(3) inch mulch of well-seasoned manure or peat shall be applied over the
disturbed ground and shallow watering basing provided around the tree.



   F.   Staking



Each tree shall be double staked in such a manner as to insure maximum
stability and to prevent whipping of the tree in high winds. Such double
staking shall be accomplished with a pair of two and one-half inches by eight
feet (2½" X 2½" X 8') stakes driven plumb two and one-half (2 ½) feet into
the ground, and tied at the tops and bottoms with figure eight hitches of #14
gauge wire encased in rubber hose or its equivalent.



   G.   Maintenance



All trees shall be watered until suitable maintenance is provided by the
occupants of the properties.



   H.   Season Limits



Planting shall be done during the proper seasons. No planting shall be done
in frozen soil or during unfavorable weather conditions.



   I.   Other



Where trees will be subject to more than occasional salt spray and high
winds, the more salt-resistant trees such as the Sycamore (a. pseudoplatinus)
Maple shall be planted.



Section 623 - Street Name and Traffic Control Signs



Street name and traffic control signs, with supports, of a type acceptable to
the Public Works Director, shall be provided and erected by the applicant at
each street intersection in the subdivision. Traffic control sign locations
shall be specified by the Chief of Police and recorded in the NOTE section of
the plans. A portion of the Performance Bond shall be retained until street
signs are erected.



Section 624 - As-Built Drawings



As-Built Drawings will be provided by the Applicant as follows:



   A.   Within fifteen (15) days of completion of the sanitary sewer
installation, a set of progress drawings showing all sewer laterals located
by depth and measurement to the two (2) lot corners fronting on the road will
be provided to the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director will not
issue any sewer hook-up permits until these prints are received.



   B.   Within thirty (30) working days of completion of construction
of all required improvements, a mylar (not sepia mylar) will be provided to
the Public Works Director. Additionally, a complete set of As-Built Drawings,
showing all changes made to the original construction plans, will be provided
to the Public Works Director and Town Planner. The As-Built Drawings must be
marked "As-Built Drawing" and must be certified by a registered professional
engineer or registered land surveyor.



Section 625 - Gated Communities and Limited Access Gates



Limited access gates proposed as part of new development, which obstruct
fire/police department access to the development shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the following provisions:



   A.   Two sets of plans drawn to scale for plan review and approval
shall be submitted to the Building Official prior to installation.



   B.   Annual testing and certification is required for limited access
gates which obstruct fire apparatus access roads and which open
electro-mechanically, using an approved Middletown Fire Department radio
receiver and transmitter.



   C.   Design. Limited access gates that obstruct fire/police
department access shall:



   1.   Be set back a minimum of 20 feet from public access roadways.



   2.   Provide an opening of 20 feet in width.



   3.   Open electro-mechanically using an approved Middletown Fire
Department radio receiver and transmitter when installed at residential
occupancies (to include apartments, hotels/motels, gated residential
communities, etc.), institutional occupancies, and other locations when, in
the opinion of the fire chief, life safety needs must be addressed. When
approved by the Fire Chief, general business occupancies may utilize manual
entry equipment, such as a Fire Department approved key access system padlock
and chain.



      Each radio receiver shall comply with the following design
criteria:



      a.   Consist of a multiple channel modular receiver. Each
channel shall be preset to a specified code designated by the Fire Chief



      b.   Be equipped with one external, weather-tight, antenna
assembly;



      c.   Be equipped with a flasher unit and external lamp
assembly with a red globe and guard. This shall be clearly visible from the
entry side of the gate;



      d.   Be located so that it can receive a clear signal from the
transmitter when activated from inside responding emergency vehicles from a
distance of 100 feet ;



      e.   Shall override all other opening systems;



      f.   Be protected from weather and physical damage; and



      g.   When activated, the gate shall open at a minimum speed of
1 foot per second and remain open until closed by the fire department.



   4.   A manual back-up system shall be provided for all
electro-mechanical gates.



      a.   A fail-safe manual back-up system shall be installed to
allow access through the gate in the event of operational failure.



      b.   This manual system shall be designed to be clearly
visible and easily accessible from the entry side of the gate and to open
manually by one person removing the Fire Department approved key access
system padlock and/or pin that is secured in the arm.



   5.   Pedestrian walkway gates. Limited access gates may be installed
across pedestrian walkways provided they swing in the direction of egress
travel. Gates serving as part of a required means of egress shall also comply
with the Rhode Island Fire Safety Code.



   D.   Maintenance. The gate opening systems shall be serviced on a
regular basis and maintained in an approved operating condition.



   1.   The mechanical and electrical components shall be serviced on a
regular basis and maintained in an approved operating condition.



   2.   A power supply shall be maintained to electronic components at
all times.



   E.   Performance test required.



   1.   The property owner shall be responsible for scheduling an
annual performance test to be conducted by the Fire Department to verify
proper operation of equipment.



   2.   Upon failure of the performance test, the security gate system
shall be disabled and maintained in the open position until repaired and
approved by the Fire Chief.



Article 7 - IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES



As a condition of final approval of a subdivision plat, the Board shall
require the applicant to demonstrate that all of the improvements required by
these Rules and Regulations have been satisfactorily completed and installed,
or to guarantee that such improvements will be satisfactorily completed and
installed within the time period established by these Rules and Regulations,
in which case the Board shall require the applicant to file a bond, surety or
other security acceptable to the Finance Director. The Board may also require
a maintenance for such improvements pursuant to these Rules and Regulations.



Section 701 - Security for Completion of Improvements



The Planning Board shall specify the required security which shall provide
for and secure to the Town Of Middletown the actual construction and
installation costs of the improvements shown upon final subdivision plans.
The form of security shall be reviewed by the Finance Director and shall be
rejected by the Planning Board if the Finance Director disapproves of the
content, format or wording of any security submitted to satisfy the intent
and requirements of these Rules and Regulations. The required security shall
guarantee the completion of construction of all improvements. All
construction shall be inspected and approved under the direction of the Town
Engineer, Public Works Director, and Town Planner.



Section 702 - Amount of Security



Prior to the submission of any final plat, the applicant shall submit to the
Town Engineer, on Form 1 Appendix A, the written estimate of the cost of
improvements, including labor and materials. Estimates for labor costs shall
be based on prevailing wage rates. Such estimate shall be reviewed by the
Town Engineer, or designee, who shall recommend to the Planning Board an
amount estimated to be sufficient to cover the cost of improvements as
contained on Form 1 (Appendix A, § 9). The Town Engineer's estimate shall be
advisory in nature and shall not bind the Planning Board to acceptance of
said estimate. The amount of surety required shall equal 125% of the cost
estimate approved by the Planning Board.



Section 703 - Duration and Release of Guarantee



   Section 703.1 - Security Duration



The term of duration of the security shall begin with the date of endorsement
of the Final Plan by the Planning Board.



   Section 703.2 - Security Release



Release of Security shall be conditioned on the completion of required
improvements to the land within two (2) years of the date of endorsement of
the final plan.



   Section 703.3 - Town Engineer Inspection and Certification



Upon completion of all required improvements to the land, the applicant shall
request certification from the Town Engineer and the appropriate utility
companies that all required improvements as shown on the Planning Board
approved plans, have been installed in accordance with required
specifications and Town regulations and within the specified time period.
Such certifications from utility companies shall be provided, in writing, to
the Town Engineer and Planning Board. The Town Engineer shall review the
request, inspect the improvements claimed to have been made, and provide
certification of completion, in writing, or inform the developer of any
deficiencies in writing, within thirty (30) days of receiving the request. A
copy of the certification or notification of deficiencies shall be provided
to the Planning Board.



   Section 703.4 - Phased Developments



In the cases of developments and subdivisions which are being approved and
constructed in phases, the Planning Board shall specify improvement guarantee
requirements related to each particular phase.



   Section 703.5 - Planning Board Recommendation to Town Council



When it certifies that all required improvements have been made in a
satisfactory manner the Planning Board shall release the remainder of the
improvement guarantee and file a recommendation to the Town Council regarding
the acceptance for maintenance of any street, open space or other
improvement. Prior to taking action to release the security the Planning
Board shall notify the owners of all lots within the subject subdivision and
all owners of property abutting the subject subdivision of the pending
action. Said notice shall be sent by first-class mail at least fourteen (14)
days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the release of security
will be considered, and shall specify the date, time and location of said
meeting. Furthermore, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the Planning Board
meeting at which the release of security will be considered, the Planning
Board shall notify the Middletown Roads & Utilities Advisory Committee of the
pending action, and invite comments regarding the status and condition of the
required subdivision improvements. The lack of comments from the Roads &
Utilities Advisory Committee shall not be cause for delay in the action by
the Planning Board to release the improvement guarantee.



   Section 703.6 - Maintenance Bond



Prior to acceptance of the improvements for maintenance by the Town and
release of security, the applicant to file, with the Finance Director, a
maintenance bond equal to at least ten (10) percent of the total initial
security amount, guaranteeing the proper functioning and durability of all
improvements for a period of one (1) year after the date of their acceptance
by the Town Council. Provided however, that the Planning Board shall have the
discretion, based on the recommendation of the Town Engineer and/or the
Public Works Director, to increase the required amount of the maintenance
bond to an amount deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning and
durability of all improvements.



   Section 703.7 - Release Of Responsibility



Sixty days before the expiration of the maintenance bond, the applicant shall
request an inspection of all required improvements by the Town Engineer. If
such inspection reveals deficiencies, the Planning Board, on written request
of the applicant, may grant an extension of not more than 90 days to correct
the deficiencies identified by the Town Engineer's inspection. Upon
expiration of said maintenance bond and correction of any deficiencies in the
required improvements, the Planning Board will release the maintenance bond,
and will notify the Finance Director of said release.



   Section 703.8 - Partial Release of Security



The Planning Board may, at its discretion, approve partial release of
security to cover the cost of remaining improvements, at any time by
notification to the Finance Director, who will so inform the surety company,
or take the required action to release the appropriate amount of the security
held. However, no amount of the security may be released prior to
installation of the binder course of road pavement in the portion of the
subdivision subject to the request partial release. A request from the
developer for a partial release of security shall be accompanied by an
estimate of the cost to complete the remaining improvements, as required by
the approved plan. The estimate shall be reviewed and approved by the Town
Engineer prior to the Planning Board taking action on the request. The amount
of security retained by the Town must, at a minimum, equal 125% of the amount
needed to complete all remaining improvements. All developer requests for
partial release must equal at least 20% of the security then held by the
Town. Prior to acceptance of the improvements by the Town, no more than 80%
of the initial security shall be released.



Section 704 - Extension of Time



If, due to circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, the
construction of required improvements to the land cannot be completed within
the prescribed time, the Planning Board may grant a time extension for
legitimate reason, for a period of time determined by the Planning Board, to
be appropriate to ensure satisfactory completion of all improvements. During
such time extension, all guarantees shall remain in full force. Such requests
for an extension of time shall be made in writing to the Planning Board at
least sixty (60) days prior to expiration of the original security.



Section 705 - Default



   Section 705.1 - Condition of Default



The Town of Middletown shall hold the applicant and surety in default of
guarantee should any one or more of the following conditions occur:



   A.   Failure to meet all specifications for construction or required
improvements to the land.



   B.   Failure to properly notify the Town Engineer or Public Works
Director on the beginning and completion of all phases of construction of
required improvements to the land.



   C.   Failure to protect existing improvements and/or properly repair
such improvements should any damage occur during the construction within the
subdivision.



   D.   Failure to remove debris from the side and adjacent area
immediately and upon completion of construction within the subdivision and/or
as directed by the Public Works Director.



   E.   Failure to complete the required improvements to the land
within the time prescribed by these Rules and Regulations.



   F.   Failure to have all construction properly inspected by the Town
Engineer or Public Works Director.



   Section 705.2 - Certificate of Default



Should any of the conditions cited in Section 705.1 above occur, the Town
Engineer or Public Works Director shall certify, in writing, to the Planning
Board that the subdivider has not complied with the requirements of the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations. The Town Engineer or Public Works Director
shall further certify the extent of non-compliance and the conditions thereof.



   Section 705.3 - Execution of Guarantee



The Planning Board shall, under provisions of the General Laws of Rhode
Island, Section 45-23-46, as amended, execute only that portion of the
guarantee which shall be necessary to correct the deficiency for which the
subdivider and surety are held in default.



   Section 705.4 - Payment by Surety



Upon notification to the surety by the Planning Board that the subdivider has
been held in default of guarantee, the surety shall promptly pay to the Town
of Middletown that portion of the guarantee which shall be deemed necessary
to correct the deficiency for which the subdivider and surety are held in
default.



   Section 705.5 - Insurance



The applicant shall be required to provide to the Town insurance sufficient
to indemnify the Town of Middletown against any claims for damage to property
or personal injury which may occur on the property being subdivided as a
result of construction activity required as a condition of subdivision
approval. Such insurance shall be submitted to the Finance Director for
review prior to endorsement of the plat by the Planning Board, and shall
remain in full force and effect during the construction period.



Article 8 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES



Section 801 - Penalties



   A.   Whoever being the owner, or agent of the owner, of any land
within a subdivision in the Town Of Middletown transfers, sells, or
negotiates to sell any land, by reference to or exhibition of or by other use
of a plat of such subdivision before such plat has been approved by the
Planning Board and has been recorded, shall be subject to a penalty of up to
five hundred dollars ($500) for each lot so transferred, sold or negotiated
for sale, and the description of such lot by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of transferring
or selling shall not except the transaction from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.



   B.   The Town of Middletown may enjoin such transfer or sale of
agreement by action for injunction brought in the Superior Court for Newport
County, or may recover such penalty by an action of the case in any court of
competent jurisdiction or may pursue both of such remedies. (Title 45,
Chapter 23, Section 59 of the General Laws of Rhode Island, 1992)



Section 802 - Recovery of Damages



Any sale of land, subdivided in violation of the provisions of these Rules
and Regulations, shall be voidable at the option of the purchaser thereof,
and shall subject the seller thereof to the forfeiture of any and all
consideration received or pledged therefore, together with any damages
sustained by the purchaser, who may maintain any action of the case to
recover any amounts due him/her under the provision of Title 45, Chapter 23,
Section 59 of the General Laws of Rhode Island, 1992.



Section 803 - Board of Review



The Zoning Board of Review of the Town of Middletown, as the same may be
legally constituted from time to time, hereinafter referred to as the Zoning
Board of Review, shall constitute and act as the Board of Review prescribed
by Title 45, Chapter 23, Section 57 of the General Laws of Rhode Island,
1956, and shall have all the power and authority and be subject to all duties
provided for said Board of Review by said Chapter 23, and all amendments
thereto.



Section 804 - Powers of the Zoning Board of Review



The Zoning Board of Review may, in appropriate cases and subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards, make special exceptions to the Rules
and Regulations of said Planning Board in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of such Rules and Regulations, or where exception is reasonably
necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public; and shall have the
following powers:



   A.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error
to any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Planning
Board in the enforcement of the Rules and Regulations.



   B.   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the Rules
and Regulations upon which such Board is authorized to pass.



   C.   To authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such variance in
the application of the terms of the Rules and Regulations as will not be
contrary to public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of such Rules and Regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the Rules and Regulations
shall be observed and substantial justice done.



   D.   In exercising the powers mentioned above, the Zoning Board of
Review may, in conformity with the provisions of the General Laws of the
State of Rhode Island, 1956 (45-23), reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the decision appealed from, and make such order requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have
all the powers of the Planning Board from whom the appeal was taken.



   E.   The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Zoning Board of
Review shall be necessary to reverse any decision or determination of the
Planning Board.



Section 805 - Appeal Procedure



   A.   An appeal to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
whose plat has been rejected by the Planning Board. The appellant shall file,
with the secretary of the Zoning Board of Review, a statement of his/her
appeal, a copy of his/her plat and a copy of the list of the abutting owners
furnished therewith and of the grounds of disapproval of the Planning Board,
together with the names and addresses of other persons who appeared before
said Planning Board in opposition to his/her application for approval of this
plat. Such appeal shall be filed with said secretary of the Zoning Board of
Review within twenty (20) days after the final action of said Planning Board
on said application.



   B.   The Zoning Board of Review shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to
the parties in interest including the applicant, abutting owners and any
other persons who entered appearance before the Planning Board and shall
decide the same, within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party in
interest may appear in person or by agent, or by attorney.



Article 9 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS



Section 901 - Administrative Officer



The Town Planner shall act as the Administrative Officer and shall have
responsibility to:



   A.   Administer these Rules and Regulations for the subdivision and
development of land.



   B.   Oversee and coordinate the review, approval, recording and
enforcement provisions of these Rules and Regulations.



   C.   Review and approve/disapprove Administrative Subdivisions.



   D.   Serve as the chair of the Technical Review Committee, should
one be established.



   E.   Coordinate site plan reviews of proposed development projects
referred by the Zoning Board of Review.



   F.   Coordinate reviews of proposed land development projects and
subdivisions with adjacent municipalities, as necessary, to be consistent
with federal, state and local laws, as directed by the Planning Board.



Section 902 - Administrative Fees



In addition to the fees required for the review stages for subdivision
approval, fees in an amount not to exceed actual costs incurred for
consultants or other assistance for the adequate review and hearings of
applications, issuance of permits and the recording of decisions shall be
paid by the applicant. In the case of reviews conducted in response to the
Zoning Board of Review, costs associated with each review shall be paid by
the applicant.



Section 903 - Meetings, Votes, Decisions and Records



   A.   All records of the Planning Board proceedings and decisions
shall be written and kept permanently available for public review. Completed
applications for proposed land development and subdivision projects, under
review by the Planning Board, shall be available for public review.



   B.   Participation in a Planning Board meeting or other proceedings
by any party, shall not be a cause for civil action or liability, except for
acts not in good faith, intentional misconduct, knowing violation of law,
transactions, where there is an improper personal benefit, or malicious,
wanton, or willful misconduct.



   C.   All final written comments to the Planning Board, from the
Administrative Officer, municipal departments, the Technical Review
Committee, state and federal agencies, and local commissions shall be part of
the permanent record of the development application.



   D.   Votes. All votes of the Planning Board shall be made part of
the permanent record and shall show the members present and their votes. A
decision by the Planning Board to approve any land development or subdivision
application shall require a vote for approval by a majority of the current
Planning Board membership.



   E.   Modification of Final Approval. If the Planning Board, in its
review of the final subdivision plat, modifies and approves a final plat, the
Board shall notify the applicant of such action by certified or registered
mail, of such modification and approval. If the applicant shall, within sixty
(60) days of the receipt of such notice, comply with such modification and
file an amended plat, such plat shall be deemed to be approved, subject to
the requirements and responsibilities as further set forth in these Rules and
Regulations.



   F.   The date of completion of final review shall be construed as
the date of the satisfactory filing of the amended plat.



Section 904 - Precedence of approvals between Planning Board and other local
permitting authorities



   A.   Zoning Board



   1.   Where an applicant requires both a variance from the local
Zoning Ordinance and Planning Board approval, the applicant shall first
obtain an advisory recommendation from the Planning Board, as well as
conditional Planning Board approval for the first approval stage for the
proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain conditional Zoning
Board relief, and then return to the Planning Board for subsequent required
approval(s).



   2.   Where an applicant requires both a special-use permit under the
local Zoning Ordinance and Planning Board approval, the applicant shall first
obtain an advisory recommendation from the Planning Board, as well as
conditional Planning Board approval for the first approval stage of the
proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain conditional Zoning
Board relief, and then return to the Planning Board for subsequent required
approval(s).



   B.   Town Council



Where an applicant requires both Planning Board approval and Council approval
for a Zoning Ordinance or Zoning map change, the applicant shall first obtain
an advisory recommendation from the Planning Board, as well as conditional
Planning Board approval for the first approval stage of the proposed project,
which may be simultaneous, then obtain conditional Zoning Board relief, and
then return to the Planning Board for subsequent required approval(s).



Section 905 - Signing and Recording of Plats and Plans



   A.   All approved final plans and plats for land development and
subdivision projects shall be signed by the appropriate Planning Board
official with the date of approval. Plans and plats for major land
developments and subdivisions shall be signed by the Planning Board
chairperson or secretary of the Planning Board attesting to the approval by
the Planning Board. All minor land development or subdivision plans and plats
and administrative plats shall be signed by the Planning Board chairperson or
secretary or the Board's designated agent.



   B.   Upon signature, all plans and plats shall be submitted to the
Administrative Officer prior to recording and filing in the appropriate
municipal departments. The material to be recorded for all plans and plats
shall include all pertinent plans with notes, thereon, concerning all the
essential aspects of the approved project design, implementation schedule,
special conditions placed on the development by the municipality, permits and
agreements with state and federal reviewing agencies, and other information,
as required by the Planning Board.



   C.   Other parts of the applications record for subdivisions and
land development projects, including all meeting records, approved master
plan and preliminary plans, site analyses, impact analyses, all legal
agreements, records of the public hearing and the entire final approval set
of drawings shall be kept permanently by the municipal departments
responsible for implementation and enforcement.



   D.   The Administrative Officer shall coordinate with the Fire Chief
to ensure notification of the statewide “911" emergency authority and the
police department servicing the new plat with the information required by
each of the authorities.



Section 906 - Changes to Recorded Plat and Plans



   A.   For all changes to the approved plans of land development
projects or subdivisions subject to this act, an amendment of the final
development plans is required prior to the issuance of any building permits.
Any changes approved in the final plan shall be recorded as amendments to the
final plan in accordance with the procedure established for recording of
plats in Section 905.



   B.   Minor changes to a land development or subdivision plan may be
approved administratively, by the Administrative Officer, whereupon a permit
may be issued. Such changes may be authorized, without additional public
hearings, at the discretion of the Administrative Officer. All such changes
shall be made part of the permanent record of the project application. This
provision shall not prohibit the Administrative Officer from requesting a
recommendation from the Planning Board. Denial of the proposed change(s)
shall be referred to the Planning Board for review as a major change.



   C.   Major changes, as defined in the local regulations, to land
development or subdivision plan may be approved, only by the Planning Board
and must follow the same review and public hearing process required for
approval of preliminary plans as described in Section 407.



Section 907 - Time Requirements between Review Stages, Endorsement and
Recording of Plans, Commencement and Completion of Subdivision Improvements



The following time requirements shall be adhered to when completing the
process of subdivision plan review through subdivision completion.



   A.   Interval Between Review Stages



The applicant shall have one (1) year, from preliminary plat approval, to
submit final plat plans, unless an extension of time is granted by the
Planning Board. In the event final plat plans are not submitted within the
required time frame, the applicant shall be required to reapply to the
Planning Board for preliminary review and approval based on the latest
revision of these rules and regulations. Subdivisions in the review process,
on the adoption date of these rules and regulations, shall be updated to
conform to these rules and regulations within six (6) months of the adoption
date, after which the applicant shall be required to reapply for preliminary
plat review and approval.



   B.   Endorsement of Final Plat Plans



Mylars and associate materials may be submitted, to the administrator
officer, within one (1) year of final approval for endorsement by the
appropriate official. The Administrative Officer shall advise the applicant
when the plans have been endorsed after which the applicant shall have seven
(7) days in which to record the plat and associated material. In those
instances where an applicant chooses to complete the actual construction of
required improvements prior to recording the subdivision, the mylar and
associated material shall be submitted for endorsement within thirty (30)
days of approval of the improvements (by the Town) and recorded within seven
(7) days of endorsement.



   C.   Construction Commencement



Subdivision construction shall commence within one (1) year of final plat
approval by the Planning Board. If subdivision construction is not commenced
within the year, the applicant shall be required to reapply, to the Planning
Board, for final plat plan review and approval.



   D.   Construction Completion



Subdivision improvements construction shall be completed within two (2) years
of final plat approval by the Planning Board. If, due to circumstances beyond
the control of the applicant, construction cannot be completed on time, the
Planning Board may grant an extension of time. (See Section 704 -"Extension
of Time")



Section 908 - Waivers, Modifications and Reinstatement of Plans



   A.   Waiver of development plan approval



The Planning Board may waive requirements for development plan approval where
there is a change in use of occupancy and no extensive construction of
improvements is sought. The waiver may be granted only by a decision of the
Planning Board finding that the use will not affect existing drainage,
circulation, relationship of buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering,
lighting and other considerations of development plan approval, and that the
existing facilities do not require upgraded or additional site improvements.



   B.   Documentation



The application for a waiver of development plan approval review shall
include documentation, as required by the Planning Board, on prior use of the
site, the proposed use, and its impact.



   C.   Grounds for waiver



The Planning Board shall have the power to grant such waivers and/or
modifications from the requirements for land development and subdivision
approval, as may be reasonable, and within the general purposes and intents
of the provisions for local regulations. The only grounds for such waivers
and/or modifications shall be where the literal enforcement of one (1) or
more provisions of the regulations is impracticable and will exact undue
hardship, because of the peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question, or where such waiver and/or modification is in the best interest of
good planning practice and/or design, as evidenced by consistency with the
municipality's comprehensive plan and Zoning Ordinance.



   D.   Decision



The Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
request for either a waiver or modifications, as described in subsection (A)
or (B) above, according to the requirements of Section 903.



Article 10 - DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW



Section 1001 - General



When Development Plan Review, as set forth in Article 3 of the Middletown
Zoning Ordinance, is required, such review shall be conducted pursuant to the
procedures and time periods set forth below.



Section 1002 - Failure to Act



The time periods specified herein are maximum time periods only, and are not
meant to indicate the time expected to be necessary to review the average
application. These time periods may be extended by mutual consent between
either the Technical Review Committee or the Planning Board and the
applicant. However, in cases where approval by the Zoning Board of Review is
not required, failure of the Planning Board to act within the periods
prescribed herein shall constitute approval of the Development Plan and a
certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall be
issued on request of the applicant.



Section 1003 - Pre-application Meeting Required



Once it is determined that development plan review is required pursuant to
Zoning Ordinance § 306, prior to submitting the development plan review
application the applicant shall first meet with the Administrative Officer in
order to review the procedure and required application materials.



Section 1004 - Required Submissions and Design Guidelines



Any applicant requesting development plan review approval shall file with the
Zoning Board of Review, by submission to the Zoning Officer, a complete
application package, including the items and plans as set forth in the
checklist provided in Appendix A of these Regulations. Development plan
review applications shall meet the design and construction requirements in
Article 5 of these Regulations, although an application not meeting all such
requirements may be submitted with a request for one or more waivers.



Section 1005 - Certification



The application shall be certified complete or incomplete by the Zoning
Officer within 14 days. Failure to provide required materials shall cause an
application to be certified incomplete. The running of the time period set
forth in this section will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a
certificate of incompleteness of the application by the Zoning Officer and
will recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the
applicant. However, in no event will the Zoning Officer be required to
certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than fourteen
(14) days after its resubmission. In the event such certification of the
application is not made by the Zoning Officer within the time specified, the
application shall be deemed complete for purposes of commencing the review
period. Review shall be completed in accordance with the provisions of Zoning
Ordinance § 307 and § 308.



Section 1006 - Review by the Technical Review Committee



Within 30 days of formal referral by the Zoning Board of Review, the
Technical Review Committee shall review the application and refer it to the
Planning Board with an advisory recommendation. All development plan review
applications shall also be forwarded to the Roads and Utilities Advisory
Committee for review. Comments received from the Roads and Utilities Advisory
Committee shall be forwarded to the Planning Board with the Technical Review
Committee’s recommendation.



Section 1007 - Review by Planning Board



Once referred to the Planning Board by the Technical Review Committee, the
Planning Board shall consider the application, and shall either approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the application within a maximum of 60 days
from the date of referral. For projects requiring zoning relief, the
development plan review by the Planning Board shall be advisory only to the
permitting authority, being the Zoning Board. Said recommendation shall be
forwarded to the Zoning Board of Review within a maximum of 60 days of
referral by the Technical Review Committee. Such decision or advisory opinion
shall be in writing and shall comply with all requirements of the
Regulations, including those for filing of records and decisions.



Section 1008 - Expiration of Approval



Approval of a development plan shall expire 180 days from the date of
approval unless an application for a building permit or certificate of
occupancy has been filed within such period, or, in the case of a use
permitted by variance or special use permit, within such period application
is made to and diligently pursued before the Zoning Board. Denial of such
building permit or certificate of occupancy, on grounds unrelated to the
development plan review, shall not affect the validity of the development
plan review approval, provided that a building permit or certificate of
occupancy is eventually issued no later than 180 days from the date of
development plan review approval.



Section 1009 - Scope of Review



There shall be two review procedures, one for those uses that are permitted
as of right and one for those uses that require a variance or special use
permit. For uses that are permitted by right, the decision by the Planning
Board shall be binding upon the permitting authority, specifically that
officer responsible for issuing the building permit or certificate of
occupancy. Such decision shall be in writing and shall comply with all
requirements of these Regulations, including those for filing of records and
decisions.



The permitting authority may not issue a permit contrary to the decision of
the Planning Board, but such decision may be considered an appealable
decision, appealable to the Zoning Board of Review, pursuant to the
procedures set forth for the review of a decision of the Planning Board.



For those uses that are permitted by variance or special use permit, the
review by the Planning Board shall be advisory only to the permitting
authority, being the Zoning Board.



Such advisory opinion shall be in writing and shall comply with all
requirements of the Regulations, including those for filing of records and
decisions. The permitting authority may reject the advisory opinion of the
Planning Board, but only by written findings and decision, specifically
setting forth the reasons for rejection.



Section 1010 - Specific and Objective Guidelines for Review



The design standards against which development plan applications are reviewed
are those applicable to the subject application as set forth in Article 5 of
these Regulations.



Section 1011 - Waivers from the design standards of Article 5



The Planning Board may consider requests for waivers from the design
standards in Article 5 of these Regulations, subject to § 307 of the Zoning
Ordinance and Section 908 of these Regulations, if the standard or standards
to be waived are neither specifically referenced as a requirement by, nor
substantially similar to a requirement in, the Zoning Ordinance. For all
waiver requests the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing preceded by
notice consistent with the requirements of Zoning Ordinance, § 320(A).



For developments permitted by right, the Planning Board has final authority
to grant or deny requested waivers. For applications that require zoning
relief, the review of waiver requests by the Planning Board is merely
advisory to the permitting authority, which is the Zoning Board of Review.



APPENDIX A - FORMS AND CHECKLISTS



This appendix provides forms and checklists required when submitting a
request for subdivision of land. Checklists for the various subdivisions and
forms related to the subdivision submission process may be found as follows.



Section   Form/Checklist



1   APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS



2   ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST



3   PRE-APPLICATION CHECKLIST



4   MINOR SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST



5   MAJOR SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST



6   APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS



7   DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST



8   ABUTTERS LIST



9   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN CHECKLIST



10   PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT FORM 1 - COST ESTIMATE



§ 1   APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS



TOWN OF MIDDLETOWN PLANNING BOARD



APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS



Name of Project:      



Stage of Review:   



Date Filed:    



Applicant's Name, Address and Telephone Number:    



Developer's Name, Address and Telephone Number:    



Assessor's Plate & Lot of Land Being Subdivided:    



Type of Subdivision:    



Subdivision Description:    



IS APPLICATION A REVISION:  Y  OR  N



IS APPLICATION A NEW SUBMISSION:  Y  OR  N



ARE PREVIOUS PLANS TO BE WITHDRAWN:  Y  OR  N    



IF Y, DATE OF PLAN.)    



   



   



Owner's Signature



(approval to subdivide)



Action Taken By Administrative Officer



         Application Certified as Complete



         Application is incomplete and returned. The following
deficiencies exist:



   



   



   



   



Signature of Administrative Office (when certified complete)



§ 2   ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST



PLAN CHECKLIST



At least three (3) photostat or blue line prints, plus one (1) original
drawing on mylar, drawn to scale of no smaller than one inch equals forty
feet (1" = 40') on a maximum sheet size of 34" long by 24" wide, unless
otherwise approved by the Administrative Officer, to show the following
information:



      Name of Subdivision.



      Name and address of owner(s).



      Tax Assessor's designation of land being resubdivided with
statement describing the adjustment being made to the plan.



      Name, address and signature of registered land surveyor, with
stamp of registration and certification that the survey conforms to the
standards of Class I survey.



      North arrow.



      Graphic scale.



      Boundary lines of the subdivision, with accurate linear and
angular dimensions.



      Names of all abutting landowners and plat/lot designation.
Include land separated from the subdivision by a street or right-of-way.



      Existing street right-of-way lines, lot lines, lot numbers, lot
areas, and easements to show accurate dimensions, bearings and areas, radii
and angles of intersection of all horizontal curves.



      Location of permanent boundary monuments.



Supporting Material



      Signed letter from owner(s) authorizing subdivision, if applicant
is not the owner.



      Certification of the Tax Collector that all taxes due on the land
to be subdivided have been paid for the period of five (5) years preceding
the date of administrative subdivision plan filing, and that there are no
outstanding tax liens thereon.



      Application filing fee of $100



§ 3   PRE-APPLICATION CHECKLIST



(For Major and certain Minor Subdivision and Land Development projects)



Materials submitted for pre-application should be conceptual in nature. Maps
based on existing information, such as that available from RIGIS, are
appropriate.



At least three (3) copies of the following shall be submitted:



   •   Site Plan



   •   Site Analysis Map



   •   Site Context Map



   •   Potential Conservation Areas



   •   Soils Map

 



ITEM


SITE PLAN

Plan drawn to a scale of no smaller than forty (40) feet to the inch (1"=40')
to show at a minimum, the information listed below ( may be shown on one or
more pages).


 
Name of the Subdivision


 
Name and address of the owner(s)


 
North arrow and graphic scale


 
Tax Assessor's designation of land being subdivided


 
Approximate parcel boundaries and boundary monument locations


 
Property lines of all lots abutting or across the street from the perimeter
of the lot proposed to be subdivided


 
Approximate location of public rights-of way and/or easements


 
Zoning of land being subdivided and all abutting properties


 
Known surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands


 
Location and approximate size of any existing structures, embankments, stone
walls or any other significant physical features


SITE ANALYSIS MAP(S)


 
Topography and Slopes
 
Prese nt
 
Not

prese nt


 
 
Topography with 10' contour lines
 
 


 
 
Slope map, with slopes grouped according to five categories based on
development suitability: 0-3&, 3-8%, 8-15%, 15-25% and over 25%
 
 


 
 
Existing drainage and drainage structures, such as culverts and pipes, etc.
 
 




 



 



 
Natural Resource Inventory
 
 


 
 
Name and location of surface watershed, water quality classification and
existing condition of nearest surface water(s) (See RI DEM Water Quality Regs)
 
 


 
 
Groundwater aquifers, recharge areas and wellhead protection areas
 
 


 
 
State-designated Natural Heritage Sites
 
 


 
 
Unfragmented forest tracts
 
 


 
 
Prime farmland soils
 
 


 
 
Land in active agricultural use
 
 


 
 
State, regional, or community greenways and greenspace priorities
 
 


 
 
100-year floodplains
 
 


 
Cultural Resource Inventory
 
 


 
 
State or locally-designated historic sites, districts, cemeteries or
landscapes
 
 


 
 
Archaeological sites
 
 


 
 
Scenic road corridors and state-designated scenic areas
 
 


 
 
Approximate location of stone walls, structures, outbuildings, roads or
trails and other historic features on the parcel
 
 


 
Recreational Resources Inventory
 
 


 
 
Existing hiking, biking, and bridle trails within and adjacent to site
 
 


 
 
Boat launches, lake and stream access points, beaches and water trails
 
 


 
 
Existing play fields, playgrounds, and play areas on or adjacent to the site
 
 


 
Utilities & Infrastructure (If available)
 
 


 
 
Size and approximate location of public water lines
 
 


 
 
Size and approximate location of public sewer lines
 
 


 
 
Gas service
 
 


 
 
Electrical service
 
 


 
 
Telephone, cable, and other communication services
 
 




 



 



SITE CONTEXT MAP

A 1997 RIGIS orthophoto, or more recent aerial photograph if available,
showing the area within one (1) mile of site at a scale of 1" = 400' or 1" =
500', showing the following information as may be readily available:
 
 


 
 
Parcel boundary outline      
 
 


 
 
Surrounding parcels
 
 


 
 
Topography (10' contours)
 
 


 
 
Surface Waters
 
 


 
 
Wetlands (from existing data, ie. RIGIS)
 
 


 
 
Public drinking water supply watersheds
 
 


 
 
Groundwater aquifers
 
 


 
 
Conservation & recreation land
 
 


 
 
Locations of major streets
 
 


 
 
Zoning Districts
 
 


POTENTIAL CONSERVATION AREA MAP

Map(s) at the same scale as the Site Plan, showing as much readily available
information as possible, including the following:      
 
 


 
Development Constraints
 
 


 
 
Wetlands and vernal pools (mapped in blue/green)
 
 


 
 
Surface waters (mapped in blue)
 
 


 
 
State-regulated wetland setbacks (mapped in dark blue/green)
 
 


 
 
Ledge/outcrops (mapped in brown)
 
 


 
 
Slopes greater than 25% (mapped in orange)
 
 


 
 
Existing utility easements and power line right-of-ways
 
 


 
 
Hydric soils (mapped collectively in red cross-hatching)
 
 


 
Partially Constrained Areas
 
 


 
 
Slopes between 15-25% (mapped in yellow)
 
 


 
 
100-yr flood plains (mapped with blue cross-hatching)
 
 


 
 
Soils with seasonal high water table less than 3.5 feet or slowly permeable
"hardpan" soils ( mapped with orange cross-hatching)
 
 




 



 

 
Important Natural, Cultural, and Recreation Resource Areas (from site
analysis)
 
 


 
 
Natural resource areas (mapped in green transparent tones)
 
 


 
 
Cultural resource areas (mapped in red transparent tones)
 
 


 
 
Recreational resources (mapped with solid and dashed lines, hatching for
areas, and annotation as appropriate)
 
 


SOILS MAP

A soils map of the site and surrounding area, along with a general analysis
of soil types and suitability for the development proposed. If present,
agricultural land as defined in Section X and any very poorly drained soils
shall also be shown.
 
 



 



§ 4   MINOR SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST



PRELIMINARY PLAN CHECKLIST



At least eight (8) blue line prints drawn to a scale of no smaller than forty
(40) feet to the inch (1"=40') to show at a minimum, the information listed
below. Such information may be indicated on more than one plan.



      Name of the Subdivision.



      Name and address of the owner(s) and applicant(s).



      Name, address and signature of land surveyor, with stamp of
registration. Certification of survey as required by the Procedural and
Technical Standards for the Practice of Land Surveying in the State of Rhode
Island.



      North arrow and graphic scale.



      Tax Assessor's designation of land being subdivided.



      Boundary lines of the subdivision.



      Property lines of all lots abutting or across the street from the
perimeter of the lot proposed to be subdivided, and the names of the property
owners and lot/plat indicated thereon.



      Zoning of all abutting properties.



      The location of existing streets, railroads, rights-of-way,
easements, utilities, cemeteries and lot lines.



      Existing and proposed topography at intervals of no greater than
two (2) feet.



      Bench Mark from which contours.



      Proposed location and dimension of street rights-of-way, street
paving, sidewalks, easements, boundary monuments, lots, lot lines and lot
areas.



      Proposed street name(s).



      Base flood elevation line, or floodway encroachment lines, if
applicable.



      Location of any significant natural features such as fresh or
salt water wetlands, wooded areas, rock outcrops, cultivated land, beaches,
etc.



      Location of any existing structures, embankments, stone walls or
any other significant physical features which may have an effect upon
development of the land, including such features on adjacent land.



      Proposed location, dimension and description of utilities,
sanitary sewers, storm water drainage facilities, water lines, fire hydrants,
electrical, telephone, street lights, and location/description of proposed
trees. Number all manholes and catch basins.



      Lot numbers.



      Parcels of land proposed for dedication to the Town of
Middletown, the state of Rhode Island or other public, quasi-public,
non-profit organization or homeowner's association.



      Location of all percolation test holes, (if applicable) indicated
by the letter "P" with test hole numbers.



      Location of all ground water table determination test holes, (if
applicable) indicated by a letter "W" with test hole numbers.



      Notation of proposed deed restrictions required by the Planning
Board.



Supporting Material - Preliminary Plan



      Application filing fee of $200 plus $40 per lot. (see note)



      Signed letter from owner(s) authorizing subdivision, if applicant
is not the owner.



      Overall Plan of Development for any remaining part of the land
being subdivided, as required by Section 509.



      Stormwater Management Plan, as required by Section 516.



      Written confirmation from appropriate utility companies that they
have reviewed and approve proposed plans for installation of water, electric,
telephone, gas or other utilities, as may be proposed.



      Preliminary certification from R.I. Department of Environmental
Management as to the suitability of the subsoil and adequacy of percolation
and water table tests for the use of individual sewage disposal systems, if
such are planned.



      Detailed profiles of all proposed roads, stormwater and sanitary
sewers, if such are planned, with description of types.



      Certification of the Tax Collector that all taxes due, on the
land to be subdivided, have been paid for the period of five (5) years
preceding the date of preliminary plan filing, and that there are no
outstanding tax liens, thereon.



      Names and addresses of all owners of abutting land or land across
any street from the perimeter of the property to be subdivided, as determined
from the most recent Tax Assessor's records. Submitted on abutters list form.
(See § 7 of Appendix A herein)



      Fees paid for soil erosion and sedimentation and site plan
reviews associated with drainage plan evaluation.



      Plan for land for the subdivision drawn at the same scale as the
Tax Plat on which the subdivision is located.



      Comments/recommendations from the Public Works Director, Chiefs
of the Fire and Police Departments and other town officials, as appropriate.



Additional Information - Conservation Development



      Streams and water bodies.



      Wetland lines with regulated setbacks, including areas within 200
ft. of the parcel.



      Existing topographic contours at intervals of two feet in
elevation.



      Boundaries of wooded areas with notation of species of existing
vegetation.



      Large trees (18" dbh or larger), shrubs or other unique
vegetation.



      Prime Farmland Soils and areas in active or recent agricultural
use, with notation of use and condition.



      Location and approximate dimensions of roads on or immediately
adjacent to the subdivision.



      Location and dimension of all existing utilities within the
subdivision, and in roads or on parcels abutting the subdivision.



      Location of any unique natural and/or historic features,
including stonewalls, cemeteries, and archaeological sites.



      Base flood elevation data and floodplain lines.



Notation on plan if the subdivision is located within or contains any of the
following areas: Natural Heritage Areas; Watershed Protection District;
groundwater aquifers, recharge areas and wellhead protection areas; state
regional or local greenways and greenspace priorities.



Open Space Use Plan.



      General location and area of all proposed open space



      General proposed use(s) of the open space



      Existing topography and existing ground cover of open space areas



      Location and nature of any existing buildings, structures, stone
walls or other unique natural and/or historic features;



      Areas of open space from which existing vegetation will be
removed or altered and areas which are proposed to be disturbed or otherwise
graded, excavated or altered from their existing natural state;



      Generalized proposals for the regrading, revegetating and/or
landscaping of proposed disturbed areas;



      Location and nature of any proposed buildings, structures,
parking areas or roadways, impervious areas recreation areas and,



      Areas proposed to be left in their existing natural states
without any disturbance.



NOTE: If Preliminary and Final reviews are to be combined, the filing fee for
both reviews is required.



MINOR SUBDIVISION



FINAL PLAN CHECKLIST



At least eight (8) photostat or blue line prints, plus one (1) original
drawing on mylar, drawn to a scale of no smaller than one inch equals forty
feet (1"=40') on a maximum sheet size of 34" long by 24" wide, unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board, to show the following information:



      Name of Subdivision.



      Name and address of owner(s).



      Name, address and signature of registered land surveyor, with
stamp of registration with certification of survey. Survey shall conform to
Class I standards and shall tie to the RIGS coordinate system.



      North arrow.



      Graphic scale.



      Boundary lines of the subdivision, with accurate linear and
angular dimensions.



      Names of all abutting landowners, and plat/lot designation,
including land separate from the subdivision by a street or right-of-way.



      Existing street right-of-way lines, lot lines, lot numbers, lot
areas, and easements to show accurate dimensions, bearings and areas, radii
and angles of intersection of all horizontal curves.



      Location of permanent boundary monuments.



      A separate Utility Plan to include all of the above information,
plus the location and descriptive notation necessary to locate all water
lines, sewer lines, storm drainage lines, underground lighting and
communication lines, trees and facilities appurtenant thereto.



      A separate Profile Drawing(s) of final profiles, at a horizontal
scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') and a vertical scale of one inch
equals four feet (1"=4'), showing road grades and cross sections at every one
hundred (100) foot station, plus the location and grades of proposed
drainage, water and sewer lines.



      An autocad disk, if plans are computer generated, shall be
submitted with the final subdivision plan.



      Two copies of any protective easements or covenants or the
statement and conditions of any deed restrictions, including any provisions
pertaining to the creation or organization of a homeowner's association.



      If applicable, open space plan detailing the management and use
of open space lots.



      Confirmation, where applicable, from the Rhode Island Department
of Environmental Management that the proposed subdivision does not violate
provisions of the Fresh Water Wetlands Act (pursuant to Chapter 2-1, General
Laws of Rhode Island, as amended, and regulations thereunder).



      Certification, from R.I. Department of Environmental Management,
that all lots within the proposed subdivision have been approved for the
disposal of sewage by individual sewage disposal systems, if such are planned.



      Written certification from the Town Council of the Town of
Middletown, or its authorized representative, that the proposed plan for use
of public sanitary sewers has been reviewed and approved with regard to
design, size, location and capacity.



      A statement indicating it is the intention of the applicant to
file a bond, surety or other security in a form satisfactory to the Planning
Board, and in sufficient amount to cover the construction and installation of
all improvements to the subdivision within the required completion period; or



      Written approval from the Public Works Director, or their
representative, of the detailed costs, including labor materials, of all
improvements which must be installed by the applicant submitted on Public
Works Form #1 - Detailed Costs (see § 9 of this appendix).



      Filing fee of $100 plus $30 per lot. (see note)



      Fees paid for additional reviews as required by the Planning
Board.



NOTE: If Preliminary and Final reviews are to be combined, the filing fee for
both reviews is required.



§ 5   MAJOR SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST



MASTER PLAN CHECKLIST



Contents of Master Plan



At least eight (8) copies of the following material, drawn at a suitable
scale, shall be filed for the Master Plan Review.



      Aerial photograph, or print thereafter, of the area to be
subdivided and the surrounding area.



      Vicinity plan showing the property to be subdivided, whether
immediate or in the future stages, and all property and streets within a
one-half (½) mile radius of the perimeter of the property to be subdivided.



      Topographic map of the area, identifying natural drainage
patterns, existing storm water drainage facilities, base flood elevation, if
applicable, and the location of any wetlands.



      Soil map and description of the physical properties of soils on
the property being subdivided, and their limitations for the type of
development being proposed.



At least eight (8) copies of the following:



1. Base Map - Subdivision plan at a suitable scale showing the following:



      Name of Subdivision.



      Date of plan preparation with revision dates.



      Name and address of property owner(s) and applicant.



      Name of designer, engineer or land surveyor, with stamp of
registration.



      North arrow and graphic scale.



      Tax Assessor's designation of land being subdivided.



      Boundary lines of the subdivision.



      Property lines of all lots abutting, or across the street from,
the perimeter of the lot proposed to be subdivided, and the names of the
property owners and lot/plat indicated thereon.



      Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided and of all
abutting properties.



      Location of existing and proposed public rights-of-way and/or
easements.



      Land area of the subject parcel.



      Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately
across any adjacent streets.



      The location of existing streets, railroads, rights-of-way,
easements, utilities, cemeteries and lot lines.



      Existing topography at intervals of no greater than two (2) feet.



      Base flood elevation line, or floodway encroachment lines, if
applicable.



      Location of any significant natural features such as fresh or
salt water wetlands, wooded areas, rock outcrops, cultivated land, beaches,
etc.



      Location of any existing structures, embankments, stone walls or
any other significant physical features which may have an effect upon
development of the land, including such features on adjacent land.



      Proposed location and dimensions of street, property lines, open
spaces, easements, utilities, drainage facilities, and other development
which would indicate satisfactory compliance with the requirements of these
Rules and Regulations.



      Plan and profile sketches shall be on the same sheet with the
plan view above and the profile view directly below, matched to the plan view.



      Sketch Profiles of all proposed streets in the subdivision plus
all existing streets in the vicinity where necessary, to show relationship
with proposed streets.



      Sketch Profiles of all proposed sanitary sewers in the
subdivision, if such are planned, with description of types.



      Pre-Application meeting with Town Planner, Public Works Director,
Fire Chief and other required agencies/commissions held on
________________________.



                             (date)



      Comments/recommendations from the Public Works Director, Chiefs
of the Fire and Police Departments and other town officials, as appropriate.



      Parcels of land proposed for dedication to the Town of
Middletown, the State of Rhode Island or other public, quasi-public,
non-profit organization or homeowner's association.



      If used for the determination of the base number of lots, a yield
plan showing a conventional subdivision for the site conforming to the zoning
requirements of the lot(s) being subdivided.



2.   Site Analysis Map. At least ten (10) copies at a suitable scale to
show at a minimum, the information listed below. Such information may be
indicated on more than one plan.



      Topography & Slopes



      •   Topography with contour lines at 10' interval, or more
detailed if necessary



      •   Slope map with slopes grouped according to development
suitability



      •   Existing drainage and drainage structures



      Natural Resource Inventory



      •   Name and location of surface watershed and subwatershed
boundaries, water quality classification and existing condition of nearest
surface water(s)



      •   Groundwater aquifers, recharge areas and wellhead
protection areas, water table;



      •   State-designated Natural Heritage Sites, wildlife
habitat and fish presence in streams that could be affected by nearby
development



      •   Unfragmented forest tracts



      •   Prime farmland soils



      •   Areas in active farm use, with annotations for cropland,
pasturage, orchard, etc.



      •   Large trees, shrubs, or other significant vegetation



      •   State, regional, or community greenways and greenspace
priorities



      •   100-year floodplains as shown on federal flood
protection maps



      Cultural Resource Inventory



      •   State or locally-designated historic sites, districts,
cemeteries or landscapes



      •   Archaeological sites, scenic road corridors and
state-designated scenic areas



      •   Location of stone walls, structures, outbuildings, roads
or trails and other historic features on the parcel



      Recreational Resource Inventory



      •   Existing hiking, biking, and bridle trails within and
adjacent to site



      •   Boat launches, lake and stream access points, beaches
and water trails



      •   Existing play fields and playgrounds within and adjacent
to the site



      Utilities & Infrastructure (if available)



      •   Size and location of public water lines



      •   Size and location of public sewer lines



      •   Gas service



      •   Electrical service



      •   Telephone, cable, and other communication services



      •   Width and surfacing material of existing road(s) at
access points



3.   Site Context Map -A 1997 RIGIS orthophoto, or more recent aerial
photograph if available, showing the area within one (1) mile of site at a
scale of 1" = 400' or 1" = 500', showing the following:



      Parcel boundary outline



      Topography (10' contours)



      Public drinking water supply watersheds



      Groundwater aquifers



      Surface Waters



      Wetlands



      Conservation & recreation land



      Additional items requested at Pre-Application:



                        



                        



                        



                        



4.   Potential Conservation Areas



      Non-buildable areas



      •   Wetlands and vernal pools (mapped in blue/green)



      •   Surface waters (mapped in blue)



      •   State-regulated wetland setbacks (mapped in dark
blue/green)



      •   Ledge/outcrops (mapped in brown)



      •   Slopes greater than 25% (mapped in orange)



      •   Existing utility easements and power line right-of-ways



      •   Hydric soils (mapped collectively in red cross-hatching).



      •   Existing land restrictions such as utility easements,
power line right-of-ways, etc.



      Partially Constrained Areas



      •   Slopes between 15-25% (mapped in yellow)



      •   100-yr flood plains (mapped with blue cross-hatching)



      •   Soils with seasonal high water table less than 3.5 feet
or slowly permeable "hardpan" soils (mapped with orange cross-hatching)



      Important Natural, Cultural, and Recreation Resource Areas (from
site analysis)



      •   Natural resource areas (mapped in green transparent
tones)



      •   Cultural resource areas (mapped in red transparent tones)



      •   Recreational resources (mapped with solid and dashed
lines, hatching for areas, and annotation as appropriate)



      Summary Map - A simplified map showing:



      •   Non-Buildable Areas (mapped in red or red hatching)



      •   Partially-constrained areas (mapped in orange or orange
hatching)



      •   Important natural, cultural, and recreational resource
areas (mapped in green)



5.   Sketch Plan



      Potential development areas - show as a tone or boundary line



      Conceptual alternatives



      Description of overall themes and organizing principles



      Description of house types and/or architectural themes



6.   Location of Building Sites



      Development Suitability - annotate plans to indicate site scale
differences in microclimate (such as north-facing areas sheltered from the
summer sun but affected by winter winds, or southern exposures good for solar
heating), soils, hydrology, or special features affecting construction such
as unique trees or stone walls to be preserved.



      Proposed water supply and wastewater disposal



      Views and visual character of house sites - describe with arrows
and annotation



      Yard spaces and activity areas - distinguish public and private
areas, annotate potential use



      Indicate site access, service and parking alternatives



      Indicate how the home sites will be connected to or benefit from
the dedicated open space



7.   Streets, Trails, and Infrastructure



      Alternatives for location and alignment of proposed roads and
pedestrian system



      Cross-section of proposed streetscape, including buildings,
plantings, fences, curbs etc. on both sides of the street, along with the
width of pavement and shoulders, if any



      Alternatives for stormwater treatment and management with an
emphasis on maintaining the natural hydrology, and encouraging the
infiltration of precipitation as close to the point of origin as possible
(see RI Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual).



      Concept for lighting of streets and homes, placement of utilities
including transformer boxes and other access points.



8.   Preliminary Open Space Plan



      General location, area, proposed uses, and design criteria of all
proposed open space



      Proposed recreational trails and any potential links to other
trails, natural features or amenities on the site or in the context area, and
sidewalk connections to other neighborhoods, schools, etc.



      Proposed facilities for active sports, playgrounds, stream
fishing access, etc.



      Plan for active agriculture, or forestry



      Conceptual Management criteria, including protection of the
natural and cultural resources



9.   Lots



      Alternatives for location of lot lines



      Criteria or statement of design intent for locating lot lines



      Location of rights-of-way, utility or trail easements



      Building envelopes or build-to lines



10.   Ownership and Maintenance of Open Space



      Preferred ownership scheme, whether public, private, non-profit
or homeowner's association



      Maintenance alternatives, including potential funding sources



      Potential open space to be preserved, conservation easements or
other restrictions



Supporting Material - Master Plan



      Filing fee of $200 plus $40 per lot proposed



      Overall Plan of Development for any remaining part of the land
being subdivided as required by Section 509.



MAJOR SUBDIVISION



PRELIMINARY PLAN CHECKLIST



Contents of Preliminary Plan



1.   Base Map. At least eight (8) prints drawn to a scale of no smaller
than forty feet to the inch (1"=40') to show at a minimum, the information
listed below. Such information may be indicated on more than one plan.



      Name of the Subdivision.



      Name and address of the owner(s) and applicant(s).



      Date of plan preparation with revision dates.



      As applicable, name, address and telephone number of designer,
engineer, and/or landscape architect, with stamp of registration.



      Name of land surveyor with stamp of registration and
certification that survey conforms to the standards of a Class I survey. The
perimeter survey shall be tied to the RIGS coordinate survey.



      North arrow and graphic scale.



      Tax Assessor's designation of land being subdivided.



      Perimeter survey of the site.



      Property lines of all lots abutting, or across any street from,
the perimeter of the lot proposed to be subdivided, whether immediate or
future, and the names of the property owners with lot/plat indicated thereon.



      Zoning district(s) of the subject property and abutting property.



      The location of existing streets, railroads, rights-of-way,
easements, utilities, cemeteries and lot lines.



      Land area of subject parcel.



2.   Existing Conditions Plan(s)



      Streams and water bodies.



      Wetland lines with regulated setbacks, including areas within 200
feet of the perimeter of the project site.



      Existing topography at intervals of no greater than two (2) feet.



      Base flood elevation line, or floodway encroachment lines, if
applicable.



      Boundaries of wooded areas with notation of species of existing
vegetation.



      Large or unusual trees (greater than 18" dbh) and shrubs; unique
vegetation.



      Prime Farmland Soils and areas in active or recent agricultural
use, with notation of use and condition



      Location of any other significant natural features.



      Location and approximate dimensions of any existing buildings or
significant aboveground structures the subject parcel and adjacent lots.



      Location of embankments, stone walls or any other significant
physical features, including such features on adjacent land.



      Location and dimension of street rights-of-way, street paving,
sidewalks, easements, boundary monuments, lots, lot lines and lot areas.



      Location and dimensions of all existing utilities within and on
lots or streets adjacent to the subdivision, including sanitary sewers, storm
water drainage facilities, water lines, fire hydrants, electrical, telephone,
cable TV, fire alarm, utility poles, street lights or other above or
underground utilities. (Number all manholes and catch basins)



      Location/description of proposed trees.



      Proposed street name(s).



      Lot numbers.



      Notation on plan if the subdivision is located within or contains
any of the following areas



      •   Natural Heritage Areas (RIDEM)



      •   Special Area Management Plan (CRMC)



      •   Public Drinking Supply Watershed



      •   Watershed Protection District



      •   Groundwater aquifers, state-designated "groundwater
reservoirs" recharge areas and wellhead protection areas



      •   State, regional or local greenways and greenspace
priorities



3.   Proposed Design Condition Plan(s)



      A separate plan of land, on one sheet, drawn at a suitable scale,
showing proposed improvements including streets, trails, sidewalks, lots, lot
lines, with approximate lot areas and dimensions, and proposed building
envelopes or build-to lines.



      Grading plan showing existing and proposed contours at two-foot
intervals for all grading proposed for on and offsite street conditions,
drainage facilities, and grading on individual lots if part of the proposed
subdivision improvement.



      Stormwater Management Plan and drainage calculations prepared by
a Registered Professional Engineer (as required by Section 516).



      Utilities plan, including sewer, water, gas, electric, phone,
cable TV, fire alarm, hydrants, utility poles, or other proposed above or
underground utilities as applicable.



      Landscaping plan, to show all significant proposed clearing of
land, removal of existing vegetation, revegetation and/or landscaping on
street rights-of way and upon individual lots, if part of proposed
subdivision improvements. Include proposed street tree plantings and
sidewalks, trails, or bike paths.



      Open space plan, showing location, use and proposed improvements
for any land proposed to be set aside as open space, with connections to
house lots and the surrounding neighborhood.



      Limit of disturbance line/limit of clearing, with method of tree
protection if applicable.



      SWMP plan (in accordance with Chapter X)



      Construction plans for access road(s) or route(s), temporary
parking and storage areas location of construction trailers, and stockpiles
of soil, stone or waste materials.



      Proposed street plans and profiles drawn at a scale of 1"=40;
horizontal and 1"=4' vertical



      Proposed street cross section(s)



      Location of all percolation test holes, indicated by the letter
"P", with test hole numbers if Individual Sewage Disposal Systems (ISDS) are
planned.



      Location of all ground water table determination test holes,
indicated by a letter "W", with test hole numbers if ISDS are planned.



      Notation of proposed deed restrictions required by the Planning
Board, utility companies or other appropriate agency/entity.



Supporting Material - Preliminary Plan



      All permits required by state and federal agencies prior to
commencement of construction, including permits related to freshwater
wetlands, the coastal zone, flood plains, and connections to state roads.



      Overall Plan of Development for any remaining part of the land
being subdivided, as required by Section 509.



      Written confirmation, from appropriate utility companies, that
they have reviewed and approve proposed plans for installation of water,
electric, telephone, gas or other utilities, as may be proposed.



      Written confirmation from the RI Department of Environmental
Management pursuant to the RIDEM Rules and Regulations Governing the
Enforcement of the Freshwater Wetlands Act, and any subsequent amendments
thereto, that plans of the proposed subdivision, including any required
offsite construction, have been reviewed and indicating that the Wetlands Act
either does not apply to the proposed site alteration(s) or that the approval
has been granted for the proposed site alteration(s).



   OR



      An affidavit signed by a qualified professional stating the there
are no freshwater wetlands present on or within 200 feet of the property
being subdivided.



      A vicinity map drawn to a scale of 1'=200' or as necessary to
show the area within one-half mile of the subdivision parcel showing the
location of all streets, existing lot lines, and zoning district boundaries,
as well as schools, parks, fire stations and other significant public
facilities.



      Preliminary certification from R.I. Department of Environmental
Management (DEM) as to the suitability of the subsoil and adequacy of
percolation and water table tests for the use of individual sewage disposal
systems, if such are planned.



      Profiles of all proposed streets in the subdivision plus all
exiting streets in the vicinity where necessary, to show relationship with
proposed streets.



      Profiles of all proposed storm water drainage facilities and
sanitary sewers in the subdivision, if such are planned.



      Certification of the Tax Collector that all taxes due, on the
land to be subdivided, have been paid for the period of five (5) years
preceding the date of preliminary plan filing, and that there are no
outstanding tax liens thereon.



      Names and address of all owners of abutting land or land across
any street from the perimeter of the property to be subdivided, as determined
from the most recent Tax Assessor's records. Submitted on abutters list form.
(See § 9 of this appendix)



      A Physical Alteration Permit (PAP) issued by the State Department
of Transportation for any connection to or construction work within a State
highway or other right-of-way, if applicable.



      Either of the following:



      •   A letter to the Planning Board of the subdivider's
intent to complete the required improvements prior to endorsement of the
final plan; or,



      •   A letter to the Planning Board requesting that security
sufficient to cover the cost of required improvements be established by the
Board according to the regulations.



      Water Quality Certification for construction activities that may
temporarily affect surface waters in the vicinity of the site work to be
performed.



      Any permits required under federal statute, including Section 404
Clean Water Act for Fill of Wetland and Waters of the US issued by the US
Army Corps of Engineers.



      Proposed ownership scheme for open space areas, with draft legal
documentation, such as Homeowner's Association bylaws.



      Open Space Management and Maintenance Plan, including standards
and methods, specific responsibilities, and funding sources.



      Plan Location and draft legal language of Proposed Conservation
Easements or Restrictions to be applied to open space areas.



      Pre-Application meeting with Town Planner, Public Works Director,
Fire Chief and other required agencies/commissions held on
____________________.



                           (date)



                                          (If not
accomplished at Master Plan Review)



      Comments/recommendations from the Public Works Director, Chiefs
of the Fire and Police Departments and other town officials, as appropriate.



      Draft copies of all legal documents describing the property,
proposed easements and rights of-way, dedications, restrictions, or other
required legal documents.



      Filing fee of $300 plus $40.00 per lot or dwelling unit,
whichever is greater.



MAJOR SUBDIVISION



FINAL PLAN CHECKLIST



Contents of Final Plan



   At least eight (8) photostat or blue line prints, plus one (1) original
drawing on mylar, drawn to scale of no smaller than one inch equals forty
feet (1" = 40') on a maximum sheet size of 34" long by 24" wide, unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board, to show the following information:



      Name of Subdivision.



      Name and address of owner(s).



      Name and address of registered engineer and land surveyor, with
stamp of registration. Surveyor certification that survey conforms to the
standards of Class I survey.



      North arrow.



      Graphic scale.



      Boundary line of the subdivision, with accurate linear and
angular dimensions.



      Names of all abutting landowners and plat/lot designation.
Include land separated from the subdivision by a street or right-of-way.



      Existing and proposed street right-of-way lines, lot lines, lot
numbers, lot areas, and easements to show accurate dimensions, bearings and
areas, radii and angles of intersection of all horizontal curve.



      Location of permanent boundary monuments.



      A separate Utility Plan, to include all of the above information,
plus the location and descriptive notations necessary to locate all water
lines, sewer lines, storm drainage lines, underground lighting and
communication lines, trees and facilities appurtenant thereto.



      A separate Profile Drawing(s) of final profiles, at a horizontal
scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') and a vertical scale of one inch
equals four feet (1"=4'), showing road grades and cross sections at every one
hundred (100) foot station, plus the location and grades of proposed
drainage, water and sewer lines.



      An autocad disk, if plans are computer generated, shall be
submitted with the final subdivision plan



Supporting Material - Final Plan



      A separate plan of land drawn to the same scale as the scale of
the Tax Plat on which the lot(s) is being subdivided appear.



      A separate maintenance requirements plan describing the
maintenance requirements for storm drainage and sanitary sewer systems.



      Two (2) copies of any protective easements or the statements and
conditions of any deed restrictions, including any provisions pertaining to
the creation or organization of a homeowner's association.



      Confirmation, where applicable, from the Rhode Island Department
of Environmental Management (RIDEM) that the proposed subdivision does not
violate provisions of the Fresh Water Wetlands Act (pursuant to Chapter 2-1,
General Laws of Rhode Island, as amended, and regulations thereunder).



      Confirmation, where applicable, from the Rhode Island Coastal
Resources Management Council (CRMC) that the proposed subdivision does not
violate policies and regulations within their jurisdiction (pursuant to
Chapter 46-23, General Laws of Rhode Island, 1971, as amended, and
regulations thereunder).



      Certification from R.I. Department of Environmental Management
(DEM) that all lots within the proposed subdivision have been approved for
the disposal of sewage by individual sewage disposal systems, if such are
planned.



      Written certification from the Town Council of the Town of
Middletown, or its authorized representative, that the proposed plan for use
of public sanitary sewers has been reviewed and approved with regard to
design, size, location and capacity.



      Written approval, where applicable, from RIDEM Division of Water
Resources approving the extension of the existing sewer system.



      House numbers corresponding to parcel numbers, as required, for
911 notification system.



      Sewer impact fee required yes/no.



      Either of the following:



         A statement indicating that it is the intention of the
applicant to file a bond, surety or other security in a form satisfactory to
the Planning Board, and in sufficient amount to cover the construction and
installation of all improvements to the subdivision within the required
completion period;



   or



         A statement indicating it is the intention of the applicant
to complete the required improvements prior to the endorsement of the
subdivision.



      Written approval from the Public Works Director, or their
representative, of the detailed costs, including labor materials, of all
improvements which must be installed by the applicant submitted on Public
Works Form #1 - Detailed Costs (see § 9 of this appendix).



      Filing fee of $200 plus $30 per lot or dwelling unit, whichever
is greater.



§ 6   APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS



   TOWN OF MIDDLETOWN



   PLANNING BOARD



   APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS



All applications for Development Plan Review must include:



   Pre-application meeting



   Application Form



   Site Plans (4 copies + 10 reduced)



   Abutter’s List (see following)



   Application Fee (see fee schedule)



   Tax Certificate (see Tax Assessor)



   Certificate of Zoning Compliance (see Zoning Officer)



   Development Plan Review Checklist Items

 


For Office Use Only


Item                  Date


Pre-application Meeting         



Submission               



Certificate of Completeness      



Certificate of incompleteness         



TRC Meeting               



Planning Board Meeting         



TRC Decision               



Planning Board Decision         


 



 


   DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW


   APPLICATION FORM


Project Name     


Property Owner                     Applicant (if
different from owner*)


Name                           Name        �
�



Address                           Address     �
�   



                                       �
�  



Phone Number   (    )                     Phone
Number   (    )                        


* Signed letter from owner(s) authorizing application, if applicant is not
the owner.


Plat & Lot Number(s)      



Area of Subject Property                  Zoning
District(s)   


Type of Development


New Development        Addition    Renovation     Site Change
    Other   


Names and owners of existing rights-of-way within and adjacent to subject
property


                                 



                                 



                                 



                                 



Signed by Owner/Applicant
                           Date    


Signed by Administrative


Officer (when complete)     
                           Date    


 



 



§ 7  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST



 




   DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST


   REQUIRED ITEMS

(1)   Applicants shall submit:

   •   Four (4) bluelines or photocopies at a scale of 1" = 40' with
a sufficient number of sheets (sequentially numbered) to clearly show all of
the information required (minimum size of 8.5"x11'; maximum size of 18" x 24")

   •   Ten (10) reduced copies of all plans (minimum size of 8.5" X
11"; maximum size of 11" X 17")

   •   Upon DPR approval, one (1) reproducible mylar

(2)   All Plans shall conform to the Procedural & Technical Standards For
the Practice of Land Surveying in the State of Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations, as prepared by the RI Society of Professional Land Surveyors,
Inc, as amended. Plans shall meet the minimum requirements for a:

   Class I Survey      Class II Survey      Class III
Survey       Class IV Survey      N/A

(3)   All plans must include:    

•   Name and address of property owner or applicant   •   Name,
address and phone number of preparer

•   Date Plan was prepared, and revision dates (if
any)   •   Signature Block

•   Graphic Scale (1"=40' or larger) & North Arrow   •   Legend
showing all symbols

•   Assessor's Plat & Lot numbers and Zoning
district(s)   •   Perimeter boundary lines of subject property

 


SITE PLAN   
 
Initial & date

(staff)


   Vicinity or Locus Map
 


   Existing Structures

   Location, size and proposed use of existing buildings and structures on
the property, including historic designation, if any
 


   Proposed Structures

   Location and size of proposed buildings and structures, including the
designation and area in square feet of each proposed use within the structure
and total number of proposed seats indoor/outdoor   
 


   Elevation

   Elevations showing all sides of new structures, or existing structures
where any changes are proposed, with a description of the materials to be
used in any such structures   
 


   Parking

   Location, dimension and number of existing and proposed parking spaces;
handicapped parking spaces; vehicular drives and curb cuts; loading areas and
total square footage of parking area (stalls & aisles)
 


   Circulation

   Location of any existing and/or proposed sidewalks and pedestrian,
bicycle and vehicular connections to adjacent parcels
 


   Improvements

   Cross section and profiles of any proposed impervious surface
construction, if intended as a public improvement
 




 



 




   Signage


   Location of any existing and/or proposed outdoor signs, and
specifications and photographs and/or renderings of all proposed signs
 


   External Lighting

   Location of any existing and proposed external lighting
 


   Solid Waste

   Location of existing and proposed solid waste facilities, including
dumpsters, and location of all screening
 


   Legal/Permits

   Notation of any special conditions of approval imposed by the Zoning or
Planning Board, and any permits and agreements with state or federal agencies
 


SUPPORTING MATERIALS
 


   Legal Documents

   Two signed copies of any required legal documents including proposed
easements and rights-of way, dedications, restrictions, or other required
legal documents, including, but not limited, to conservation easements,
homeowners' association documents, and the like
 


   Construction Schedule

   Identifying expected start and finish times for major construction tasks
 


   DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST

   ADDITIONAL ITEMS

These items MAY be required for review. During the pre-application meeting
the Administrative Officer will determine which, if any, of the following
items must be submitted.



PLANS
 

Require d?



(staff)

 

Submitted - Initial & date



(staff)



   Certification

   Certification by a Registered Land Surveyor
 
Y    N
 


   Property Lines & Easements

   Location and dimensions of existing property lines, easements,
reservations and rights-of-way within or abutting the subject property
 

Y    N
 


   Proposed Easements

   Location and notation of type of proposed easement(s) or existing
easement(s) to remain, with accurate dimensions and areas indicated
 

Y    N
 


   Streets

   Location, width and names of existing streets abutting the proposed
property
 
Y    N
 


   Utilities

   Location of all existing utilities (electric, water, sewer, gas);
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells and individual sewage disposal
systems with a notation as such
 

Y    N
 


   Zoning

   Setbacks and Lot coverage computations in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance
 
Y    N
 




 



 




   Topography


   Existing contours with intervals of two (2) feet and finished grade
shown as solid lines (notation if no changes to contours are proposed, or
where changes are proposed)

 
 

Y    N
 


   Wetlands

   Location of any wetlands, watercourses or their buffers (perimeter
wetlands), as determined by a RIDEM qualified biologist (in accordance with
RIDEM regulations)
 

Y    N
 


   Flood Zone

   Notation as to the flood zone of the subject property
 
Y    N
 


   Trees

   Location of wooded areas with a notation of existing trees with a
twelve inch (12") or larger caliper, if any
 

Y    N
 


   Significant Features

   Location of significant existing natural and man-made environmental
features including rock outcrops and stone walls
 

Y    N
 


   Historic cemeteries

   Location of historic cemeteries on, or immediately adjacent to, the
subject property
 
Y    N
 


   Land for dedication

   The location, dimension and area of any land proposed to be set aside
as open space, or drainage, or conveyed to the Town for public purposes
 

Y    N
 


   Permits

   Notation of any permits and agreements with State and Federal Reviewing
agencies
 
Y    N
 


   Utility Plan

   Showing location and descriptive notations necessary to locate all
water lines, sewer lines, storm drainage lines, underground lighting and
communication liens, trees and facilities appurtenant thereto.
 

Y    N
 


   Landscape Plan
 
Y    N
 


   Soil Erosion & Sediment Control/Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
 
Y    N
 


   Drainage/Stormwater Management Plan
 
Y    N
 


SUPPORTING MATERIALS
 
 


   Deed

   Copy of the current deed
 
Y    N
 


   Title Certificate

   A title certificate certifying any encumbrances, easements, and/or
restrictions
 

Y    N
 




 



 




   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW CHECKLIST


   OTHER APPROVALS

If the project requires any of the following reviews or approvals, a copy of
the pertinent approval shall be submitted.


APPROVAL/PERMIT
 
Initial & date

(staff)


   Soil Erosion and Sediment Control/Construction Site Runoff Control
(Middletown DPW)

   Written confirmation from the Building Official or designee that the
proposal has an approved Plan in accordance with Town Code Chapter 151 - Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control/ Construction Site Runoff Control.
 


   Drainage/Stormwater Management (Middletown DPW)

   Written confirmation from the Public Works Director that the proposal
has an approved Stormwater Management Plan in accordance with Town Code
Chapter 153 - Stormwater Management Ordinance.
 


   Freshwater Wetlands (RI Department of Environmental Management - RIDEM)

   1)   Written confirmation from the RIDEM that development plans,
including any required off-site construction, have been reviewed and
indicating that the Wetlands Act either does not apply to the proposed site
alteration, or that approval has been granted for the proposed site alteration

   or

   2)   Affidavit signed by a qualified professional (having minimum
qualifications as described by the RIDEM Department of Freshwater Wetlands)
stating that there are no freshwater wetlands or wetland buffers (perimeter
wetlands) present on the subject property (in accordance with RIDEM Wetland
Regulations)   
 


   Coastal Wetlands (Coastal Resources Management Council - CRMC)

   Preliminary determination from the CRMC if the property is subject to
the jurisdiction of this agency
 


   Physical Alteration Permit (RI Department of Transportation - RIDOT)

   A Physical Alteration Permit (PAP) issued by the RIDOT for any
connection or construction work within a state highway or state right-of-way
 


   Water Availability (Newport Water Department)

   1)   A copy of the water service contract covering the installation
of water service

   or

   2)   Written confirmation that a contract has been executed or will
be executed upon approval of the Planning Board (a copy of the executed
contract must be submitted to the Planning Board prior to recording the
plan)   
 


   Wastewater (Middletown DPW or RIDEM)

   1)   Written confirmation from the Middletown Department of Public
Works certifying that the development can tie into the Middletown Sewer
Service,

   or

   2)   RIDEM Preliminary Subdivision Suitability Report or water table
verification within the proposed development are suitable for the safe and
proper operation of the ISDS
 




 



§ 8  ABUTTERS LIST



ABUTTERS LIST



(Type information in boxes)



 




PLAT/LOT

 
NAME/ADDRESS
 
PLAT/LOT
 
NAME/ADDRESS


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 




 



§ 9  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN CHECKLIST



 




   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN CHECKLIST


(1)  The applicant shall submit (x) copies of the Narrative Description and
five (5) copies of all plans. Plans shall be a minimum of 8.5" x 11" and a
maximum of 18" x 24" at a scale of 1" = 40' with a sufficient number of
sheets to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be
numbered sequentially (e.g. sheet 1 of 3, etc.) For projects involving a
Subdivision, Land Development Project, or Development Plan Review, an
additional seven (7) reduced copies of the plan shall be submitted (minimum
size of 8.5" X 11"; maximum size of 11" X 17").

(2) Plans shall conform to the Procedural & Technical Standards For the
Practice of Land Surveying in the State of Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations, as prepared by the RI Society of Professional Land Surveyors,
Inc, as amended.

(3)All plans must include:

   

•   Name and address of property owner or applicant   •   Date
plan was prepared, and revision

   and of preparer                        dates
(if any)

•   Vicinity or Locus Map & Aerial
photography      •   Signature Block

•   Graphic Scale (1"=40' or larger) & North Arrow   •   Legend
showing all symbols

•   Assessor's Plat & Lot numbers & Zoning
district(s)   •   Perimeter boundary lines of subject property


NARRATIVE DESCRIPTION
 
   Initial &date

   (staff)


   Project Description

   Brief description of the nature and purpose of the land disturbing
activity and the amount of grading involved (acreage or square footage of
disturbance
 


   Existing Site Conditions

   A description of the existing soils, topography, vegetation, and
drainage
 


   Adjacent Areas

   Description of the watershed the site is within, and adjacent areas
which might be affected by the land disturbance
 


   Critical Area

   Description of areas on or adjacent to the site, which may be seriously
impacted by the development
 


   Erosion and Sediment Control Measures/Construction Site Runoff Control

   A description of the methods which will be used to control erosion and
sedimentation on the site before, during, and after construction. Reference
1990 RI SEICSC Handbook (available through RI RC&D 885-1321; can refer to
proposed SWMPP)
 


   Stormwater Management Guidelines

   Compute pre-and post-development runoff discharges using "TR 55" method
   
 


   Adherence to Stormwater Management Regulations

   Design necessary permanent and temporary stormwater management
specifications, including control structures to minimize sediment transport
and flooding. Evaluate the final off-site destination of the runoff.   
 




 



 




   Computations


   Include all supporting computations, in an orderly manner, for
hydrology and design structures, including all "TR 55" and other accepted
methodology worksheets and computer printouts (CN number, time of
concentration, storage volumes, hydrographs, etc.)   
 


   Maintenance

   Include schedules of regular inspection, operation and maintenance, and
authority delegations.
 


   Review Process

   Include a listing of all agencies currently reviewing the project and
the status of these reviews.
 


   Water Quality Impacts

   Discuss possible pollutant sources; evaluate the impact on any water
body, including groundwater aquifers, intermittent and perennial streams,
ponds and wetlands; and discuss any possible measures to be used in reducing,
mitigating this impact.
 


   Soils

   If stormwater management control measures depend on the hydrologic
properties of soils, a soils report based on onsite boring logs or testhole
data   
 


SITE PLAN
 
Initial &date

   (staff)


   Topography

   Existing and proposed contours (2' minimum)   
 


   Soils

   Boundaries of different soil types within the watershed, including
delineation of the site. (Copies of soil survey sheets with boundaries and
roadways drawn on the map are sufficient).
 


   Watershed Patterns

   Delineate the watershed sub areas and indicate all water course flow
directions including pre-and post-development conditions. Delineate all flow
"TR 55", ID segments on the plan.
 


   Wetlands

   The delineation, if applicable, of the 100-year floodplain and any on
site wetlands.
 


   Limits of Clearing and Grading

   Outline areas to be cleared and graded   
 


   Phasing

   If a project is to be phased, delineate limits of each phase (including
temporary grading)
 


   Location of Practices

   The location of the erosion and sediment control and stormwater
management practices used on the site, included within a legend, where
appropriate.
 


   Improvements

   Any existing or proposed improvements, including location of buildings
or other structures, impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities, and all
grading.
 


   Easements & rights-of-way

   Existing and/or proposed
 




 



 




CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS

 


   Details

   Structural and construction details for all components of the proposed
drainage system or systems, and stormwater management facilities
 


   Specifications

   All necessary construction specifications
 


   Erosion and Sediment Control

   Erosion and sediment control measures to be implemented in all
construction phases along with final site stabilization plans
 


   Area of Disturbance

   Limits of clearing and overall site disturbance
 


   Data

   Data for total site area, disturbed area, new impervious area, and
total impervious area   
 


   Planting Materials

   A table of materials to be used for stormwater management facility
planting
 


   Certification

   Certification, by the owner/developer, that all stormwater management
construction will be done according to this plan
 


   As-Built

   An as-built certification signature block to be executed after project
completion
 


   Maintenance Plan

   Detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure continued function
of stormwater management facilities
 




 



§ 10  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT FORM 1 - COST ESTIMATE.



   MDPW FORM NO. 1



   Sheet No. (  ) of (  )



COST ESTIMATE



DEVELOPER       



DEVELOPMENT NAME:       



DEVELOPMENT LOCATION:      



ENGINEER:    

 






ITEM NO.
 

QUAN .
 
UNIT MEAS.
 

ITEM
 
UNIT COST
 
TOTAL COST


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 




 



APPENDIX B - DRAWINGS



This appendix contains drawings depicting the specifications for required
improvements and other graphic information.



Section      Drawing



1      TYPICAL STREET CROSS SECTION DETAIL



2      TYPICAL DRIVEWAY CURB CUT DETAIL



3      CUL DE SAC DETAIL



4      RIVERINE FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



§ 1  TYPICAL STREET CROSS SECTION DETAIL







 



§ 2  TYPICAL DRIVEWAY CURB CUT DETAIL







 



§ 3  CUL DE SAC DETAIL







 



§ 4  RIVERINE FLOOD HAZARD AREAS







 



APPENDIX C - CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT DESIGN PROCESS



Step 1 - Analyze the Site



The first step is to inventory existing site features, taking care to
identify sensitive and noteworthy natural, scenic and cultural resources on
the site, and to determine the connection of these important features to each
other and strategies for protection.



Step 2 - Evaluate Site Context



The second step is to evaluate the site in its larger context of the
neighborhood and Town by identifying physical (e.g., stream corridors,
wetlands), transportation (e.g., street and bicycle networks), and cultural
(e.g., open spaces, recreational opportunities) connections to surrounding
land uses and activities.



Step 3 - Designate Potential Conservation Areas



The third step is to identify the areas on the site to be preserved on the
site as open space. The open space shall at a minimum include portions of the
site that are unsuitable for development and which constitute the most
sensitive and noteworthy natural, cultural and recreational resources of the
site. Where appropriate, areas that serve to extend neighborhood open space
networks to/from surrounding property shall be identified. The designation of
open space shall reflect consistency with the Middletown Comprehensive Plan.



Step 4 - Determine Maximum Number of Units



At the master plan stage for major subdivisions and major land development
projects, and at the preliminary stage for minor subdivisions and minor land
development projects, the applicant and Planning Board shall agree upon an
initial number of dwelling units and total square foot area of
non-residential uses that will be permitted in the conservation development
or subdivision, using the Yield Plan approach as described in Section 10-10.6
or the density calculations specified in Article 25 of the Zoning Ordinance
for the MXD zoning districts.



Step 5 - Locate Development Areas and Explore Conceptual Alternatives



The sixth step is to locate development areas and specific building sites,
using the proposed open space as a base map as well as other relevant data on
the Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map. The design shall take into
account the potential negative impacts of development on nearby conservation
areas as well as the potential positive benefits of such locations to provide
attractive views and visual settings for residences, with emphasis on
consistency with Middletown's character.



Step 6 - Locate the Building Sites



The sixth step is to locate building sites, using the proposed open space as
a base map as well as other relevant data on the Existing Resources and Site
Analysis Map. The design shall take into account the potential negative
impacts of development on nearby conservation areas as well as the potential
positive benefits of such locations to provide attractive views and visual
settings for residences, with emphasis on consistency with Middletown's
character.



Step 7 - Lay Out Streets, Trails and Other Infrastructure



Upon designation of the building sites, a street plan shall be designed to
provide vehicular access to each building, complying with the standards
herein and bearing a logical relationship to topographic conditions. Detailed
information regarding stormwater drainage, water supply and sewage disposal,
trails, sidewalks and other infrastructure are also provided during this step.



Step 8 - Design and Program Open Space



Details regarding the use, design, ownership and management of proposed open
spaces shall be developed during the review process. Starting with conceptual
proposals at the early stages of review, the function of open space areas
shall be developed and refined. Based on review by the Planning Board and
other reviewers, these concepts shall be clarified during the review process
to establish as clear an approach to the use and maintenance of open space as
it does for development areas.



Step 9 - Draw in the Lot Lines



Upon completion of the preceding 8 steps, the next step is simply to draw in
the lot lines to delineate the boundaries of individual residential lots (if
applicable).



Step 10 - Establish Ownership and Management of Open Space and Other
Community Elements



At the time of preliminary review for major land development projects or
major subdivisions, or at the time of final review for minor land development
projects or minor subdivisions, a more detailed open space use and management
plan as described in Section 10-10.7.A shall be submitted.



Conclusions/Outcomes form Pre-application Review



   •   Agreement on areas for further investigation, necessary detail
of field surveys, etc.



   •   Approximate location of natural, cultural and recreational
resources and agreement on town's priorities for resource protection in the
areas of the site.



   •   Understanding of resource systems within the site's larger
context.



   •   Preliminary location of potential conservation and development
areas.



   •   Agreement on approach to determining maximum number of units.



   •   Schedule for the site visit(s)



   •   Agreement regarding the consultants, if any, the community
will use to assist in the review process.



Conclusions/Outcomes from Site Visit



   •   Agreement on areas for further investigation, necessary detail
of field surveys, etc.



   •   Agreement on general location of natural, cultural and
recreational resources within the site and the need for further surveys.



   •   Review of general boundaries of potential conservation and
development areas.



   •   Agreement on the general visual and social character of the
neighborhood, and the type of development that would best fit in.



Conclusions/outcomes from Master Plan Review



   •   Areas for further investigation, soil tests, borings,
necessary detail of field surveys, Etc. to be done for the Preliminary Plan
submission.



   •   Location and function of natural, cultural and recreational
resources.



   •   Function and value of resource systems within the site's
larger context



   •   Location of potential conservation and development areas



   •   Maximum number of units



   •   Design and uses of open space areas, trail connection, and
other shared amenities



   •   Location and design of streets, homes and other elements



   •   Criteria for establishing lot lines, pending further site
surveys and analysis



   •   Ownership, maintenance and management responsibility of open
space areas



   •   Relevant town goals for the area.



PARALLEL REFERENCES FOR SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



 

R.I. Gen. Laws Section
 
Appendix A Section




Chapter 2-1
 
Appendix


Chapter 34 36-1
 
514.1


45-22.2-3
 
Art. 2


Title 45, Ch. 23
 
101, Art. 2, 804


45-23-36
 
402


45-23-46
 
705.3


45-23-47
 
Art. 2


45-23-57
 
Art. 2, 803


45-23-59
 
801, 802


45-23-60 (4)
 
Art. 2


45-24-44
 
407


45-24-53 (E)
 
408


Chapter 46-23
 
Appendix


 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to the Rhode Island General Laws





References to 1973 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO THE RHODE ISLAND GENERAL LAWS



 

R.I. Gen. Laws Section
 
Code Section




Constitution, Am. 28
 
Related Laws, Art. I, Sec. I


Constitution, Am. 28 § 4
 
Charter, Sec. 502


Constitution, Am. 28 § 8
 
Charter, Sec. 1201


Constitution, Am. 29 § 4
 
Charter, Sec. 502


Constitution, Am. 35 § 1
 
Charter, Sec. 502


Constitution, Art. 1, Sec. 21
 
111.09(A)(4)


Constitution, Art. 13
 
92B.01


Constitution, Art. XIII, Sec. 2
 
117.01(A)


1-3-2
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


1-3-4
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 713


Title 2, Ch. 1
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400, 707


2-1-14
 
153.07


2-1-15 et seq.
 
151.10


2-1-18 et seq
 
53.16


2-1-20
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400; 153.07


2-14-10
 
96.08


Title 3
 
111.06


3-1-1
 
110.02


Title 3, Ch. 5
 
111.97


3-5-15
 
110.02, 111.01


3-5-20
 
110.02, 111.01


3-5-21
 
110.02, 111.01, 111.99


3-8-11.1(c)
 
130.01


Title 4, Ch. 4
 
90.61


Title 3, Ch. 7
 
130.03


Title 4, Ch. 13
 
90.21


Title 4, Ch. 19
 
90.61, 90.63


4-13-1-9(d)(1)
 
90.21


4-13-1 et seq.
 
93.99


4-13-1
 
94.99(D)


4-13-4
 
90.23


4-13-15
 
90.32


4-13-26 - 4-13-32
 
90.29


4-13-31
 
90.23


4-13-37
 
90.32


Title 4, Ch. 13.1
 
90.24


4-13.1-4
 
90.24


4-24-9
 
90.23


Title 5, Ch. 45
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


5-11-1 - 5-11-3
 
115.02


5-11-1.1
 
115.01


5-11-18
 
115.02


5-21-1
 
115.59


Title 7, Ch. 6
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


8-8-3 (a)(4)
 
38.07


8-8-3.2
 
38.07


8-18-3
 
38.07, 38.10


8-18-4
 
38.10


8-18-9
 
38.07


10-1-1 et seq.
 
116.97


Title 10, Chapter 2
 
Rel. Laws, Art. VII, Sec. 11A


Title 11, Chapters 11-1 et seq.
 
116.15


11-34
 
116.17


11-34.1
 
116.17


11-37
 
116.17


11-37-8.1
 
116.17


11-37-8.3
 
116.17


11-44-19
 
50.02


Title 17
 
115.40


17-8-1 et seq.
 
Charter, Sec. 502


17-11-7 - 17-11-10
 
Rel. Laws, Art. IV, Sec. 1


17-18-10
 
Rel. Laws, Art. IV, Sec. 1


17-18-11
 
Rel. Laws, Art. IV, Sec. 1


17-19-2
 
Rel. Laws, Art. IV, Sec. 1


20-1-2
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1003


Title 23
 
116.06


Title 23, Ch. 17
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


Title 23, Ch. 17.4
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


Title 23, Ch. 23-23
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 2713


23-17-37
 
116.17


23-18.8
 
50.20


23-18.9
 
50.20


23-18.9-1(b)(1)
 
50.06


23-19
 
50.20


23-19.1-4
 
50.01, 92A.03


23-20.8-3(h)
 
116.01


Ch. 23-20.8
 
116.06


23-20.10-2(15)
 
118.05


23-27.3
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1003


23-27.3-108.1
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1001


23-27.3-122.3
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1001


Ch. 23-28.19
 
101.01


Ch. 24-21
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 2401


31-1-3(k)
 
70.02


31-1-8
 
72.12


31-3-1 et seq.
 
34.86


31-3-31
 
72.12


31-12-12
 
71.02 - 71.06, 72.39


31-13-1
 
71.27


31-13-4
 
71.25


31-14-2
 
Ch. 75, Schedule V


31-14-5 - 31-14-8
 
71.01


31-16-10
 
73.06


31-18-2
 
71.09


31-19-3
 
73.02


31-19-10
 
73.14


31-20-6
 
71.06, 71.07


31-25-26
 
71.04


31-43-1
 
93.70


31-43-4
 
38.07


33-22-1 et seq.
 
Charter, Sec. 610


33-22-20
 
Charter, Sec. 610


Title 34, Ch. 10, §§ 2 - 5
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 705


Title 34, Ch. 37
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 101


36-14-1 et seq.
 
Charter, Sec. 211


36-14-2(1)
 
Charter, Sec. 211


Title 38
 
33A.004


39-1.2-1 et seq.
 
94.16


Title 39, Ch.1
 
Rel. Laws, Art. VII, Sec. 15


39-4-7
 
Rel. Laws, Art. VII, Sec. 15


39-4-19 - 39-4-24
 
Rel. Laws, Art. VII, Sec. 15


Title 39, Ch. 5
 
Rel. Laws, Art. VII, Sec. 15


39-15-5 - 39-15-10
 
Rel. Laws, Art. VII, Sec. 15


Title 40.1, Ch. 24
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


42-17.1
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1003


42-17.6
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1003


42-28.3-1
 
37.026


42-35-1 et seq.
 
53.02, 53.22


42-45-5
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


42-46
 
Title 17, Policy 16, § 2.11


42-55-5.3(a)
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1703


42-128-8.1(d)(1)
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1703


Title 42, Ch. 35
 
116.96


Title 42, Ch. 72.1
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


Title 42, Ch. 87
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 101


44-3-3
 
34.08


44-3-4
 
34.30


44-3-4.2
 
34.30


44-3-29
 
34.61


44-3-29.1
 
34.60, 34.70


44-4-6
 
34.50


Title 44, Ch. 5
 
34.17


44-5-15
 
39.02, 39.04


44-5-26
 
Rel. Laws, Art. VII, Sec. 11A, 52.06


44-5-30
 
Rel. Laws, Art. VII, Sec. 11A, 52.06


44-5-31
 
Rel. Laws, Art. VII, Sec. 11A, 52.06


Title 44, Ch. 5.1
 
34.80


44-5.1-3
 
34.81


44-7-6
 
33.01


Title 44, Ch. 34
 
34.70


44-34-1 et seq.
 
34.86


44-34.1 et seq.
 
34.86


44-34.1.1
 
34.70


Title 44, Ch. 35
 
34.50


Ch. 45-2
 
38A.01


45-2-1
 
33.17


45-2-37
 
38.01


45-2-43
 
96.08


45-4-1
 
30.02


45-5-11
 
33.14


45-6-1 et seq.
 
30.01


45-6-2
 
10.99


45-6-3
 
130.02


45-12-2
 
Rel. Laws, Art. VII, Sec. 6


Title 45, Ch. 19
 
37.018


45-22-1 et seq.
 
32.45


45-22-1
 
Charter, Sec. 1008


45-22-2
 
Charter, Sec. 1008; Ch. 152, App. A: 400


45-22-7(c)
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 27A02


45-22.2
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 101, 400


45-22.2-4
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


Title 45, Ch. 23
 
32.54, 32.56


45-23-1 et seq.
 
Charter, Sec. 1008


45-23-14
 
32.56


45-23-32
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 305


45-23-50
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 305


45-23-56
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 305


45-23-60(5)
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1704


45-23-67
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 319


45-23-69
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 319


45-23-70
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 319


45-24
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 200, 400


45-24-30
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 101


45-24-41
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


45-24-42
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


45-24-49
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 305


45-24-53
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 317


45-24-53(E)
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1704


45-24-61
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 317, 322


45-24.1-7-1
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 205


45-24.1-7.2
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 205


Title 45, Ch. 24.3
 
38.07


45-24.3
 
38.07


45-35-1 et seq.
 
32.15, 32.18


Title 45, Ch. 53
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1701


45-53
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 27A06


45-53-3(2)(i)
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1704


45-53-7
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1704


46-4-6.12
 
93.02


46-12
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1003


46-12-1 et seq.
 
53.17


46-12-1(b)
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


46-13.1-3
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


46-23
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1003


46-23-6
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1003


Title 46, Ch. 42
 
38A.05


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1973 CODE



 

1973 Code Section
 
1995 Code Section




1-2
 
10.05


1-2
 
10.12


1-8
 
10.13


1-9
 
10.14


1-10
 
10.15


2-1
 
31.01


2-2
 
31.02


2-4
 
30.01


2-5
 
30.02


2-6
 
35.01


2-7
 
35.01


2-8
 
35.03


2-9
 
35.04


2-10
 
35.05


2-11
 
35.06


2-12
 
33.01


2-13
 
33.02


2-14
 
33.03


2-15
 
33.04


2-16
 
33.05


2-17
 
33.06


2-18
 
33.07


2-19
 
33.08


2-20
 
33.09


2-21
 
33.10


2-22
 
33.11


2-23
 
33.12


2-24
 
33.13


2-25
 
33.14


2-26
 
33.15


2-27
 
33.16


2-28
 
33.17


2-29
 
32.01


2-30
 
32.02


2-31
 
32.03


2-32
 
32.04


2-33
 
32.05


2-34
 
32.06


2-35
 
32.07


2-36
 
32.15


2-37
 
32.16


2-38
 
32.17


2-39
 
32.18


2-40
 
32.20


2-41
 
32.21


2-42
 
32.22


2-43
 
32.19


2-44
 
32.23


2-45
 
32.24


2-46
 
32.45


2-47
 
32.46


2-48
 
32.47


2-49
 
32.49


2-50
 
32.50


2-52
 
32.52


2-53
 
32.53


2-54
 
32.48


2.3
 
32.75


2.51
 
32.51


3-1
 
112.01


3-4
 
112.02


3-7
 
112.03


3-8
 
112.04


3-10
 
112.05


3-11
 
114.01


3-12
 
114.02


3-13
 
114.03


3-14
 
114.04


3-15
 
114.05


3-16
 
114.06


3-17
 
114.07


3-18
 
114.08


3-19
 
114.10


3-20
 
114.09


3-21
 
114.11


3-22
 
Chapter 36


4-1
 
90.01


4-2
 
90.02


4-3
 
90.03


4-4
 
90.04, 90.99


4-5
 
90.21


4-6
 
90.20


4-7
 
90.30


4-8
 
90.22


4-9
 
90.32


4-10
 
90.33


4-11
 
90.34


4-12
 
90.35


4-13
 
90.28


4-15
 
90.25


4-16
 
90.29


4-17
 
90.36


4-19
 
90.26


4-20
 
90.37


4-21
 
90.39


4-22
 
90.31


4-23
 
90.38


4-24
 
90.40


4-25
 
90.99


4-26
 
90.23


5-1
 
70.01


5-10
 
70.99


5-11
 
70.99


5-13
 
73.01


5-14
 
73.02


5-15
 
73.03


5-16
 
73.07


5-17
 
73.03


5-18
 
73.06


5-19
 
73.05


5-20
 
73.08


5-21
 
73.09


5-22
 
73.12


5-23
 
73.11


5-24
 
73.10


5-26
 
73.13


7-1
 
37.001


7-2
 
37.015


7-3
 
37.025


7-4
 
37.002


7-5
 
37.003


7-6
 
37.004


7-7
 
37.005


7-8
 
37.006


7-9
 
37.027


7-10
 
37.028


7-11
 
37.026


7-12
 
37.100


7-13
 
37.016


7-14
 
37.017


7-15
 
37.008


7-16
 
37.007


7-17
 
37.045


7-18
 
37.046


7-19
 
37.048


7-20
 
37.049


7-21
 
37.050


7-23
 
37.029 - 37.031


7-24
 
37.031


7-25
 
37.032


7-26
 
37.026


7-27
 
37.033


7-28
 
37.034


7-29
 
37.035


7-30
 
37.036


7-31
 
37.037


7-32
 
37.060


7-33
 
37.061


7-34
 
37.062


7-35
 
37.070


7-36
 
37.071


7-37
 
37.072


7-38
 
37.073


7-39
 
37.074


7-40
 
37.075


7-41
 
37.076


7-42
 
37.077


7-43
 
37.078


7-45
 
37.079, 37.080


7-46
 
37.081


7-47
 
37.082


7-48
 
37.083


7-49
 
37.084


7-50
 
37.085


7-51
 
37.086


7-52
 
37.087


7-53
 
37.088


7-54
 
37.089


7-55
 
37.090


7-56
 
37.018


7-57
 
37.101


7-58
 
37.102


7-59
 
37.103


7-60
 
37.104


7-61
 
37.105


9-1
 
91.01


9-2
 
91.02


9-3
 
91.12


9-4
 
91.07


9-5
 
91.09


9-6
 
91.10


9-7
 
91.11


9-8
 
91.03


9-9
 
91.04


9-10
 
91.08


9-11
 
91.05


9-12
 
91.06


9-13
 
91.13


9-14
 
32.35


10-1
 
50.01


10-2
 
10.21, 50.02


10-3
 
50.03


10-4
 
50.04


10-5
 
50.05


10-6
 
92.01


10-7
 
92.02


10-8
 
92.03


10-9
 
92.04


10-10
 
92.05


10-11
 
92.06


10-12
 
92.07


12-B.10
 
113.99


12-B.3
 
113.04


12-B.4
 
113.03


12-B.5
 
113.04


12-B.6
 
113.04


12-B.7
 
113.07


12-B.8
 
113.08


12-B.9
 
113.09


12-B1
 
113.02


12-1
 
115.02


12A-1
 
115.15


12-2
 
115.03


12A-2
 
115.16


12-3
 
115.04


12A-3
 
115.99


12-4
 
115.05


12-5
 
115.06


12-6
 
115.07


13A-1
 
112.20


13A-2
 
112.21


13A-3
 
112.22


13A-4
 
112.23


13A-5
 
112.24


13A-6
 
112.25


13A-7
 
112.26


13A-8
 
112.27


13A-9
 
112.28


13A-10
 
112.29


14-1
 
115.55


14-2
 
115.56


14-3
 
115.57


14-4
 
115.58


14-5
 
115.59


14-7
 
115.60


14-8
 
115.62


14-9
 
115.61


14-10
 
115.63


15-1
 
70.01-


15-2
 
71.06


15-4
 
71.05


15-5
 
71.01


15-6
 
71.02


15-7
 
71.03


15-8
 
71.04


15-9
 
71.09


15-10
 
71.08


15-11A
 
70.03


15-12
 
70.02


15-13
 
71.28


15-16
 
71.25


15-17
 
71.29


15-18
 
72.01


15-19
 
72.03


15-20
 
72.04


15-21
 
72.05


15-22
 
72.07


15-23(a)
 
95.25


15-23(b)
 
95.26


15-24
 
95.27


15-26
 
72.35


15-27
 
72.35


15-28
 
72.38


15-29
 
72.39


15-31
 
72.37


15-33
 
70.97


15-34
 
70.98


15-35
 
72.08


15-36
 
72.10


15-37
 
70.01


15-38
 
70.04


15-39
 
70.99


16-2
 
130.01


16-3
 
130.31


16-4
 
130.37


16-6
 
130.33


16-7
 
130.34


16-8
 
130.02


16-9
 
130.99


16-10
 
130.51


16-11
 
130.16


16-12
 
130.15


16-13
 
130.52


16-14
 
130.35


16-15
 
130.36


16-16
 
130.18


16-17
 
130.17


16-18
 
130.50


16-19
 
130.65


16-20
 
130.66


16-21
 
130.67


16-24
 
130.19


18-43
 
51.01


18-44
 
51.11


18-45
 
51.02


18-46
 
51.07


18-47
 
51.08


18-48
 
51.09


18-49
 
51.06


18-50
 
51.10


18-51
 
51.03


18-52
 
51.04


18-53
 
51.05


19-1
 
32.65


21-1
 
94.01


21-2
 
94.03


21-3
 
94.30


21-4
 
94.31


21-5
 
94.32


21-6
 
94.33


21-7
 
94.34


21-11
 
94.15


21-12
 
94.16, 94.17


21-13
 
94.18


21-14
 
94.19


21-15
 
94.20


21-16
 
94.21


22-1
 
32.54


22-1
 
32.54


22-2
 
32.56


22-3
 
32.57


22-4
 
32.58


23-1
 
114.25


23-2
 
114.26


23-3
 
114.28


23-4
 
114.29


23-5
 
114.30


23-6
 
114.27


23-7
 
114.31


23-8
 
114.32


23-9
 
114.33


23-11
 
114.34


23-12
 
114.35


24-1
 
34.01


24B-1
 
34.30


24-2
 
34.02 - 34.04


24A-2
 
34.16


24-3
 
34.05


24A-3
 
34.17


24A-4
 
34.18


24-5
 
34.07


24A-5
 
34.19


24-6
 
34.08


24A-6
 
34.15


25A-1
 
95.01


25A-2
 
95.07


25A-3
 
95.02


25A-4
 
95.04


25A-5
 
95.09


25A-6
 
95.06


25A-7
 
95.05


25A-8
 
95.08


25A-9
 
95.11


25A-10
 
95.03


25A-11
 
95.10


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




--
 
8-21-05
 
73.07, 130.02, 130.51


--
 
1-15-17
 
50.02, 130.33


--
 
7-15-17
 
50.03


--
 
7-20-21
 
112.01 - 112.03, 112.05


--
 
10-16-22
 
130.50


--
 
1-28-24
 
130.52


--
 
7-13-33
 
72.39


--
 
11-3-33
 
130.67


--
 
6-21-45
 
94.03


--
 
4-7-47
 
71.06, 71.27


--
 
4-21-48
 
115.02 - 115.07


--
 
5-3-48
 
72.37 - 72.39, 94.30, 94.31


--
 
4-1-51
 
114.26


--
 
4-15-51
 
115.03


--
 
7-2-51
 
72.39


--
 
9-4-51
 
112.04, 112.05


--
 
8-29-52
 
94.15 - 94.18, 94.21


--
 
5-5-56
 
73.06


--
 
5-7-56
 
70.01, 70.99, 73.01 - 73.03, 73.05, 73.07 - 73.13


--
 
10-1-56
 
130.65


--
 
4-1-57
 
114.25, 114.27 - 114.33


--
 
7-15-57
 
50.01


--
 
9-30-57
 
70.02


--
 
9-30-57
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
3-16-59
 
130.33


--
 
6-6-60
 
72.35


--
 
6-6-60
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
5-1-61
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
6-5-61
 
130.01


--
 
6-5-61
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
8-7-61
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
6-4-62
 
130.37


--
 
9-4-62
 
95.25 - 95.27


--
 
10-29-62
 
37.001 - 37.003, 37.005, 37.008, 37.015


--
 
10-30-62
 
90.01, 130.66


--
 
7-1-63
 
37.101 - 37.103


--
 
2-17-64
 
94.31


--
 
3-21-66
 
115.55 - 115.63


--
 
6-20-66
 
94.33


--
 
8-1-66
 
32.15 - 32.24


--
 
7-3-67
 
35.01, 35.03 - 35.06


--
 
8-5-68
 
90.20, 90.22, 90.25 - 90.40


--
 
2-17-69
 
32.45 - 32.58, 92.01 - 92.07


--
 
7-7-69
 
51.01 - 51.11


--
 
8-3-70
 
30.01, 30.02, 33.01 - 33.17


--
 
9-21-70
 
32.01 - 32.07, 94.31, 94.32, 94.34


--
 
10-5-70
 
37.001 - 37.004, 37.006, 37.007, 37.015 - 37.017, 37.025 - 37.037, 37.045,
37.046, 37.048 - 37.050, 37.061, 37.062, 37.070 - 37.078, 37.080 - 37.085,
37.087 - 37.089, 37.100, 94.15 - 94.19


--
 
10-5-70
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, III


--
 
11-2-70
 
Chapter 75, Schedule II


--
 
12-7-70
 
34.01, 34.07, 34.08


--
 
5-3-71
 
130.65


--
 
9-5-72
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
9-18-72
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
10-2-72
 
130.99


--
 
4-16-73
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
8-20-73
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
9-17-73
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
4-7-75
 
33.08


--
 
6-2-75
 
115.15, 115.16, 115.99


--
 
6-16-75
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
7-7-75
 
130.19


--
 
8-16-76
 
114.01 - 114.11, 114.34, 114.35


--
 
12-5-77
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
12-4-78
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
3-5-79
 
95.01 - 95.11


--
 
3-5-79
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
4-16-79
 
Chapter 36


--
 
6-4-79
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
6-16-79
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
8-20-79
 
70.01, 70.99, 90.33, 90.35 - 90.37


--
 
8-30-79
 
90.22


--
 
2-19-80
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
4-21-80
 
70.01, 70.04


--
 
6-26-80
 
34.30


--
 
1-21-81
 
10.13 - 10.15


--
 
5-20-81
 
50.04


--
 
5-5-82
 
112.20 - 112.29


--
 
6-16-82
 
113.01 - 113.04, 113.07 - 113.09, 113.99


--
 
7-7-82
 
34.02 - 34.05


--
 
9-15-82
 
34.15 - 34.19, 70.03


--
 
10-20-82
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
4-6-83
 
32.15 - 32.24


--
 
7-1-83
 
37.104, 37.105


--
 
7-18-84
 
37.105


--
 
8-7-85
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
8-21-85
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
2-5-86
 
90.20, 90.21, 90.23


--
 
3-25-86
 
90.22


--
 
4-2-86
 
92.05


--
 
5-21-86
 
37.047


--
 
5-26-86
 
110.02, 111.01, 111.03 - 111.08, 111.97, 111.98


--
 
6-18-86
 
130.03, 130.04


--
 
8-6-86
 
93.01 - 93.03, 93.10 - 93.23, 93.30 - 93.32, 93.40 - 93.48, 93.60, 93.61,
93.70, 93.71, 93.99


--
 
8-16-86
 
72.20 - 72.27


--
 
12-17-86
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
8-5-87
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
8-19-87
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
9-2-87
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
11-4-87
 
Chapter  75, Schedules I, II, III


--
 
12-16-87
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
3-2-88
 
72.02


--
 
8-17-88
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
9-21-88
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
2-21-89
 
94.04 - 94.06, 94.15 - 94.21, 94.99


--
 
3-6-89
 
Chapter 75, Schedule II


--
 
3-6-89
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
3-20-89
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
8-7-89
 
94.32


--
 
8-7-89
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
9-5-89
 
Chapter 74, Schedule I, Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
11-6-89
 
72.06


--
 
2-5-90
 
37.037


--
 
6-18-90
 
34.40, 34.41


--
 
10-15-90
 
34.02 - 34.04, 34.30


--
 
5-20-91
 
33.08


--
 
1-7-91
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
3-4-91
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
7-15-91
 
90.27


--
 
7-15-91
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
8-5-91
 
112.24, 130.75 - 130.91


--
 
9-3-91
 
94.02


--
 
9-16-91
 
110.01


--
 
10-21-91
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
12-21-91
 
90.02


--
 
1-6-92
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
2-18-92
 
Chapter 75, Schedule II


--
 
3-16-92
 
115.30 - 115.42, 115.99


--
 
3-16-92
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
8-3-92
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
8-18-92
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
9-8-92
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
9-21-92
 
151.01 - 151.04, 151.10 - 151.19, 151.35 - 151.37, 151.45 - 151.48, 151.98,
151.99


--
 
9-21-92
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
11-2-92
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
5-17-93
 
94.31, 94.32


--
 
8-16-93
 
72.22


--
 
9-7-93
 
70.05


--
 
9-20-93
 
Chapter 75, Schedule II


--
 
12-6-93
 
130.80


--
 
4-4-94
 
90.01


--
 
5-16-94
 
38.01 - 38.13


--
 
8-25-94
 
34.02 - 34.04


--
 
8-25-94
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
9-6-94
 
Chapter 75, Schedule II


--
 
10-3-94
 
50.06, 50.07, 50.20 - 50.28, 50.99, 93.01 - 93.03, 93.10 - 93.23, 93.30 -
93.32, 93.40 - 93.48, 93.60, 93.61, 93.70, 93.71, 93.99


--
 
12-5-94
 
Chapter 75, Schedule II


--
 
12-19-94
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
12-19-94
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
3-6-95
 
38.06, 38.10


--
 
3-6-95
 
Chapter 36


--
 
4-3-95
 
Chapter 96


--
 
5-1-95
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
5-20-95
 
Chapter 36


--
 
6-20-95
 
130.38, 130.99


--
 
6-20-95
 
130.39, 130.99


--
 
7-17-95
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
9-18-95
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


95-15
 
11-6-95
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
12-18-95
 
Chapter 36


--
 
3-4-96
 
Chapter 36


--
 
3-18-96
 
37.032


--
 
3-18-96
 
Chapter 39


--
 
3-18-96
 
Chapter 36


--
 
11-4-96
 
Repealing 34.06


--
 
11-4-96
 
90.27


97-3
 
2-3-97
 
90.22


97-5
 
8-12-97
 
34.50


--
 
1-20-98
 
Ch. 36


98-3
 
3-2-98
 
111.09, 111.99(B)


--
 
4-6-98
 
37.101, 37.103


--
 
4-20-98
 
117.01 - 117.99


98-7
 
5-4-98
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
6-1-98
 
51.02


--
 
6-1-98
 
97.01 - 97.03


--
 
6-15-98
 
94.32(A), 94.99(D)


--
 
6-15-98
 
94.32(I)(1)


--
 
10-26-98
 
130.32


--
 
11-2-98
 
30.05


98-19
 
11-2-98
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


98-20
 
11-2-98
 
Chapter 75, Schedule IV


--
 
12-7-98
 
34.02


--
 
1-19-99
 
34.02


--
 
4-19-99
 
34.60


--
 
6-21-99
 
94.32


--
 
6-21-99
 
91A.01 - 91A.09, 91A.99


99-9
 
8-16-99
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
11-16-99
 
98.01 - 98.99


--
 
2-22-00
 
51.02


--
 
3-20-00
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
6-19-00
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
8-21-00
 
90.99, 93.99, 94.99, 130.32, 130.99


--
 
9-18-00
 
38A.01 - 38A.05


01-05
 
1-2-01
 
Ch. 36


01-06
 
1-2-01
 
Ch. 36


--
 
5-7-01
 
Ch. 36


--
 
8-20-01
 
Ch. 36


01-17
 
9-4-01
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


01-19
 
9-4-01
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


02-02
 
1-24-02
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
6-3-02
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
8-19-02
 
72.40


--
 
8-19-02
 
93.03, 93.60


02-11
 
8-19-02
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I,  II


--
 
9-3-02
 
94.33


--
 
9-16-02
 
92A.01 - 92A.04


02-14
 
9-16-02
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
12-30-02
 
51.02


--
 
3-17-03
 
92.08


--
 
6-2-03
 
38A.02


--
 
7-3-03
 
34.02


--
 
7-3-03
 
34.15, 34.17, 34.20 - 34.25


--
 
7-3-03
 
34.70


--
 
7-14-03
 
34.42


--
 
7-21-03
 
52.01 - 52.09


--
 
9-2-03
 
34.50


--
 
9-2-03
 
Ch. 36


--
 
9-2-03
 
92.01 - 92.07, 92.99


--
 
10-6-03
 
39.01 - 39.08


--
 
10-20-03
 
35.01 - 35.11


--
 
11-3-03
 
Ch. 36


--
 
11-3-03
 
50.01


04-02
 
1-5-04
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
1-20-04
 
94.45 - 94.48


--
 
2-2-04
 
Ch. 36


--
 
2-17-04
 
93.30


--
 
3-1-04
 
Ch. 36


--
 
3-1-04
 
91.14


--
 
3-1-04
 
91A.02


04-10
 
3-1-04
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
4-19-04
 
72.40


--
 
5-3-04
 
94.33


--
 
5-24-04
 
Ch. 36


--
 
6-21-04
 
Ch. 36


--
 
8-16-04
 
Ch. 36


--
 
8-16-04
 
150.15 - 150.19


--
 
9-7-04
 
Ch. 36


--
 
9-7-04
 
110.01


--
 
10-4-04
 
150.19


--
 
10-18-04
 
150.19


--
 
11-1-04
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
11-16-04
 
30.03


--
 
1-3-05
 
Ch. 36


--
 
1-3-05
 
Ch. 36


--
 
1-3-05
 
Ch. 36


--
 
4-4-05
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
4-18-05
 
33.18


05-08
 
4-18-05
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
5-16-05
 
93.60


--
 
5-16-05
 
94.35


05-12
 
5-16-05
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
7-18-05
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


--
 
8-15-05
 
Ch. 36


--
 
8-15-05
 
99.01 - 99.11, 99.99


--
 
9-6-05
 
90.20, 90.22, 90.27, 94.32


--
 
9-19-05
 
Ch. 36


--
 
9-19-05
 
37.026, 37.032, 37.037


--
 
9-19-05
 
33A.001 - 33A.004, 33A.020 - 33A.022, 33A.030 - 33A.049, 33A.060 - 33A.063,
33A.080 - 33A.085, 33A.100 - 33A.103, 33A.130, 33A.140 - 33A.146, 33A.160,
33A.161, 33A.200 - 33A.208


--
 
9-19-05
 
94.40


--
 
11-21-05
 
Chapter 75, Schedules I, II


--
 
1-3-06
 
Ch. 36


--
 
2-21-06
 
153.01 - 153.07. 153.11 - 153.14, 153.21 - 153.27, 153.31, 153.32, 153.41 -
153.43, 153.50 - 153.54, 153.60 - 153.63, 153.70


--
 
2-21-06
 
53.01 - 53.03, 53.11 - 53.17, 53.21 - 53.30


--
 
2-21-06
 
151.01 - 151.04, 151.10 - 151.19, 151.35 - 151.37, 151.45 - 151.48, 151.98,
151.99


--
 
4-3-06
 
90.03


--
 
4-3-06
 
94.32


--
 
4-17-06
 
34.30


--
 
6-5-06
 
90.03


--
 
6-5-06
 
94.32


--
 
7-17-06
 
Ch. 36


--
 
10-16-06
 
32.85


--
 
10-30-06
 
152.001; Ch. 152, App. A


--
 
3-5-07
 
Ch. 36


--
 
3-19-07
 
93.14


--
 
3-19-07
 
93.30


--
 
5-7-07
 
33.19


--
 
5-7-07
 
37.032


--
 
5-21-07
 
100.01 - 100.06


07-08, As Amended
 
6-18-07
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 803, 1200 - 1210, 1212, 1213


--
 
9-4-07
 
50.01 - 50.06, 50.07, 50.20 - 50.25, 50.41 - 50.45, 50.99


--
 
9-4-07
 
70.01, 70.04, 70.99


07-11
 
9-4-07
 
Chapter 75, Schedule II


--
 
10-1-07
 
Ch. 36


--
 
12-3-07
 
50.01 - 50.07, 50.20 - 50.25, 50.41 - 50.45, 50.99


07-15
 
12-3-07
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 310


07-16
 
12-3-07
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 602


07-17
 
12-3-07
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 603


07-18, As Amended
 
12-3-07
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 602, 17A00, 17A02


--
 
3-3-08
 
114.28 - 114.30, 114.33 - 114.35


--
 
3-3-08
 
Ch. 36


--
 
3-17-08
 
91A.01 - 91A.10, 91A.99


08-05
 
5-19-08
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 102, 400, 602 - 605, 700 - 702, 1500 - 1508, 1900 - 1906


08-06
 
6-2-08
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 602


08-08
 
8-4-08
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 602


--
 
12-15-08
 
Ch. 36


--
 
12-15-08
 
Ch. 36


--
 
12-15-08
 
Ch. 36


--
 
12-15-08
 
50.44


--
 
1-20-09
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 602


--
 
2-17-09
 
38A.02


--
 
3-2-09
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


09-04
 
4-20-09
 
94.35


09-05
 
4-20-09
 
130.68


09-06
 
4-20-09
 
30.04, 30.05


09-07
 
4-20-09
 
90.23


09-08
 
5-4-09
 
100.01 - 100.06


09-09
 
6-1-09
 
93.30


--
 
7-6-09
 
111.10


09-10
 
7-6-09
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


--
 
8-3-09
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


–, As Amended
 
8-3-09
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 705


--
 
8-3-09
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400, 2201


--, As Amended
 
9-8-09
 
Ch. 36


09-16
 
9-8-09
 
115.33


--
 
9-21-09
 
Chapter 75, Schedule I


09-18
 
11-2-09
 
101.01 - 101.04; Ch. 152, App. A: 600, 703


--
 
2-16-10
 
Ch. 152, App. A: Art. 25A


2010-2
 
3-1-10
 
130.01, 130.99


2010-3
 
4-5-10
 
Ch. 152, App. A: Art. 10


2010-4
 
4-5-10
 
Chapter 75, Schedule II


2010-5
 
6-7-10
 
90.20


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
Ch. 36


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
50.44


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
90.60 - 90.63


--, As Amended
 
6-21-10
 
93.30


2010-24
 
7-19-10
 
Ch. 36


2010-25
 
8-16-10
 
110.01


2010-26
 
10-4-10
 
Ch. 36


2010-27
 
10-4-10
 
34.86


2010-28
 
10-18-10
 
Ch. 152, App. A, Art 25A, Secs. 25A02, 25A03, 25A05


2010-29
 
10-18-10
 
71.08


2010-30
 
12-20-10
 
Ch. 36


2011-1, As Amended
 
2-22-11
 
130.01, 130.99


2011-2
 
4-4-11
 
90.01


2011-3
 
4-4-11
 
Ch. 74, Schedule II


2011-4
 
4-4-11
 
37.017, 37.019, 37.026, 37.027, 37.035, 37.036, 37.037, 37.047, 37.061,
37.062, 37.075, 37.078, 37.100, 37.103, 37.105


2011-5
 
6-20-11
 
Ch. 36


2011-6
 
9-6-11
 
90A.01 - 90A.05


2011-7
 
9-6-11
 
90.99, 94.99


2011-8
 
9-6-11
 
90.23


2011-9
 
9-6-11
 
Ch. 36


2011-12
 
11-21-11
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 603, 605, 1304


2011-13
 
12-19-11
 
33.18


2012-1
 
4-2-12
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1202, 1203, 1208 - 1211


2012-2
 
5-7-12
 
93.60.1


2012-3
 
5-7-12
 
Ch. 36


2012-4
 
5-21-12
 
152.01, Ch. 152, App. A: 400, 602, 725


2012-5
 
5-21-12
 
91.12


2012-7
 
6-18-12
 
Ch. 75, Schedule II


2012-8
 
8-16-12
 
34.02


2012-9
 
8-6-12
 
34.30


2012-10
 
8-6-12
 
34.40


2012-11
 
9-4-12
 
Ch. 75, Schedule V


2012-12
 
9-4-12
 
111.10


2012-13
 
9-4-12
 
Ch. 36


2012-14
 
9-17-12
 
34.01


2012-14
 
9-17-12
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 25A02 - 25A06


2012-15
 
9-17-12
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 602


2012-16
 
9-17-12
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400, 602, 725


2013-1
 
1-7-13
 
Ch. 75, Schedule I


2013-3
 
3-4-13
 
34.50


2013-4
 
5-20-13
 
Ch. 36


2013-6
 
6-17-13
 
96.08


2013-7
 
6-17-13
 
Ch. 36


2013-10
 
8-19-13
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 1000 - 1003, 1005, 1006


2013-11
 
8-19-13
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 304 - 310


2013-13
 
10-21-13
 
90.20 , 90.27


2014-1
 
3-3-14
 
Ch. 36


2014-3
 
9-2-14
 
Ch. 74, Schedule IV


2015-1
 
1-20-15
 
Ch. 36


2015-4
 
6-1-15
 
Ch. 75, Schedules I, II


2015-5
 
7-6-15
 
130.40, 130.99


2015-6
 
8-17-15
 
Ch. 36


2015-7
 
9-8-15
 
34.02


2015-8
 
9-8-15
 
34.30


2015-9
 
9-8-15
 
34.40


2015-10
 
9-21-15
 
116.01 - 116.16, 116.96 - 116.99


2015-13
 
11-2-15
 
130.40, 130.99


2015-14
 
11-2-15
 
95.01 - 95.11, 95.25 - 95.27


2016-2
 
4-4-16
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 605


2016-4
 
6-20-16
 
Ch. 36


2016-6
 
7-18-16
 
34.01, 34.02, 34.16


2016-7
 
8-15-16
 
110.01


2016-10
 
9-6-16
 
Ch. 36


2016-11
 
9-6-16
 
70.99


2016-12
 
9-6-16
 
Ch. 74, Schedule I


2016-13
 
9-6-16
 
116.01, 116.06, 116.17, 116.96


2016-14
 
9-19-16
 
34.01, 34.02, 34.16


2016-15
 
10-3-16
 
150.15, 150.18, 150.19; Repealing 150.01 - 150.05


2016-16
 
10-17-16
 
72.12


2016-17
 
12-5-16
 
72.12


2017-1
 
1-17-17
 
100.04


2017-2
 
1-17-17
 
Ch. 36


2017-3
 
1-17-17
 
98.01, 98.02, 98.04, 98.05, 98.09 - 98.12


2017-4
 
4-3-17
 
Ch. 74, Schedules I, II, III


2017-6
 
4-17-17
 
100.04


2017-7
 
5-2-17
 
92B.01 - 92B.08


2017-10
 
6-19-17
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 726


2017-11
 
6-19-17
 
118.01 - 118.08


2017-14
 
11-6-17
 
72.12


2017-15
 
11-20-17
 
92B.01 - 92B.08


2017-16
 
11-20-17
 
Ch. 36


2017-17
 
12-4-17
 
118.01 - 118.08


2018-1
 
2-20-18
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 317


2018-2
 
2-2-18
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 322


2018-3
 
3-5-18
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 307, 308


2018-4
 
3-5-18
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 310


2018-5
 
3-19-18
 
94.32


2018-6
 
3-19-18
 
150.15 - 150.19


2018-7
 
3-19-18
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400


2018-8
 
3-19-18
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 604


2018-9
 
4-2-18
 
Ch. 36


2018-10
 
4-17-18
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 603


2018-11
 
5-7-18
 
Ch. 74, Schedules II, III


2018-12
 
5-7-18
 
72.35


2018-14
 
8-20-18
 
34.05 - 34.07, 34.18, 34.31, 34.43


2018-15
 
9-4-18
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 400, 602, 2730


2018-16
 
9-4-18
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 501, 602, 603, 719, 1500, 27A00 - 27A07


2018-17
 
9-17-18
 
72.09


2018-18
 
10-15-18
 
Ch. 152, App. A: 709


2018-19
 
11-5-18
 
34.90


2018-20
 
11-5-18
 
130.40


2018-21
 
12-3-18
 
72.09


 
 
 
 
 




 


