REVISED ORDINANCES TOWN OF NORTH KINGSTOWN, RHODE ISLAND 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Town Council 2002 
____________ 
Adopted: May 13, 2002 
Effective: May 13, 2002 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
NORTH KINGSTOWN, RHODE ISLAND 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
David R. Burnham 
Town Council President 
____________ 
Patricia Beauchamp 
Kenneth C. D'Ambrosio 
Dale M. Grogan 
Robin Porter 
Town Council 
____________ 
Richard I. Kerbel 
Town Manager 
____________ 
A. Lauriston Parks 
Town Solicitor 
____________ 
James D. Marques, CMC 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1988 Code, as supplemented through May 7, 2001, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. The Code was not renumbered or reorganized and for the most part is as it appears in the 1988 Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1974 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS DISPOSITION TABLE SADT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Code Attorney, and Jodie Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to James D. Marques, CMC, Town Clerk, and Larry Parks, Town Solicitor, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island. 2002. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 02-3 
An Ordinance Adopting And Enacting A New Code For The Town Of North Kingstown, Rhode Island; Providing For The Repeal Of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing A Penalty For The Violation Thereof; Providing For The Manner Of Amending Such Code; And Providing When Such Code Shall Become Effective. 
The Town Council Of The Town Of North Kingstown Hereby Ordains: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Revised Ordinances, Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 21, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 5, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not apply to any ordinance, which the Code does not affect by virtue of Section 1-9 thereof. Nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days in some jail or house of correction, and/or require restitution in cases involving property damage or personal injury in an amount up to twenty five hundred dollars ($2,500) and/or for voluntary community restitution for a town agency for not more than ten (10) days for any one offense, unless other penalties therefore or penalties within other limits are specially prescribed by statute, to be prosecuted by some officer appointed for that purpose, and to be recovered to the use of the town or of such person or persons, and in such proportions as the town council in its ordinances and regulations shall designate. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses and permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the town council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 5, 2001 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this Ordinance or the Code adopted hereby shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. 
    Section 8. This Ordinance shall take effect upon passage. 
    First Read at the Town Council Meeting of April 8, 2002 and referred to the Town Council Meeting of May 13, 2002 for second reading and consideration of adoption. 
    Adopted at the Town Council Meeting of May 13, 2002. 
/s/ James D. Marques, CMC 
      Town Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature and ordinances that amend subject matter not found in the Code are not codified and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 11-01 Included 17 11-02 Included 17 11-03 Included 17 11-04 Included 17 11-05 Included 17 11-06 Included 17 11-07 Included 17 Special Acts of 11-2-2010 Included 17 11-08 Included 18 11-09 Included 18 11-10 Included 18 11-11 Included 18 11-12 Included 18 11-13 Included 18 11-14 Included 18 11-16 Omitted 18 11-17 Omitted 18 11-18 Included 18 11-19 Included 18 11-20 Included 18 11-21 Included 18 11-22 Included 18 11-23 Included 18 11-24 Included 18 11-25 Included 18 12-01 Included 18 12-02 Included 18 12-03 Included 18 12-04 Included 18 12-05 Included 18 12-06 Included 19 12-07 Included 19 12-08 Included 19 12-09 Included 19 12-10 Included 19 12-11 Included 19 12-12 Included 19 12-13 Included 19 12-14 Included 19 12-15 Included 19 12-16 Included 19 12-17 Included 19 Charter Amend. of 11-6-2012 Included 19 13-01 Included 20 13-02 Included 20 13-03 Included 20 13-04 Included 20 13-05 Included 20 13-06 Omitted 20 13-07 Included 20 13-08 Included 20 13-09 Omitted 20 13-10 Included 20 13-11 Included 20 13-12 Included 20 13-13 Included 20 13-14 Included 20 13-15 Included 20 13-16 Included 20 13-17 Included 20 13-19 Included 20 13-20 Included 20 13-21 Included 20 13-22 Included 20 14-01 Included 21 14-02 Included 21 14-03 Included 21 14-04 Included 21 14-05 Included 21 14-07 Included 21 14-08 Included 21 14-09 Included 21 14-10 Included 21 14-12 Included 21 14-15 Included 21 14-16 Included 21 14-17 Included 22 14-18 Included 22 14-19 Included 22 Charter Amendment of 
11-4-2014 Included 22 15-01 Included 23 15-02 Included 23 15-03 Included 23 15-04 Included 23 15-05 Omitted 23 15-06 Included 23 15-07 Included 23 15-08 Included 23 15-09 Included 23 15-10 Included 23 15-11 Included 23 15-12 Omitted 23 16-01 Included 24 16-02 Included 24 16-03 Omitted 24 16-04 Omitted 24 16-05 Included 24 16-06 Omitted 24 16-07 Included 24 16-08 Included 24 16-09 Included 24 16-10 Included 24 16-11 Included 24 16-12 Included 24 16-13 Included 24 17-01 Included 25 17-02 Included 25 17-03 Included 25 17-04 Included 25 17-05 Included 25 17-06 Included 25 17-07 Included 25 17-08 Included 25 17-09 Included 25 17-10 Included 25 17-11 Included 25 17-12 Included 25 17-13 Included 25 17-14 Included 25 17-15 Included 25 17-16 Included 26 17-17 Included 26 17-18 Included 26 17-19 Included 26 17-20 Included 26 17-21 Included 26 18-01 Included 26 18-02 Included 26 18-03 Included 26 18-04 Included 26 18-05 Included 26 18-06 Included 26 18-07 Included 26 18-08 Included 26 18-09 Included 26 18-10 Included 26 18-11 Included 27 18-12 Included 27 18-13 Included 27 18-14 Included 27 18-15 Included 27 18-16 Included 27 18-17 Included 27 18-18 Included 27 18-19 Omitted 27 18-20 Omitted 27 18-21 Included 27 18-22 Included 27 18-23 Included 27 18-24 Omitted 27 18-25 Included 27 18-26 Included 27 18-27 Omitted 27 18-28 Included 27 18-29 Included 27 18-30 Included 27 18-31 Included 27 18-32 Omitted 27 18-33 Included 27  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island, as adopted by referendum on November 2, 1954. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule, R.I. Const., art. XIII; cities and towns, G.L. 1956, § 45-1-1 et seq. 

[PREAMBLE] 
    The people of the Town of North Kingstown, in order to secure the right of self-government in all local matters, pursuant to the provisions of the constitution of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, do adopt and establish this Charter. 
ARTICLE I. - POWERS OF THE TOWN 

Sec. 101. - Municipal body. 
    The inhabitants of the town within the corporate limits, as now or hereafter established, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity. 
Sec. 102. - Local self-government. 
    The town shall have all powers of local self-government and home rule and all powers possible for a town to have under the constitution of this state, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The town shall have such additional powers as now or hereafter may be granted to the town by the laws of the state. All powers of the town shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if not so prescribed, then in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution of the council. 
Sec. 103. - State law. 
    The laws of the state not inconsistent with this Charter, except those superseded by or declared inoperative by ordinance or resolution of the council, shall have the force and effect of ordinances of the town. 
Sec. 104. - Ordinance. 
    In the event of conflict between any town ordinance or resolution and any law of the state, other than a law enacted in conformity with the powers reserved to the general assembly by the constitution, the provisions of the town ordinance or resolution shall prevail and control. 
Sec. 105. - Property. 
    The town may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any municipal purpose, in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation, and may, subject to the provisions of section 314 of this Charter, buy, sell, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interest may require. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985) 
Sec. 106. - General powers. 
    The town shall have and may exercise all local and municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever unless otherwise provided by the constitution of the state or by this Charter. The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the town shall have and may exercise all powers which, under the constitution of the state, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. 
Sec. 107. - Legislative powers. 
    The town shall have power to adopt and amend local laws and ordinances relating to its property, affairs and government. The legislative powers of the town shall be vested in the town council, except such powers as are retained by the people to be exercised through initiative and referendum procedures provided in this Charter. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985) 
Sec. 108. - Parking regulations. 
    The town shall have power for the purposes of local regulation to provide by ordinance for the installation of parking meters and for the acquisition and maintenance of municipal parking lots, and the council may impose reasonable fees in connection therewith. 
State Law reference- Traffic regulations for stopping, standing, parking, turns, G.L. 1956, § 31-16-1 et seq. 
Sec. 109. - Mobile and manufactured homes regulations. 
    The town shall have power for purposes of local regulation to provide by ordinances for the use, occupancy, sanitation and parking of house trailers and/or mobile home[s] within the town. The right of the town to so regulate any house trailer and/or mobile homes shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or placing it on, or attaching it to, the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any manner whatsoever. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 110. - Building regulations. 
    The powers of the town shall include authority to enact a building code, to establish and enforce standards for the construction and repair of buildings and other structures, to require building permits, and to prescribe a schedule of fees for such permits. 
Sec. 111. - Zoning regulations. 
    The powers of the town shall include authority to enact a zoning ordinance and to establish districts or zones within which may be regulated the use of land, the use, height, area, size and location of buildings and other structures, the required open spaces for light and ventilation, and the density of population. Such regulations in one (1) or more districts may differ from those in other districts. 
Sec. 112. - Contracts with other bodies. 
    The town may enter into a contract or cooperative agreement with the federal government, with the state, or with any political subdivision thereof for the performance of any service and the use of any facilities. 
ARTICLE III. - TOWN COUNCIL 

Sec. 301. - Number; selection; term. 
    The town council shall consist of five (5) members elected from the town at large to serve for a term of two (2) years or until a subsequent council has been elected and a majority of its members have qualified and taken office. 
Sec. 302. - Compensation. 
    Commencing in the year 1990, and in every fourth year thereafter during which a general election is scheduled to take place, the council shall appoint, no later than the first of March in each said year, a bipartisan commission on compensation to review the compensation (including all payments and benefits) paid to the members of the council and the school committee. Said commission, taking into the account the cost of living, comparable compensation in other communities, and such additional factors as it may deem relevant, shall, within sixty (60) days following its appointment, recommend proposed levels of compensation to the council. The council shall consider the recommendations of the commission and may accept, reject or reduce the proposed levels of compensation. The compensation of the members of the council and of the school committee shall be changed only pursuant to the provisions of this section, and any increase in compensation shall take effect following the next general election. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-6-1990) 
Sec. 303. - Qualifications. 
    Councilmembers shall be qualified electors of the town and shall hold no other civil office than that of notary public except as otherwise provided in this Charter or in state law. If a councilmember shall cease to possess any of these qualifications, or shall have been convicted or plead nolo contendere to a felony or shall have been convicted or plead nolo contendere to a misdemeanor resulting in a jail sentence of six (6) months or more, either suspended or to be served, his or her office shall immediately become vacant. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1964; Charter Amend. of 11-6-1990) 
Sec. 304. - Presiding officer. 
    The council shall elect one (1) of its members as council president. The president shall preside at meetings of the council and shall be recognized as head of the town government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, but he/she shall have no administrative duties. Such office shall not deprive the council president of his/her vote on any question. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 305. - Investigation. 
    The council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any officer, department or agency of the town and to make an investigation relating to town affairs and for such purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, records, papers and other evidence. 
Sec. 306. - Vacancies in council. 
    In the event that the office of a member of the council shall become vacant from any cause, such vacancy shall be filled by the council by appointing thereto the council candidate who, in the most recent general election, received the highest number of votes among the unsuccessful candidates in said election. If such candidate declines appointment, has ceased to meet the qualifications for council office, or is otherwise not available for appointment, the council shall appoint another qualified elector of the town to fill the vacancy. In the event that the council becomes deadlocked and is thus unable to make an appointment to fill a vacancy, it shall direct the town clerk to schedule a special election to fill such vacancy. Should a council vacancy remain unfilled for thirty (30) days through failure of the council to act, or to direct the holding of a special election, the town clerk shall have the authority to schedule a special election to fill such vacancy. In no case shall a council vacancy remain unfilled for more than ninety (90) days. Any council vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-6-1990) 
Sec. 307. - Council meetings; rules. 
    The first meeting of each newly elected council for induction into office shall be held on the first Monday in December, or on the first Monday following certification of the election of its members, whichever occurs last. The council shall meet regularly in accordance with the schedule it shall establish for each calendar year pursuant to the state open meetings law, but not less than once each month. All such meetings shall be open to the public, except as provided in the state open meetings law. Citizens in attendance at council meetings shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The council shall have the authority to prescribe its own rules. A quorum to transact business shall be a majority of all the members elected to the council. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-6-1990) 
Sec. 308. - Eligibility. 
    The council shall be the judge of the eligibility of its own members subject to review by the courts on questions of fact and law. 
Sec. 309. - Ordinance powers. 
    The council shall have authority to enact ordinances and resolutions for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the town and for the protection of persons and property. The council may provide reasonable penalties for the violation of any ordinance. 
Sec. 310. - Ordinance requirements. 
    An ordinance shall be required for any act of the council, the purpose of which is to create, abolish or reorganize any offices or departments, to authorize the borrowing of money, or to establish a fine or other penalty. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be "The Town Council of the Town of North Kingstown hereby ordains:". 
Sec. 311. - Ordinance passage. 
    No ordinance shall be passed by the council at the meeting at which it is introduced, but is [it] shall be referred to a subsequent regular or special meeting for a vote thereon. 
Sec. 312. - Procedure. 
    The council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall keep a journal of its proceedings which shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 313. - Acceptance of gifts. 
    The council is authorized to accept gifts of any property, real or personal, on behalf of the town if the council deems it for the best interests of the town, and all monies given for a particular purpose and accepted on behalf of the town by the council, may, by resolution, be deposited to the general fund and be appropriated for such purpose by the council without the necessity of being included in the annual budget. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-5-1968) 
Sec. 314. - Purchase, sale or lease of real property. 
    The council shall have the authority to purchase lands or other real properties for the town, and the authority to sell, lease or convey lands or real properties belonging to the town which it has the legal right to sell, lease or convey; provided, however, that the qualified electors of the town shall approve or reject said sale or conveyance, and any lease of town lands or properties which by its terms extends to a period of ten (10) or more years. Said approval or rejection shall be voted at the next following general or special election. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985) 
Sec. 315. - Budget adoption and taxing powers. 
    The council shall have the authority to adopt the town budget subject to the procedures and referendum provisions set forth in this Charter, and to raise by a tax upon real and personal estate such sums of money as may be required to pay town debts and to defray the necessary charges of the town, and it also may assess, levy or impose any other taxes for the support of the town which legally may be assessed, levied or imposed. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985) 
Sec. 316. - Special referendum. 
    Whenever the town council by resolution or whenever ten (10) percent of the electors of the town qualified to vote on a proposition for the expenditure of money shall make a request in writing for the calling of a special referendum and direct the same to the town clerk; the town clerk shall cause the proposition to be submitted to the qualified electors for their approval or rejection within ninety (90) days of said resolution or request. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-2-2010) 
Sec. 317. - Term limits. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter no person may serve on an elected or appointed body for more than twelve (12) consecutive years and that person shall not be reelected or reappointed to that body for two consecutive years thereafter, unless the person has special qualifications required by the board, or for other good reason, with a unanimous vote of the council concurring with the reappointment. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-6-2012) 
ARTICLE IV. - TOWN OFFICERS 

Sec. 401. - Departments, officers and agencies. 
    The town shall have the several offices, departments and agencies provided for in this Charter and such additional offices, departments and agencies as the council may create by ordinance. 
Sec. 402. - Departments, any additional. 
    The council shall provide by ordinance for the departments and agencies of the town not provided for by this Charter and shall define their respective powers, duties and functions. 
Sec. 403. - Department heads. 
    The head of each additional department or agency created by the council shall be a single officer who shall be appointed by the manager and shall be known and designated by such title as the council may prescribe. 
Sec. 404. - Allocation of functions. 
    Administrative functions and services of the town government shall be allocated and assigned by ordinance among and within the several departments which are under the control of the manager except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
Sec. 405. - Appointments. 
    The head of each department or agency appointed by the council or by the manager shall appoint the subordinate officers and employees therein, or he/she may delegate such appointment to the head of any subdivision thereof subject to his/her approval. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 406. - Department organization. 
    The head of any department or agency appointed by the manager may organize his/her department and make such assignment of powers and duties as he/she may consider advisable unless otherwise provided by Charter or ordinance. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 407. - Department officers, acting. 
    The head of any department or agency appointed by the manager may designate, with the approval of the manager, a subordinate officer thereof to act in his/her place in the event of his/her absence or incapacity or whenever the circumstances may require. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 408. - Rearrangements. 
    The council by ordinance may create, abolish, combine and arrange the several offices, departments and agencies of the town other than those established by the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 409. - Terms of office. 
    Each officer appointed by the council shall serve until his/her successor is appointed and qualified unless his/her services previously be [are] terminated by resignation or otherwise. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 410. - Appointments by council. 
    The appointment of any officer for the full term of a fixed term of office shall be made in each case by the council most recently elected. No appointments shall be made by the council during its concluding days of office following a regular town election except to fill a vacancy temporarily until an appointment is made by the newly elected council. 
    Officers, boards, commissions, etc., appointed jointly by the council and manager, shall be responsible to the council except for those areas of responsibility which the council shall assign in writing to the manager. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1964) 
Sec. 411. - Removals. 
    Any officer appointed by the council may be removed by resolution of the council, but no such resolution shall be passed at the same meeting at which it is introduced. 
Sec. 412. - Compensation. 
    Officers appointed by the council shall receive such compensation as the council may determine. 
Sec. 413. - Bonding. 
    Each officer or employee of the town who has possession of or control over any funds of the town shall give bond for the faithful performance of his/her duties in such sum as may be fixed and with sureties to be approved by the council, and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the town. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 414. - Authority of officers. 
    Any powers, duties or functions which are required by law to be exercised, performed or administered by a particular officer of the town shall be exercised, performed or administered by such officer as by the authority of Charter or ordinance is responsible for the same, notwithstanding the title or designation of the office. 
Sec. 415. - Committees, commissions, boards, etc. 
(1)  Within one (1) month following the appointment or reappointment of a member of a committee, commission or board, its members shall elect a member as chair and a member or nonmember as secretary. The results of such election shall be reported to the town clerk within one (1) week of its taking place and the officers so elected shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(2)  Members ex-officio shall not be entitled to vote. 
(3)  A quorum shall consist of a majority of the appointed members. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1964; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
ARTICLE V. - TOWN MANAGER 

Sec. 501. - Appointment. 
    The council shall appoint a town manager who shall have the powers and perform the duties in this Charter provided. No councilmember shall receive such an appointment during the term for which he/she shall have been elected, nor within one (1) year after the expiration of his/her term. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 502. - Removal. 
    The council shall appoint the manager for an indefinite term and may remove him/her by a majority vote of its members. At least thirty (30) days before such removal shall become effective, the council shall by a majority vote of its members adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for his/her removal. The manager may reply in writing and may request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than twenty (20) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one be requested, and after full consideration, the council by majority vote of its members may adopt a final resolution of removal. By the preliminary resolution the council may suspend the manager from duty, but shall in any case cause to be paid him/her forthwith any unpaid balance of his/her salary and salary for the next two (2) calendar months following adoption of the preliminary resolution. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 503. - Noninterference by council. 
    Notwithstanding Section 510, entitled Town council approval, the council or any of its members shall not direct or request the appointment of any person to or his/her removal from office by the manager or by any of his/her subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the town. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998; Charter Amend. of 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 504. - Qualifications. 
    The manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his/her actual experience in, or his/her knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his/her office as hereinafter set forth. He/she shall be appointed without regard to his/her place of residence at the time of his/her appointment but during his/her tenure of office he/she shall reside within the town. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 505. - Powers. 
    The manager, with the approval of the council, may exercise and perform the powers and duties of one (1) or more administrative officers instead of appointing some other person or persons so to do, but he/she shall not be entitled thereby to receive more than his/her compensation as manager alone. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 506. - Assignment of duties. 
    The manager, with approval of the council, may assign the duties of two (2) or more administrative officers to one (1) person or divide the duties of any office among two (2) or more persons. 
Sec. 507. - Duties. 
    The manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the town government. He/she shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the town and to that end shall have power and shall be required: 
(a)  To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(b)  To be responsible for the conduct and performance of all administrative functions and services which are not imposed by Charter upon some other officer. 
(c)  To appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove all officers and employees of the town under his/her jurisdiction, except as he/she may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office. 
(d)  To determine the salaries of all officers and employees under his/her jurisdiction subject to the approval of the council. 
(e)  To prepare and submit to the council, as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the town for the preceding year, which report shall be printed and made available to the citizens. 
(f)  To keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the town and make such recommendations as may seem to him/her desirable. 
(g)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him/her by the council. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 508. - Absence. 
    The manager may designate by letter filed with the town clerk a qualified administrative officer of the town to perform his/her duties during his/her temporary absence or disability. In the event of failure of the manager to make such designation, the council may appoint an officer of the town to perform the duties of the manager until he/she shall return or his/her disability shall cease. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 509. - Vacancy. 
    Whenever the office of manager is declared vacant by the council, an interim manager shall be elected by majority vote of the council. He/she shall have the same duties and powers as a manager, except he/she shall not serve longer than six (6) months, and may be summarily removed by majority vote of the council without charges or a hearing. Nothing shall prevent an interim manager from applying to be appointed manager. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1964; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 510. - Town council approval. 
    Appointments of department head by the town manager, or any employee who reports directly to the town manager, shall require the advice and consent of the majority of the council. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-6-2012) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 601. - Director of finance. 
    There shall be a department of finance, the head of which shall be the town treasurer, who shall be the manager or a person appointed by the manager. 
Sec. 602. - Qualifications. 
    The treasurer shall have knowledge of municipal accounting and taxation and shall have had experience in budgeting and financial control. 
Sec. 603. - Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the treasurer and he/she shall be required: 
(a)  To supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; 
(b)  To maintain a general accounting system for the town government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; 
(c)  To keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; 
(d)  To keep separate accounts for the items of appropriations contained in the town budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance; 
(e)  To require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the town government to be made at such intervals as the manager may deem expedient; 
(f)  To prepare a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the town; 
(g)  To prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report; 
(h)  To deposit all funds coming into his/her hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the council, subject to the requirements of law as to surety and the payment of interest on deposits, but all such interest shall be the property of the town and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account; 
(i)  To have custody of all investments and invested funds of the town government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the town and the receipt and delivery of town bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange; 
(j)  To supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment and other articles used by any office, department or agency of the town government; 
(k)  To approve all proposed expenditures, and unless he/she shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and available funds, no appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditures shall be made. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 604. - Accounting supervision and control. 
    The treasurer shall have power and shall be required: 
(a)  To prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and agencies of the town government; 
(b)  To examine and approve all contracts, orders and other documents by which the town government incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that moneys have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligation shall become due and payable; 
(c)  To audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidences of claims, demands or charges against the town government and determine the regularity and correctness of the same; 
(d)  To inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any office, department or agency of the town government apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his/her office. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 605. - Work programs; allotments. 
    Before the beginning of the budget year, the head of each office, department or agency shall submit to the manager a work program for the year, which shall show the requested allotments of appropriations by quarterly periods, for the entire budget year. The manager shall review the requested allotments and may revise, alter or change such allotments before approving the same. The aggregate of such allotments shall not exceed the total appropriation available to said office, department or agency for the budget year. 
Sec. 606. - Budget control. 
    The treasurer shall authorize all expenditures for the offices, departments and agencies to be made from the appropriations on the basis of approved allotments and not otherwise. An approved allotment may be revised during the budget year in the same manner as the original allotment was made. If, at any time during the budget year, the manager shall ascertain that the available income, plus balances, for the year will be less than the total appropriations, he/she shall reconsider the work program, and allotments of the several offices, departments and agencies and revise the allotments so as to forestall the making of expenditures in excess of income. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998; Charter Amend. of 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 607. - Tax collector. 
    There shall be in the department of finance a town tax collector. 
Sec. 608. - Duties of tax collector. 
    The tax collector shall collect all taxes, special assessments, license fees and other revenues of the town or for whose collection the town is responsible, and receive all money receivable by the town from the state or federal government, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of the town, except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
Sec. 609. - Delinquent installments. 
    No amounts received for taxes shall be applied to any current installment until all previous installments of taxes have been paid. 
ARTICLE VII. - ASSESSMENT 

Sec. 701. - Town assessor. 
    There shall be a town assessor who shall be appointed by the manager. The assessor shall be responsible for the fixing of an assessed valuation for the purposes of taxation on all taxable real estate and personal property and for the preparation of an assessment roll and a tax roll for the town in the manner provided by law and ordinance. 
Sec. 702. - Board of assessment review; appointment; vacancies. 
    There shall be a board of assessment review consisting of three (3) members appointed by the council for a term of three (3) years. The members first appointed shall serve for terms of one (1), two (2) and three (3) years respectively. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term. If a member of such board shall cease to be a resident, his/her office shall thereby become vacant. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 703. - Duties. 
    The board of assessment review shall hear and consider the appeal of any property owner concerning the amount of his/her assessed valuation as determined by the assessor. The board shall keep an accurate record of its proceedings which shall be available for public inspection. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 704. - Correction in assessment. 
    If it shall appear that the valuation of any property has been erroneously or incorrectly assessed, the board [of assessment review] shall have authority to order a correction. Such determination shall be certified by the board to the assessor whose duty it shall be to make such corrections in the valuation as the board may determine. If the tax roll has been certified by the assessor, he/she shall transmit the findings of the board to the council, which may cancel in whole or in part the tax based on such valuation in order to effect a correction. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 705. - Procedure. 
    The council shall provide by ordinance for the organization and procedure of the board of assessment review and for the manner of receiving, considering and disposing of appeals. 
Sec. 706. - Right of appeal. 
    The taking of an appeal to the board of assessment review or any action thereon shall not be construed to limit or restrict the right of any taxpayer to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief from any assessed valuation or tax originally determined by the assessor. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OTHER DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 801. - Town clerk. 
    There shall be a town clerk who shall be appointed by the manager with the approval of the council. The town clerk shall be clerk of the council. 
    It shall be the duty of the town clerk: 
(a)  To make a permanent record of council proceedings; 
(b)  To certify by his/her signature all actions of the council; 
(c)  To be custodian of the town seal which shall have imprinted thereon the following: (picture of seal), and of the official documents and records of the town; 
(d)  To direct and supervise the recording of deeds, mortgages, vital statistics, and other records and instruments; 
(e)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the council. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 802. - Planning commission. 
    There shall be a town planning commission which shall consist of six (6) members who shall be determined and appointed by the town council, none of whom shall be an employee of the town. The manager and the head of the public works department and town engineer shall serve as ex-officio members of the commission. The commission shall elect its chair from among the appointive members. Every order, requirement, decision or determination of the board shall immediately be filed in the office of the town clerk and shall be a public record. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1964; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1994; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 803. - Term of office; vacancies. 
    The term of appointive members shall be six (6) years except that, of the six (6) members first appointed, one (1) shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, one (1) for two (2) years, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for four (4) years, and one (1) for five (5) years. Any vacancy shall be filled by town council for the remainder of the term. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 804. - Duties. 
    The planning commission shall make, amend, extend and add to a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the town, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts, descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the commissions' recommendations for the development of town territory, and may include, among other things: 
(a)  The general location, character and extent of streets, bridges, parks, waterways and other public ways, grounds and spaces; 
(b)  The general location of public buildings and other public property; 
(c)  The general location and extent of public utilities, whether publicly or privately owned; 
(d)  The removal, relocation, widening, extension, narrowing, vacating, abandonment or change of use of such existing or future public ways, grounds, spaces, buildings, property or utilities; 
(e)  The general extent and location of public housing projects. 
(f)  The formulation, amending and revising [of] the Town Comprehensive Plan. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 805. - Powers. 
    The planning commission also shall have power and shall be required: 
(a)  To exercise control over subdividing land within the town; 
(b)  To draft for the council an official map of the town and recommend or disapprove proposed changes in such map; 
(c)  To recommend to the council such changes in the zoning ordinance and zoning map as it deems desirable. All applications for amendments to the zoning ordinance shall be referred by the council to the planning commission for its study and recommendations; 
(d)  To make and adopt plans for the clearance and rebuilding of blighted areas within the town; 
(e)  Reserved; 
(f)  To promote public interest in and understanding of the master plan [comprehensive plan] and planning and zoning; 
(g)  To meet not less than once each month and keep a public record of its resolutions, findings and determinations. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1964; Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-5-1996; Charter Amend. of 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 806. - Powers. 
    The commission shall have power: 
(a)  To require that information be furnished within a reasonable time from the other departments of the town governments in relation to its work; 
(b)  To contract with town planners and other consultants for such services as it may require, within its budget appropriations; 
(c)  To request additional assistance for special survey work of the manager who may at his/her discretion assign to the commission members of [or] the staff of any administrative department or direct such department to make special studies requested by the commission; 
(d)  To make and adopt plans for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of neighborhoods; 
(e)  To make and adopt a plan for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may be destroyed in whole or in part or seriously damaged by fire, earthquake, flood or other disaster. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 807. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An amendment of November 3, 1998, amended the Charter by repealing former section 807 in its entirety. Former section 807 pertained to the platting board of review, and derived from an amendment of November 8, 1988. 
Sec. 808. - Zoning board of review. 
    There shall be a zoning board of review which shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the council for a term of three (3) years, except that of the members first appointed, two (2) shall be for a term of one (1) year and two (2) for a term of two (2) years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term. The board shall elect a chair from among its members. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Note- See Public Law 1977 Chapter 181 Alternate Members. 
Sec. 809. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the zoning board of review shall be held at the call of the chair, and at such other times as such board may determine. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 810. - Public record. 
    Every order, requirement, decision or determination of the board shall immediately be filed in the office of the town clerk and shall be a public record. The board shall have power to hear and determine appeals from applications for or refusal of building permits and to permit exceptions to or variations from the zoning regulations in classes of cases or situations and in accordance with the principles, conditions and procedures specified in the zoning ordinance of the town. 
Sec. 811. - Town solicitor. 
    There shall be a town solicitor who shall be appointed by the council for a term of office concurrent with that of the council. 
(a)  The solicitor shall be an attorney at law in good standing who has been admitted to practice in this state. 
(b)  The solicitor need not be required to devote full time to the duties of his/her office and shall receive such compensation, either on a salary or fee basis, as the council may determine. 
(c)  The solicitor shall be attorney for the town and legal advisor to the town council, manager, and all other officers, departments and agencies of the town. He/she shall appear for and protect the rights of the town in all actions, suits, or proceedings brought by or against it or any of its officers, departments or agencies, and shall perform such other duties as the council may require. 
(d)  All legal opinions furnished to the council and to all town officers, departments and agencies, shall be in writing and filed with the town clerk, as a public record, together with the resolution, letter, or other memorandum requesting the opinion. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 812. - Department of public works. 
    There shall be a department of public works, the head of which shall be the director of public works who shall be either the manager or a person appointed by the manager. He/she shall be responsible for the efficient operation of all the activities of the department of public works. 
(a)  The department of public works shall be responsible for the functions and services of the town relating to highways, engineering, street lighting, public parking lots, waste disposal, sewers, parks, public buildings and such other public works activities as may be defined by ordinance. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 813. - Department of public safety. 
    There shall be a department of public safety, the head of which shall be the director of public safety who shall be or be appointed by the manager. 
(a)  The director of public safety, subject to the supervision of the manager, shall be responsible for the efficient operation of the services of said department. 
(b)  Within the department of public safety, there shall be divisions known as the police department and fire department. The head of each such division shall be a chief who shall be appointed by the director of public safety with the approval of the manager. 
(c)  The director of public safety shall be responsible for the administration and discipline of the police and fire departments and for the enforcement and execution of all laws and ordinances and of the rules and regulations of said departments. 
(d)  The chief of police and the chief of the fire department shall be the chief executive officers of their respective departments, subject to the direction of the director of public safety. 
(e)  The records of the department of public safety and of any divisions within said department shall at all times be open to the inspection of the manager and such persons as may be designated in writing by the manager. 
(f)  In the event of a vacancy at any time in the office of director of public safety, the manager shall act as the head of said department until a director has been appointed. 
Sec. 814. - Department of public welfare. 
    There shall be a department of public welfare which shall perform the functions and services of the town relating to public welfare. The head of the department shall be the director of public welfare who shall be or be appointed by the manager. 
Sec. 815. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- A Charter Amendment of November 3, 2004, amended the Charter by repealing § 815. Former § 815 pertained to the department of public health; and derived from a Charter Amendment of November 3, 1998. Similar powers, privileges, duties and immunities are grated to the Rhode Island Department of Health. 
Sec. 816. - Building inspector. 
    The manager shall appoint a building inspector to be in such department as the council may designate. He/she shall be responsible for the enforcement of ordinances relating to buildings, zoning and mobile and manufactured homes. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998; Charter Amend. of 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 817. - Department of public recreation. 
    There shall be a department of public recreation, the head of which shall be the director of public recreation, who shall be or be appointed by the manager. His/her duties shall include the programming and operation of recreational activities at playgrounds, parks, beaches and community recreational centers or areas. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1964; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 818. - Library trustees. 
    The council shall provide by ordinance for a board of trustees of any free library created under G.L. 1956, § 29-4-1 et seq., to consist of seven (7) members appointed by the council for a period of three (3) years, except that of the members first appointed, two (2) shall be for a term of one (1) year, and two (2) for a term of two (2) years, and their successors for a term of three (3) years. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1970) 
Sec. 819. - Department of water supply. 
    There shall be a department of water supply, the head of which shall be the director of water supply, who shall be the manager or a person appointed by the manager. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient operation, maintenance, and development of the system of water supply for the town and all related facilities and equipment, and for the provision of water which meets all applicable federal and state standards. The department of water supply and the town council shall, in conformity with all applicable provisions of the Charter, have and perform all of the powers, duties, and functions vested in the town and in the water works commission by Chapter 786 of the Public Laws of 1939 as amended. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988) 
Sec. 820. - Asset management commission. 
    There shall be an asset management commission who shall be appointed by the town council, the terms and membership to be fixed by ordinance. The asset management commission shall be responsible for formulating a capital improvement program and an asset protection plan. The program shall address projecting major expenditures needed to maintain existing municipal and school facilities and for projecting new public facilities. The commission shall prioritize all projects and recommend funding sources for all expenditures. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 821. - Qualification of boards and commission members. 
    Board and commission members shall generally be qualified electors of the town; provided, however, that the town council may appoint non-electors who have specific expertise or local business interest. If a board or commission member shall cease to possess any of these qualifications, or shall have been convicted or plead nolo contendere to a felony or shall have been convicted or plead nolo contendere to a misdemeanor resulting in a jail sentence of six (6) months or more either suspended or to be served his or her office shall immediately become vacant. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-2-2010) 
Editor's note- This was added to match the language in the Charter for the qualifications of Town Council and School Committee members. 
ARTICLE IX. - SCHOOL DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 901. - School committee. 
    The school committee shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom shall be elected from the town at large for a term of four (4) years, and until his/her successor is elected and qualified. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998; Charter Amend. of 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 902. - Qualifications. 
    Members of the school committee shall be qualified electors of the town and shall not be employees of the public schools. If a school committee member shall cease to possess any of these qualifications, or shall have been convicted or plead nolo contendere to a felony or shall have been convicted or plead nolo contendere to a misdemeanor resulting in a jail sentence of six (6) months or more, either suspended or to be served, his or her office shall immediately become vacant. 
Sec. 903. - Vacancies. 
    In the event that the office of a member of the school committee shall become vacant from any cause, such vacancy shall be filled by the town council by appointing thereto the school committee candidate who, in the most recent general election, received the highest number of votes among the unsuccessful candidates in said election. If such candidate declines appointment, has ceased to meet the qualifications for school committee, or is otherwise not available, the council shall appoint another qualified elector of the town to fill the vacancy. In any event, such vacancy shall be filled by the town council within thirty (30) days. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998; Charter Amend. of 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 904. - Compensation. 
    The members of the school committee shall receive such compensation as may be approved by the town council pursuant to the provisions of section 302 of this Charter. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-6-1990) 
Sec. 905. - Organizations. 
    The first meeting of each newly elected school committee for induction into office shall be held on the first Monday in December or on the first Monday following certification of the election of its new members whichever occurs last. The school committee shall determine its own rules and order of business and the time of its meetings. All such meetings shall be open to the public, except as provided in the State Open Meetings Law. Citizens in attendance at school committee meetings shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard. A quorum to transact business shall be a majority of all the members elected to the school committee. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-2004) 
Sec. 906. - Powers and duties. 
    The school committee, in addition to its other powers and duties, shall have the power to inquire upon recommendation of the superintendent of schools, except as may otherwise be provided by law. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the school committee and its members shall deal with the administration of the public schools solely through the superintendent of schools and neither the school committee nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the superintendent of schools, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 907. - Appointments and removals. 
    The appointment and removal of all school employees shall be made by the school committee upon recommendation of the superintendent of schools, except as may otherwise be provided by law. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the school committee and its members shall deal with the administration of the public schools solely through the superintendent of schools and neither the school committee nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the superintendent of schools, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 908. - Budget. 
    Two (2) weeks prior to the date on which the manager is required to submit the town budget to the council under the terms of section 1004 of article X [of this Charter], the school committee and the library board of trustees shall submit budget estimates to the manager in the same manner as other departments, for inclusion in that budget. The council shall consider appropriations for the school committee and for the library board in total only, and the allocation of moneys appropriated for the school and library purposes shall be determined by the school committee and the library board of trustees respectively. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1992) 
Cross reference- Budget schedule, Charter app. 1. 
Sec. 909. - Buildings and grounds. 
    The department of public works, at the request of the school committee and with the approval of the council, may maintain and care for the school buildings and grounds, provided that the costs are charged against the appropriation for the public schools. 
Sec. 910. - Purchasing. 
    The finance department shall assume all the purchasing functions of the school committee, in accordance with the requisitions of the school committee, and shall purchase and distribute such supplies and materials as are used by both the public schools and administrative departments, provided the costs thereof are charged to the respective departments. 
Sec. 911. - Delegation of noneducational functions. 
    The school committee, with the approval of the council, may delegate to any officer or department of the town any functions or services under the control of said committee not directly connected with education. 
ARTICLE X. - FINANCIAL PROVISIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- A Charter amendment adopted Nov. 8, 1988, renumbered former sections 1012-1017 as sections 1013-1018, and set out as sections 1011 and 1012 provisions formerly included as section 1011. 
Cross reference- Budget schedule, Charter app. 1. 

Sec. 1001. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the town government shall begin on the first day of July and shall end on the last day of June of each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. As used in this Charter, the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered. 
Cross reference- Budget schedule, Charter app. 1. 
Sec. 1002. - Annual audit. 
    Within three (3) months after the beginning of each fiscal year, the council by resolution shall arrange for an annual independent audit of the books, accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the town, as of the close of the fiscal year, to be conducted either by state auditors or by a certified public accountant holding a certificate from this state and having no personal interest therein, without regard to requirements for competitive bidding. Such examinations shall conform with generally accepted auditing standards and shall include all procedures necessary for the auditors to express an informed opinion of the financial practices and accounts. A copy of the audit report shall be filed with the town clerk and shall be a public record. 
Sec. 1003. - Automatic provisions. 
    If the council shall fail to provide for such an independent audit not later than three (3) months after the beginning of any fiscal year, the proper officers of the state concerned with municipal audits shall have the authority to conduct such audit and the town clerk shall notify the proper state officer in writing that such audit is authorized to be conducted under the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 1004. - Proposed budget. 
    The schedule for the preparation, consideration, adoption and conduct of requested referenda on the annual town budget shall be followed each year as set forth in the various sections of this article, based upon the requirement that final action by the council thereon shall take place on or before the first Wednesday in May. Accordingly, the manager shall submit to the council on or before the fiftieth day preceding said first Wednesday in May a proposed budget of receipts and expenditures and an explanatory budget message. For such purpose, the manager shall obtain from the head of each department, board, commission and agency estimates of its revenues and expenditures and such supporting data as he or she may request. In preparing the proposed budget, the manager shall review the estimates and may revise them as deemed advisable. The proposed budget as proposed by the manager shall show all anticipated revenue and all proposed expenditures, and the total of proposed expenditures shall not be greater than the total of anticipated revenues. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1992; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1994) 
Sec. 1005. - Preliminary approval of budget. 
    The council shall have two (2) weeks to give preliminary approval to the budget submitted by the manager, and must do so on or before the thirty-sixth day prior to the first Wednesday in May. The council may revise said budget; provided, however, that if an increase is approved in the total of expenditures as proposed by the manager, the council also shall provide for increasing the total anticipated revenues and shall indicate the revenues necessary to maintain a balance between revenues and expenditures. No revenue from any source other than the tax levy shall be included in the budget as adopted by the council unless the facts clearly warrant the expectation that such amount actually will be realized in cash during the budget year. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1992) 
Sec. 1006. - Public hearings. 
    Following preliminary approval of the budget, the council shall schedule and hold two (2) public hearings, one (1) on the school portion of the budget at which the school committee shall be represented, and the other on the remainder of the budget. These hearings shall be scheduled to begin approximately three (3) weeks following preliminary approval of the budget and be completed on or before the thirteenth day preceding the first Wednesday in May. To inform the public prior to said hearings, the town clerk shall cause sufficient copies of the budget to be prepared for public distribution, and shall arrange for the publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. At the hearings, all those desirous of being heard shall be heard. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1992; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1994) 
Sec. 1007. - Petitions to the council. 
    Following preliminary approval of the budget by the council, any qualified elector of the town may circulate a petition requesting the council to increase or decrease any item of expenditure in the said budget, or to insert a new item of expenditure. Such petition shall specify the budget item or insertion and amount thereof; must be approved by the town clerk as to form prior to circulation, and must be returned to the town clerk on or before the ninth day preceding the first Wednesday in May. Upon receipt of such petition, the town clerk shall cause the signatures thereon to be verified by the board of canvassers forthwith, and if it contains no less than fifty (50) valid signatures of qualified electors of the town, shall transmit the same to the council. The council, before final adoption of the budget, shall consider and vote upon each such petition proposal; provided, however, that the council may change the appropriation for the school committee or the library board of trustees in total only. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1992; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1994) 
Sec. 1008. - Final approval of budget. 
    The council shall, on or before the first Wednesday in May, complete its consideration of any petitions it shall have received pursuant to section 1007, make any final changes in the budget it may deem advisable, and give final approval to said budget by a vote of a majority of all the members of the council. Following such approval, the town clerk shall cause sufficient copies of the budget to be prepared for public distribution, and shall arrange for publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. The budget so adopted shall be the budget for the town for the ensuing fiscal year subject only to change pursuant to sections 1009, 1010 or 1011 hereof. 
    If the council determines that it has inadequate financial information or other good cause to delay final budget approval as required by section 1008, and a final budget has not been enacted by the start of the fiscal year, the town council may authorize monthly expenditures by the town departments and agencies not to exceed one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the rate of expenditures for the preceding fiscal year. Such authorization shall be valid for not more than thirty days without renewal by the council. The council may negotiate loans in anticipation of tax revenues repayable in no more than twelve months' time in order to provide funds to cover such expenditures. In the event the council delays budget approval beyond the first Wednesday in May the time for submitting and acting upon Referendum Petitions shall not commence until final adoption of the budget. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1992; Charter Amend. of 11-2-2010) 
Sec. 1009. - Referendum petitions. 
    Following final approval of the budget by the town council, any qualified elector of the town may circulate a petition requesting that a referendum be held on the appropriation for a specific fund in the budget as approved. Such petition may propose a reduction or increase in the total appropriation for said fund. In the event that a reduction or an increase as proposed in any such petition is approved by the electors of the town voting thereon, the council shall cause the total appropriation for said fund to be adjusted upward or downward accordingly. The council, the school committee, or the board or [of] library trustees, whichever has jurisdiction over the fund affected by such action, shall make reductions or may make increases within said fund to match the new appropriation total; however, if the council shall determine that expenditure of an added appropriation to the general fund for a suggested purpose would not be fiscally responsible, it shall adopt a resolution to that effect and shall not be required to expend the funds for said purpose, provided, however, such funds shall not be spent for another purpose and shall revert to the general surplus. 
    The town clerk shall cause petition forms to be printed with standard language and spaces for the insertion of dollar amounts, budget fund designations, whether an increase or decrease of expenditure is called for, and other necessary information. All petition forms shall be approved by the town clerk before circulation, and must be returned to the town clerk on or before the twentieth day following the first Wednesday in May. Any language added to a petition, or any alteration of the language thereof, subsequent to its approval by the town clerk, shall be of no force or effect. The town clerk, upon the return of petitions to his or her office, shall cause the signatures thereon to be verified by the board of canvassers, such verification to be completed on or before the twenty-eighth day following the first Wednesday in May. There shall be no limit to the number of separate petitions which an elector may sign. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1992) 
Sec. 1010. - Budget referendum. 
    The town clerk shall cause a referendum by ballot to be held on the first Tuesday following the first Saturday in June, on all budget changes requested on petitions submitted pursuant to section 1009 hereof, provided that each such petition shall contain signatures of no less than 3% of the qualified electors of the town as certified at the previous general election and shall request an increase or decrease of a sum of at least $100,000. The ballot used at such referendum shall be prepared by the town clerk in such manner as to allow the qualified electors to vote either to "approve" or "disapprove" on each separate petition proposal for an increase in appropriation, and shall also be so arranged that all proposed reductions in the appropriation for a particular fund shall be listed together with the original approved fund total, and the electors shall be instructed to vote either for the original total or for one (1) of the proposed reductions thereof. Each proposal for an increase in appropriation which is approved by a majority of electors voting thereon shall be declared to have been adopted; and whichever among the proposed reductions in appropriation for a particular fund receives the most votes shall be declared to have been adopted unless the original fund total approved by the council shall have received the most votes. The polls at such referendum shall be open at 8:00 a.m. and shall remain open until 8:00 p.m. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1992; Charter Amend. of 11-3-2004; Charter Amend. of 11-2-2010; Charter Amend. of 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 1011. - Minor adjustments in dates. 
    The council may authorize minor adjustments in the dates and deadlines set forth in the sections of this article when the same shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, unless the date is expressed in terms of a designated day of the week. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1994) 
Sec. 1012. - Appropriation transfers. 
    The manager shall have the authority to make transfers within the total appropriation for any department, board, commission or agency as set forth in the final budget, and a majority of all the members of the council shall have the authority to transfer any portion of an unencumbered appropriation balance from one (1) department, board, commission, office or agency to another. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988) 
Sec. 1013. - Contracting and accepting of grants; borrowing in anticipation of taxes; issuance of bonds. 
    The council shall have sole authority on behalf of the town to: 
(1)  Contract for and accept all grants of federal or state aid and authorize by appropriation the expenditure thereof; 
(2)  Authorize borrowing in anticipation of taxes, subject to applicable provisions of state law; 
(3)  Authorize the issuance of bonds subject to applicable general or special acts of the general assembly; provided, however, that no issuance of bonds shall be valid unless the same shall have been approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the town voting thereon. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988) 
Sec. 1014. - Competitive bidding. 
    Before the town makes any purchase of or contracts for supplies, materials or equipment, ample opportunity shall be given for competitive bidding, under such rules and regulations, and with such exceptions, as the council may prescribe by ordinance; provided that the council shall not except individual contracts, purchases or sales from the requirement of competitive bidding. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988) 
Sec. 1015. - Accounting control of purchases. 
    All purchases made and contracts executed on behalf of the town shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged, and no contract or order shall be issued to any vendor unless and until the treasurer certifies that there is to the credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to pay for the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for which the contract is to be issued. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988) 
Sec. 1016. - Contracts and expenditures prohibited. 
    No office, department or agency, during any budget year, shall expend or contract to expend any money or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by its terms involves the expenditure of money, for any purpose, in excess of the amounts appropriated for that general classification of expenditures pursuant to this Charter. Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this Charter shall be null and void. Any officer or employee of the town who shall violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall cause [cease] to hold his/her office or employment. Nothing in this section contained, however, shall prevent the making of contracts or the spending of money for capital improvements to be financed in whole or in part by the issuance of bonds, nor the making of contracts of lease or for services for a period exceeding the budget year in which such contract is made. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988; Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 1017. - Appropriations lapse at end of year. 
    All general fund appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or encumbered and the balance thereof shall revert to the general fund. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988) 
Sec. 1018. - Fees shall be paid to town government. 
    All fees received by any officer or employee shall belong to the town government and shall be paid to the department of finance at such intervals as the manager may require. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-8-1988) 
ARTICLE XI. - LICENSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Businesses and professions, G.L. 1956, title 5. 

Sec. 1101. - Regulation and control. 
    The town shall have power by ordinance to require a license for purposes of regulation or control in any matter of local or municipal concern, but no tax may be levied by the town except as provided by law. 
Sec. 1102. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The Charter Amendment of November 2, 2010, amended the Charter by removing § 1102. Former § 1102 pertained to Sunday activities. The Sunday Sales Law was repealed by the State of Rhode Island in 2005. 
Sec. 1103. - Terms and conditions. 
    The council shall prescribe by ordinance the fees to be charged for any town license and the terms, conditions and time of expiration of any license or class of licenses. 
Sec. 1104. - Licensing authority. 
    The council shall designate the respective department or agency which shall be the licensing authority of the town for the granting of any license or class of licenses. The licensing authority so designated may require an inspection, investigation and report by any other department or agency on any license or any application for a license. 
Sec. 1105. - Fee payments. 
    All fees for town licenses shall be paid to the department authorized by the council to receive the same, which may issue a license either for itself as agent for the department or agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter concerned. If issued for another department or agency, compliance with requirements and standards and approval of the application shall be certified by the department or agency for which the authorized department is acting. 
Sec. 1106. - Terminated for cause. 
    Any license may be terminated for cause by the department or agency designated by the council as the licensing authority for the granting of such license. Any appeal from or remonstrance against any action by the licensing authority shall be directed to and subject to final determination by the council. 
Sec. 1107. - Alcoholic licenses. 
    All licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted by the council in accordance with law, and the vote thereon shall be entered in the record of proceedings. 
ARTICLE XII. - ELECTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, G.L. 1956, title 17. 

Sec. 1201. - Town elections. 
    A regular election of town officers shall be held in even-numbered years at the time provided by law for state elections. 
Sec. 1202. - Regulation of elections. 
    The council by ordinance may make any regulations which it considers needful or desirable, for the conduct of town elections, not inconsistent with the powers of local self-government and home rule confirmed by the constitution of the state. The council may adopt by reference any provisions of the state election laws for the conduct of a town election. 
Sec. 1203. - Listing of candidates. 
    At any regular or special town election, the names of the individual candidates to be elected at large shall not be numbered upon the ballot or considered as separate places to be filled. 
Sec. 1204. - Who shall be declared elected. 
    At any regular or special town election, the person or persons receiving the greatest number of votes for an office, not exceeding the number of persons to be chosen for the office, shall be declared elected to office. 
Sec. 1205. - The election of school committee. 
    The members of the school committee shall be elected for staggered four (4) year terms so arranged that the terms of three (3) members shall expire in one (1) even-numbered year and the terms of two (2) members shall expire the following even-numbered year. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1992; Charter Amend. of 6-13-1998; Charter Amend. of 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 1206. - Voter recall. 
    The members of the town council and the school committee may be removed from office by recall, provided that a recall may not be initiated during the first six (6) months or the last six (6) months of the term of an incumbent. The procedure to accomplish recall shall be as follows: 
(a)  A declaration of intent to petition for recall which contains the name of the person whose removal from office is sought and which has been signed by at least fifty (50) qualified electors of the town shall be filed with the town clerk. The town clerk shall cause the signatures on the declaration of intent to be verified by the board of canvassers within seven (7) calendar days of the filing of the declaration. 
(b)  If it is determined that the declaration contains the signatures of fifty (50) qualified electors of the town, the town clerk shall forthwith prepare petition blanks for such removal with a copy of said petition and general statement printed thereon or attached thereto, which shall contain the signature of said town clerk, and his or her official seal, and which shall be dated and contain the name of the person whose removal from office is sought. The petition blanks shall be made available to the proponents of the recall petition within ten (10) calendar days of the filing of the declaration of intent. 
(c)  Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date on which the petition blanks were first made available to the proponents of the recall petition, the petition must be filed with the town clerk containing the signatures of that number of qualified electors of the town which equals or exceeds twenty percent (20%) of the average (rounded down) number of qualified electors of the town who voted in the two (2) most recent general elections. 
(d)  The signatures on any recall petition provided for in this section may be on separate petitions, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a signed statement of the circulator thereof, who shall state therein under sworn oath and penalty of perjury, that each signature appended to said petition was made in the presence of the circulator. All such separate petitions comprising a completed recall petition may be bound together and filed as one instrument at one time, or may be filed at different times as separate petitions; provided however, that all such separate petitions must be filed within the time limit set forth above. 
(e)  The town clerk, upon the receipt of a completed recall petition (or the last of the separate petitions constituting a completed recall petition) shall cause the signatures on the petition to be verified by the board of canvassers, which shall be accomplished within fourteen (14) calendar days following the town clerk's receipt of the completed recall petition (or the last of the separate papers constituting the completed recall petition). 
(f)  If it is determined that the completed recall petition (or all of the separate petitions constituting the completed recall petition) contains the signatures of that number of qualified electors of the town which equals or exceeds twenty percent (20%) of the average (rounded down) number of qualified electors of the town who voted in the two (2) most recent general elections, the town clerk shall schedule a vote of the qualified electors of the town on a date not earlier than fifty (50) calendar days nor later than seventy (70) calendar days from the date on which the board of canvassers completed the verification of the signatures on the petition; provided however, that no such vote shall be scheduled on a date which is within ninety (90) calendar days of a general election. Notice of any such recall vote shall be published by the town clerk at least two (2) times on separate days, with no less than a three (3) day interval between publications. 
In no event shall a majority of the members of the council or school committee be removed by recall at the same time. In order to maintain a quorum, not more than two (2) council members or two (2) school committee members are subject to recall at the same time. If the recalled members exceed such numbers, the two (2) council members or two (2) school committee members having the highest number of votes for recall shall be deemed recalled. 
(g)  Each ballot at such recall vote shall have printed thereon the following question: "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office)?" Immediately following such question, there shall be printed on the ballot the following two propositions in this order: 
"YES" 
"NO" 
(h)  No recall vote shall be valid unless the total number of qualified electors of the town voting on such recall vote equals or exceeds forty percent (40%) of the average (rounded down) number qualified electors of the town who voted in the two (2) most recent general elections. 
(i)  In any valid recall vote, if a majority of the votes cast on the question of removal is affirmative, the person whose removal from office is sought shall thereupon be deemed removed from office as of the certification of the results of the vote by the board of canvassers and the vacancy in office resulting thereby shall be filled in accordance with the appropriate provision of the Charter; provided however, that a person removed from office hereunder shall not be eligible to fill the vacancy created by his or her removal. 
(j)  The town council may, by ordinance, make other and further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this section not inconsistent herewith. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-7-2006; Charter Amend. of 11-2-2010; Charter Amend. of 11-4-2014) 
ARTICLE XIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1301. - Publicity of records. 
    All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the town shall be open to inspection by any person at such times and under such regulations as may be established by the manager, except records and documents, the disclosure of which would tend to defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish. 
Sec. 1302. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer of the town shall, before entering upon the duties of his/her office, take and subscribe to [the] following oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the town clerk: "I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitutions of the United States of America and of the State of Rhode Island and will obey the laws of the United States and of the State of Rhode Island; that I will in all respects observe the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the Town of North Kingstown, and will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of ...." 
(Charter Amend. of 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 1303. - Effect on existing law. 
    Upon the effective date of this Charter, all laws and ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with its provisions shall be superseded insofar as they relate to the town. All ordinances and special acts of the General Assembly applicable to the town in force at the time when this Charter takes effect and which are no [not] inconsistent with its provisions shall continue in force until amended or repealed. 
Sec. 1304. - Separability. 
    If any provision of this Charter shall be held by any court of competent jurisdiction, [to be] invalid or ineffective in whole or in part or inapplicable to any person or situation, it is the purpose and intent of this Charter that all other provisions or parts thereof shall be separately and fully effective and that the application of any such provisions to other persons or situations shall not be affected. 
Sec. 1305. - Amending the Charter. 
(a)  Each newly elected council, following its induction into office, shall appoint a Charter Review Commission of seven (7) members to serve at the pleasure of the council, chosen to be broadly representative of the town, all of whom shall be electors and residents of North Kingstown. It shall be the duty of said commission to convene at the request of the council to consider and make recommendations concerning any issue or issues relating to the Charter, or provisions thereof, which the council shall lay before it, and report thereon to the council. In 1996 and every sixth year thereafter, the Charter Review Commission shall review the town Charter as it exists at that time, and propose to the council such amendments, if any, as it may deem necessary and advisable. 
(b)  Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the electors of the town in the manner provided by the constitution of the state. It shall not be necessary for the full text of a Charter or amendments to a Charter to be printed upon a ballot. Any digest or description thereof or any questions or statement which substantially expresses the purpose or identifies the subject matter to be voted upon shall be sufficient. When any question is to be submitted to the voters, the council shall approve the statement of the question as it shall appear upon the ballot. (Upon the approval by the voters of any amendments, the town clerk shall cause the language thereof to be inserted in the Charter at the appropriate point, and shall number and/or renumber sections and articles as may be appropriate.) 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985; Charter Amend. of 11-6-1990) 
Editor's note- An amendment to the Charter, dated November 6, 1990, amended the Charter by adding provisions designated as subsection 1305(a). Provisions already existing within section 1305 have been designated as subsection 1305(b) at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 1306. - Codification. 
    The council, within two (2) years following the effective date of this Charter and every tenth year thereafter, shall cause to be prepared a revision or codification of the ordinances of the town which are appropriate for the continuation as local laws of the town. Such revision or codification shall be prepared under the supervision of the town solicitor, but the council may authorize the solicitor to contract for the services of persons or organizations experienced in the revision and codification of ordinances and statutes. 
Sec. 1307. - Construction. 
    The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed in favor of the town. The powers of local self-government shall include not only those granted in express terms but also those of necessity or fair implication, or incident to the powers expressly conferred, or essential thereto, and not inconsistent with or prohibited by the constitution of the state. 
Sec. 1308. - Conflictions. 
    To the extent that any specific provision contained in this Charter conflicts with any provision expressed in general terms, the specific provision shall prevail. 
Sec. 1309. - Effective date of Charter amendments. 
    These amendments shall take effect upon their approval by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon. All sections of the Charter or parts thereof, and all town ordinances or parts thereof, inconsistent with these amendments shall be deemed to have been superseded or repealed. 
(Charter Amend. of 4-23-1985) 
ARTICLE XIV. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Voter recall, § 1206. 

Sec. 1401. - General provisions. 
    In order to preserve direct participation in government to the voters of North Kingstown, there are hereby established procedures whereby they may initiate legislative proposals for consideration by the town council and the voters. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-5-1968) 
Sec. 1402. - Initiative procedure. 
    Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the town council by a petition signed by qualified electors of the town equal in number to at least ten (10) percent of the number of persons registered to vote at the time of the last regular town election. Whenever the council receives a certified initiative petition from the town clerk, it shall proceed at once to consider the proposed ordinance transmitted therewith, and shall take a final vote on the enactment of the same no more than thirty (30) days following the receipt of the petition from the town clerk. If the council shall fail to pass an ordinance thus proposed by initiative petition, or shall pass it in substantially altered form, the said ordinance as originally proposed by the petitioners shall be submitted to the electors for their approval or rejection, at the next special or general election after thirty (30) days from the date the council takes its final vote thereon. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-5-1968) 
Sec. 1403. - Referendum. 
    The council may provide in the terms of any ordinance it enacts that the same be submitted to the electors for their approval or rejection. In the event it makes such provision, the vote thereon by the electors shall be called in accordance with the provisions set forth for voting upon initiative proposals in section 1402. Pending the decision of the voters, the ordinance in question shall remain inoperative. 
(Charter Amend. of 11-5-1968) 
APPENDIX 1. - BUDGET SCHEDULE[7] 
Date for submission of budget requests to town manager by school committee and library board Two weeks prior to the date on which the manager is required to submit the town budget to the council. (908) Date for submission of town manager's budget to town council On or before the 50th day prior to the first Wednesday in May. (1004) Preliminary approval of budget by town council On or before the 36th day prior to the first Wednesday in May. (1005) Two public hearings to be completed On or before the 13th day preceding the first Wednesday in May. (1006) Petitions to the town council for budget changes (50 signatures) due On or before the 9th day preceding the first Wednesday in May. (1007) Final approval of the budget by the town council On or before the first Wednesday in May. (1008) Petitions for referendum on budget provisions (300 signatures) due On or before the 20th day following the first Wednesday in May. (1009) Petition signatures must be verified by canvassers On or before the 28th day following the first Wednesday in May. (1009) Date for holding budget referendum on petition questions First Tuesday following the first Saturday in June. (1010) Start of new fiscal year, to which budget applies July 1. (1001)  
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- The budget schedule included in this appendix is not part of the Charter, but has been included herein at the request of the town for the convenience of the use of this volume. 
Charter reference- School department budget, § 908; financial provisions, 1001 et seq.; licenses, § 1101 et seq. 

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE REFERENDUM 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum 
Date  Section 
this Charter 11- 2-1954 Arts. I-XIV 11- 3-1964 303 410 415 509 802 805 817 11- 5-1968 313 1401-1403 11- 3-1970 818  4-23-1985 105 107 302 314-316 805 908 1004-1013 1305 1309 11- 8-1988 812 819 908 1004, 1005 1009-1018 11- 6-1990 302, 303 306, 307 904 1305 11- 3-1992 908 1004-1010 1205 11- 8-1994 802 1004 1006, 1007 1011 11- 5-1996 805 820  6-13-1998 1205 11- 3-1998 304 405-407 409 413 415 501-505 507-509 603, 604 606 702-704 801-803 806 808, 809 811, 812 815-817 901 903 1016 1302 11- 3-2004 109 606 804, 805 808 815, 816 905 1010 11- 7-2006 903       Added 1206 Art. XIV(note) 11- 2-2010 316 1008 1010 1206       Rpld 1102       Added 821 11- 6-2012 503, 901 1010       Added 317, 510 11- 4-2014 1205, 1206(f)  
PART II - SPECIAL ACTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is a list of the Special Acts of the General Assembly applicable to the Town of North Kingstown. The acts have been arranged by subject matter and are listed chronologically within each section. Catchlines have been supplied by the editor. Citations to the acts are at the end of each act, designating the chapter and year of passage and the date of approval or passage. The section numbers to each act have been supplied by the editor and are for reference purposes only. 

Sec. 1. - Abandonment of portion of Ten Rod Road. 
    An act of abandonment of and in confirmation of the abandonment of a certain portion of the Ten Rod Road, so-called, in the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1944, ch. 1422, approved March 20, 1944) 
Sec. 2. - Bond issuance. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds. (Public Laws of 1903, ch. 1129, passed April 17, 1903) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance the acquisition of development rights to farmland and other real estate and to issue not more than $4,000,000.00 bonds and notes therefor. (Public Laws of 1998, ch. 20, approved May 11, 1998, ratified June 13, 1998) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance acquisition of development rights to farmland and other real estate and to issue not more than $4,000,000.00 bonds and notes therefor. (Public Laws of 2000, chs. 129 and 299, approved July 13, 2000, ratified November 7, 2000) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance land acquisition, construction, renovations, additions, improvements and/or related equipment for public safety facilities and to issue not more than $4,500,000 bonds and notes therefore. (Public Laws of 2006, Ch. 397 and 519, enacted July 6, 2006, ratified November 7, 2006) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance new construction, renovations, additions, improvements and/or related equipment at the North Kingstown Senior Center Complex, Beechwood House, Community Center and Town Beach and to issue not more than $4,000,000 bonds and notes therefore. (Public Laws of 2006, Ch. 398 and 518, enacted July 6, 2006, ratified November 7, 2006) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance the acquisition of farmland and other real estate and/or development rights thereto and to issue not more than $4,000,000 bonds and notes therefore. (Public Laws of 2006, Ch. 399 and 517, enacted July 6, 2006, ratified November 7, 2006) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds and notes for an amount not exceeding $10,000,000 to finance the construction of sewers and sewerage systems in the town including the acquisition of land therefore and authorizing the imposition of sewer assessments and sewer fees. It shall be used to phase in sewers along the Post Road Corridor. (Public Laws of 2009, chs. 25 and 35, enacted June 12 and June 19, 2009 without the governor's signature, ratified November 3, 2009) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds and notes for an amount not exceeding $9,200,000 to finance the construction of sewers and sewerage systems in the town including the acquisition of land therefore and authorizing the imposition of sewer assessments and sewer fees. (Public Laws of 2010, chs. 291 and 263, enacted June 25, 2010 without the governor's signature, ratified November 2, 2010) 
Sec. 3. - Boundaries established. 
    An act appointing a commission to determine and establish the westerly, southerly and southeasterly boundary lines of the Town of East Greenwich dividing the Town of East Greenwich and the Town of West Greenwich, the Town of Exeter and the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1954, ch. 3315, approved April 26, 1954) 
Sec. 4. - Building ordinances authorized. 
    An act to authorize the Town of North Kingstown to enact building ordinances. (Public Laws of 1935, ch. 2237, approved April 10, 1935) 
Sec. 5. - Bulkhead, boat landing, etc., construction authorized. 
    An act authorizing the state department of public works, through its division of harbors and rivers, to permit the Town of North Kingstown to construct a permanent bulkhead, place fill shoreward thereof and to construct a boat landing with necessary dredging beyond the state harbor line in Wickford Cove as established by chapter 478 of the Public Laws, 1885, as amended. (Public Laws of 1962, Acts and Resolves, p. 1054, approved February 28, 1962) 
Sec. 6. - Charter validations and ratifications. 
    An act validating certain provisions in the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1955, ch. 3437, approved February 3, 1955) 
    An act validating certain amendments to the provisions in the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1965, ch. 1, approved February 19, 1965) 
    An act validating certain provisions of the home rule charter adopted by the Town of North Kingstown. (Effective upon passage, Public Laws of 1980, ch. 47, approved April 21, 1980) 
    An act validating and ratifying certain amendments and additions to the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1985, ch. 19, approved May 9, 1985) 
    An act validating and ratifying certain amendments to the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1985, ch. 44, approved May 21, 1985) 
    An act validating and ratifying certain amendments to the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1988, ch. 327, approved July 7, 1989) 
    An act validating and ratifying certain amendments to the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1990, ch. 393, approved June 20, 1991) 
    An act validating certain provisions in the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1992, ch. 114, approved July 14, 1993) 
    An act validating certain provisions in the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1995, ch. 345, approved July 5, 1995) 
    An act validating certain provisions in the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1997, ch. 301, approved July 8, 1997) 
    An act validating certain provisions in the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1999, chs. 272 and 308, approved July 2, 1999) 
    An act validating certain provisions in the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 2005, ch. 107, approved June 30, 2005) 
    An act validating certain provisions in the home rule charter of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 2007, ch. 104, approved June 30, 2007) 
Sec. 7. - Deputy town treasurer. 
    An act relating to the appointment of a deputy town treasurer in the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1950, ch. 2442, approved March 27, 1950) 
Sec. 8. - Earth removal. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to enact ordinances regulating, controlling and licensing earth removal. (Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, approved May 11, 1973, ratified August 7, 1973) 
    An act to authorize the Town of North Kingstown to establish by ordinance the licensing fees and bond amount for earth removal. (Public Laws of 1988, ch. 121, approved June 1, 1988) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to enact ordinances regulating, controlling, and licensing earth removal. (Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332, approved July 7, 1989, ratified November 7, 1989) 
Sec. 9. - Election polls. 
    An act relating to elections. (Public Laws of 1985, ch. 95, approved May 20, 1985) 
Sec. 10. - Election of town officers. 
    An act in amendment of an act in relation to the election of town officers in the Town of North Kingstown, passed at the January session, 1886. (Public Laws of 1905, ch. 1280, approved April 21, 1905) 
    An act fixing the time for the election of town officers in the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1915, ch. 1310, approved March 18, 1915) 
    An act fixing the time for the election of town officers in the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1915, ch. 1310, approved April 8, 1915) 
    An act relating to towns and cities that in the Town of North Kingstown, no sealer of weights and measures shall be elected or appointed. (Public Laws of 2006, Ch. 118, authorized June 16, 2006) 
Sec. 11. - Elective meetings. 
    An act in amendment of item (23) of section 11 of chapter 314 of the General Laws [G.L. § 17-18-11], entitled "Elective Meetings," as amended. (Public Laws of 1946, ch. 1707, approved April 11, 1946) 
Sec. 12. - Establishment of and opening of streets. 
    An act establishing the requirements to constitute the opening or establishment of a street as a public way. (Public Laws of 1987, ch. 393, approved July 1, 1987) 
Sec. 13. - Financial town meeting. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to hold a financial town meeting. (Public Laws of 1895, ch. 1438, passed May 22, 1895) 
    An act in amendment of an act entitled "An Act Authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to Hold a Financial Town Meeting." (Public Laws of 1900, ch. 734, passed February 9, 1900) 
    An act in amendment of chapter 1438 of the Public Laws, passed at the January session, 1895, entitled "An Act Authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to Hold a Financial Town Meeting," as amended by chapter 734 of the Public Laws, passed at the January session, 1900, and all acts in amendment thereof or in addition thereto. (Public Laws of 1917, ch. 1588, passed February 27, 1917) 
    An act in amendment of chapter 1438 of the Public Laws, 1895, entitled "An Act Authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to Hold a Financial Town Meeting," as amended. (Public Laws of 1948, ch. 2081, approved April 30, 1948) 
    An act in amendment of chapter 1438 of the Public Laws, 1895, entitled "An Act Authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to Hold a Financial Town Meeting," as amended. (Public Laws of 1949, ch. 2183, approved April 1, 1949) 
    An act in amendment of chapter 1438 of the Public Laws, 1895, entitled "An Act Authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to Hold a Financial Town Meeting," as amended. (Public Laws of 1961, ch. 171, approved June 8, 1961, ratified September 12, 1961) 
Sec. 14. - Fire department authorized. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to establish a permanent fire department. (Public Laws of 1954, ch. 3260, approved March 17, 1954) 
Sec. 15. - Fire department call system. 
    An act relating to North Kingstown members of the North Kingstown fire department call system. (Public Laws of 1985, ch. 217, approved June 25, 1985) 
Sec. 16. - Fiscal year established. 
    An act fixing the fiscal year of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1953, ch. 3066, approved March 27, 1953) 
Sec. 17. - Harbors and harbor lines. 
    An act conferring powers upon the North Kingstown Town Council regulating its public waters. (Public Laws of 1985, ch. 234, approved June 25, 1985) 
Sec. 18. - Harbor violations. 
    An act allowing harbor violations in North Kingstown to be heard by the division of administrative adjudication. (Public Laws of 1987, ch. 200, approved June 25, 1987) 
Sec. 19. - Highway reconstruction appropriation. 
    An act making an appropriation for the reconstruction of a highway in the Town of North Kingstown upon the condition that the town pay one-half the cost thereof. (Public Laws of 1923, ch. 520, approved April 28, 1923) 
Sec. 20. - Historic zoning. 
    An act providing for historic area zoning. (Public Laws of 1959, ch. 131, approved May 27, 1959) 
Sec. 21. - Interest charges on unpaid tax bills. 
    An act regulating interest charges on unpaid tax bills for the Town of North Kingstown. (Effective upon passage, Public Laws of 1980, ch. 137, approved May 9, 1980) 
Sec. 22. - Judge of probate court election authorized. 
    An act providing for the election of a judge of probate court for the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing the town solicitor to perform temporarily the duties of judge of probate court. (Appointment of judge by Town Council.) (Public Laws of 1965, ch. 74, approved May 6, 1965) 
Sec. 23. - Jukeboxes and mechanical amusement devices. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to enact ordinances licensing and regulating jukeboxes and mechanical amusement devices. (Public Laws of 1961, ch. 174, approved June 13, 1961) 
    An act to authorize the Town of North Kingstown to establish by ordinance the licensing fees for jukeboxes and mechanical amusement devices within the town. (Public Laws of 1988, ch. 55, approved May 23, 1988) 
Sec. 24. - Jurisdiction of district courts. 
    An act in amendment of and in addition to sections 42 and 45 of chapter 501 of the General Laws, entitled "Criminal Jurisdiction of District Courts," as amended. (Public Laws of 1942, ch. 1120, approved February 13, 1942) 
Sec. 25. - Library bonds. 
    An act providing for acquiring land and constructing, equipping and furnishing a public library by the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing the financing thereof, including the issue of not more than $1,300,000.00 bonds therefor. (Public Laws of 1972, ch. 106, approved May 1, 1972, ratified November 7, 1972) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance expansion, remodeling, renovation, additions, improvements and related equipment at the North Kingstown Free Library and to issue not more than $1,350,000 bonds and notes therefor. (Public Laws of 1997, ch. 13, approved April 11, 1997; Public Laws of 1997, ch. 205, approved July 7, 1997, ratified June 14, 1997) 
Sec. 26. - Microfilming records. 
    An act authorizing microfilming of records in the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1957, ch. 149, approved May 8, 1957, ratified June 25, 1957) 
Sec. 27. - Peddler licensing and regulation. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to enact ordinances licensing and regulating categories of peddler licenses. (Public Laws of 1984, ch. 67, approved May 2, 1984) 
Sec. 28. - Police force authorized. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to establish a permanent police force. (Public Laws of 1950, ch. 2495, approved April 26, 1950) 
Sec. 29. - Police lieutenants to issue complaints without giving surety. 
    An act allowing police lieutenants in the Town of North Kingstown to issue complaints without giving surety. (Public Laws of 1971, ch. 43, approved May 20, 1971) 
Sec. 30. - Police lieutenants to sign complaints for search warrants. 
    An act allowing North Kingstown police officers of the rank of lieutenant to sign complaint[s] for the issuance of search warrants. (Effective upon passage, Public Laws of 1980, ch. 378, approved May 19, 1980) 
Sec. 31. - Police station bonds. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds in $500,000.00 for the building and equipping of a new police station. (Public Laws of 1971, ch. 201, approved July 14, 1971, ratified July 27, 1971) 
Sec. 32. - Pojac Point Fire District incorporated. 
    An act to incorporate the Pojac Point Fire District. (Public Laws of 1950, ch. 2506, approved April 25, 1950) 
Sec. 33. - Political party caucuses. 
    An act in relation to the holding of caucuses in the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1915, ch. 1311, approved April 23, 1915) 
Sec. 34. - Probate court fees. 
    An act fixing certain fees in the probate court of the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1961, ch. 141, approved June 8, 1961, ratified September 12, 1961) 
Sec. 35. - Property grant to the United States. 
    An act to grant to the United States of America land now owned by the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations at Quonset Point in the Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island, for the express purpose of establishing and developing a naval base of the United States Navy. (Public Laws of 1939, ch. 696, approved April 5, 1939) 
Sec. 36. - Regulation of public waters. 
    An act relating to the Town of North Kingstown's regulation of public waters. (Public Laws of 1974, ch. 130, approved May 3, 1974; Public Laws of 1978, ch. 320, effective May 12, 1978, without the governor's signature) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to provide by ordinance, regulations controlling the use of personal watercraft on any or all fresh or inland waters. (Public Laws of 2002, ch. 126, effective June 14, 2002) 
Sec. 37. - Sale of Hamilton School House. 
    An act to validate the action of the Town of North Kingstown, taken at its annual financial town meeting, held March 26, 1946, in authorizing the town to sell and dispose of the Hamilton School House and such land appurtenant thereto as the town may have an interest therein. (Public Laws of 1946, ch. 1715, approved April 16, 1946) 
Sec. 38. - School bonds. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds to refund its indebtedness incurred in providing a schoolhouse. (Public Laws of 1932, ch. 1992, approved March 16, 1932) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue school bonds in [the] amount of $500,000.00 and validating certain action of said town in respect thereto. (Public Laws of 1948, ch. 2080, ratified March 30, 1949) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue school bonds in [the] amount of $350,000.00 and validating certain action of said town in respect thereto. (Public Laws of 1949, ch. 2223, ratified March 9, 1949) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds in amount not exceeding $350,000.00 for the erection of a new school building in said town. (Public Laws of 1951, ch. 2800, approved May 1, 1951, ratified November 18, 1952) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds not exceeding $2,000,000.00 to erect a new high school. (Public Laws of 1956, ch. 3623, approved February 23, 1956) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds not exceeding $1,500,000.00 for the purpose of acquiring land for public schools and the constructing of a public school building or buildings and related athletic and recreational facilities, including landscaping and building roads in connection therewith. (Public Laws of 1956, ch. 3706, approved April 16, 1956, ratified December 4, 1956) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds not exceeding $1,000,000.00 for the purpose of acquiring land for and constructing and equipping a new public elementary school building and related athletic and recreational facilities, including landscaping and building roads in connection therewith, and of constructing and equipping an addition to the North Kingstown Senior High School. (Public Laws of 1961, ch. 8, approved March 14, 1961, ratified May 4, 1961) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds in an amount not exceeding $2,900,000.00 for additions to the high school. (Public Laws of 1968, ch. 127, approved May 22, 1968, ratified June 18, 1968) 
    An act providing for acquiring land and constructing, equipping and furnishing two elementary schools and an addition to an elementary school by the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing the financing thereof, including the issue of $2,500,000.00 bonds therefor. (Public Laws of 1969, ch. 209, approved May 15, 1969, ratified June 3, 1969) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds not to exceed $2,000,000.00 for the purpose of remodeling and making extraordinary repairs to the town's public school buildings, including additional equipment. (Public Laws of 1982, ch. 172, approved May 13, 1982, ratified November 2, 1982) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds not to exceed $3,100,000.00 for the remodeling, reconstruction, and making extraordinary repairs to the town's public school buildings. (Public Laws of 1988, ch. 233, approved June 2, 1988, ratified November 8, 1988) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds not exceeding $6,500,000.00 to finance expansion, remodeling at the Stony Lane and Hamilton schools and at other North Kingstown Elementary Schools. (Public Laws of 1994, ch. 322, approved July 5, 1994; Public Laws of 1994, ch. 409, approved July 13, 1994) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance a computer network and related equipment for the North Kingstown School System and to issue $2,200,000.00 bonds and notes therefor. (Public Laws of 1996, ch. 61, effective without the governor's signature June 28, 1996, ratified November 5, 1996) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance expansion, remolding [remodeling], renovation, additions, improvements and related equipment at athletic and physical education facilities at the North Kingstown High School and Middle Schools and to issue not more than $2,300,000.00 bonds and notes therefor. (Public Laws of 1996, ch. 62, effective without the governor's signature June 28, 1996, ratified November 5, 1996) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance new construction, expansion, remolding [remodeling], demolition, renovations, additions, improvements and/or related equipment for the North Kingstown High School and the Administration Building and to issue not more than $33,000,000.00 bonds and notes therefor. (Public Laws of 1998, ch. 18, approved May 11, 1998, ratified June 13, 1998) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance fire suppression systems, heating and ventilation systems, septic systems and other repairs and renovations and/or related equipment at the Davisille, Forest Park, Fishing Cove and Wickford Elementary Schools and the Wickford Middle School and to issue not more than $9,000,000 bonds and notes therefore. (Public Law of 2004, ch. 562, approved July 7, 2004; Public Law of 2004, ch. 534, approved July 9, 2004, ratified November 3, 2004) 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance renovations, alterations, additions and other improvements and/or related equipment for the Wickford Middle and the Davisville Elementary Schools and to issue not more than $27,200,000 bonds and notes therefore. (Public Laws of 2006, Ch. 425 and 530, enacted July 6, 2006) 
    An act amending Chapters 425 and 530 of the Public Laws of 2006 and authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance renovations, alterations, additions and other improvements and/or related equipment for the Wickford Middle and the Davisville Elementary Schools and to issue not more than $20,100,000 bonds and notes therefore. (Signed by the Governor on March 1, 2007, rejected on April 24, 2007) 
Sec. 39. - Security personnel for housing for the elderly. 
    An act adding North Kingstown to the list of communities eligible to participate in the program to provide security at housing for the elderly complexes. (Public Laws of 1987, ch. 241, approved June 29, 1987) 
Sec. 40. - Shows and exhibitions. 
    An act in amendment of section 2 of chapter 362 of the General Laws, entitled "Licensing and regulation of shows and exhibitions," as amended. (Public Laws of 1954, ch. 3283, approved April 16, 1954) 
Sec. 41. - Solid waste transfer station bonds. 
    An act providing for constructing a solid waste transfer station by the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing the financing thereof, including the issue of not more than $300,000.00 bonds therefor. (Public Laws of 1981, ch. 401, ratified June 23, 1981) 
Sec. 42. - South County Hospital appropriations. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to make an annual appropriation for South County Hospital. (Public Laws of 1948, ch. 2049, approved April 26, 1948) 
    An act in amendment of sections 1 and 2 of chapter 2049 of the Public Laws, 1948, entitled "An act of authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to make an annual appropriation for South County Hospital." (Public Laws of 1952, ch. 2948, approved April 25, 1952) 
Sec. 43. - Tax assessor authorized. 
    An act providing for the appointment of one tax assessor for the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1950, ch. 2531, approved April 25, 1950) 
Sec. 44. - Tax exemption for Cocumcussoc Association. 
    An act authorizing the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation the Cocumcussoc Association. (Public Laws of 1965, ch. S-256, approved March 25, 1965) 
    An act authorizing the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation for such period as it may deem advisable the real estate and personal property to an amount not exceeding in value $8,000,000, as long as said real estate and personal property, and all funds derived from said real estate and personal property shall be used exclusively for public purposes. (2009, chs. 275 and 276, enacted without the governor's signature November 13, 2009; Ord. 09-10 adopted December 14, 2009) 
Sec. 45. - Tax exemption for the elderly. 
    An act enabling the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt certain property from taxation. Tax exemption for persons 65 years of age and older. (Public Laws of 1964, ch. 26, approved March 25, 1964) 
    An act providing for increased tax relief for the elderly citizens of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1971, ch. 188, ratified July 8, 1971) 
    An act increasing tax relief for the elderly citizens of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1973, ch. 278, approved May 15, 1973, ratified May 1, 1973) 
    An act authorizing the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to modify the levels of maximum income based upon age and income levels. (Public Laws of 1999, chs. 261 and 324, approved July 2, 1999, ratified November 2, 1999) 
    An act authorizing the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to allow for a flat tax exemption based upon age and residency. (Public Laws of 1999, chs. 262 and 396, approved July 2, 1999, ratified November 2, 1999) 
    An act enabling the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt certain property from taxation, tax exemption for persons 65 years of age and older. (Public Laws of 1964, Ch. 26, Sections 1 and 6, signed by the Governor on February 28, 2007, ratified on April 24, 2007) 
Sec. 46. - Tax exemption for The Gilbert Stuart Memorial, Inc. 
    An act authorizing the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation the Gilbert Stuart Memorial, Inc. (Public Laws of 1932, ch. 1991, approved April 7, 1932) 
    An act authorizing the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation the Gilbert Stuart Memorial, Inc. (Public Laws of 1965, Acts and Resolves, p. 1186, ch. S-251, approved March 25, 1965) 
    An act authorizing the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation for such period as it may deem advisable the real estate and personal property to an amount not exceeding in value $8,000,000, as long as said real estate and personal property, and all funds derived from said real estate and personal property shall be used exclusively for public purposes. (2009, chs. 275 and 276, enacted without the governor's signature November 13, 2009; Ord. 09-10 adopted December 14, 2009) 
Sec. 47. - Tax exemption for granges. 
    An act to empower the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from local taxation all granges within said town. (Public Laws of 1974, ch. 283, effective May 14, 1974) 
Sec. 48. - Tax exemption for South County Museum, Inc. 
    An act authorizing the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation the South County Museum, Inc. (Public Laws of 1972, Acts and Resolves, p. 217, approved April 15, 1972) 
Sec. 49. - Tax exemption for St. Bernard's Roman Catholic Church. 
    An act authorizing the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation certain real and personal property of the St. Bernard's Roman Catholic Church of Wickford, Rhode Island. (Public Laws of 1965, ch. S-250, approved March 23, 1965) 
Sec. 50. - Tax exemption for totally disabled citizens. 
    An act enabling the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt certain property from taxation. Tax exemption for citizens determined to be totally disabled by the Social Security Administration. (Public Laws of 1986, ch. 129, approved June 19, 1986, ratified November 2, 1986) 
Sec. 51. - Taxation. 
    An act relating to section 44-5-13.3 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956, § 44-5-13.3] entitled, "Levy and Assessment of Local Taxes." (Public Laws of 1996, ch. 55, effective without the governor's signature June 28, 1996) 
Sec. 52. - Town auditor election authorized. 
    An act authorizing the election of a town auditor in the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1919, ch. 1822, approved April 23, 1919) 
Sec. 53. - Trailer coach parks. 
    An act to authorize the Town of North Kingstown to enact ordinances regulating and licensing trailer coach parks. (Public Laws of 1953, ch. 3172, approved May 11, 1953) 
    An act to authorize the Town of North Kingstown to establish by ordinance the licensing fees for trailer coach parks within the town. (Public Laws of 1988, ch. 120, approved June 1, 1988) 
    An act relating to trailer coach parks in the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1989, ch. 357, approved July 10, 1989, ratified November 7, 1989) 
Sec. 54. - War memorial appropriation. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to appropriate a sum not exceeding $4,500.00 for the purpose of erecting or contributing toward the erection of a memorial to those who served in the World War. (Public Laws of 1928, ch. 1284, approved March 24, 1928) 
Sec. 55. - Waterworks system. 
    An act creating a waterworks commission for the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing said town to issue bonds in the amount of $225,000.00 for the construction and maintenance of a waterworks system. (Public Laws of 1939, ch. 786, approved April 3, 1939) 
    An act in amendment of sections 11 and 13 of chapter 786 of the Public Laws, 1939, entitled "An act creating a waterworks commission for the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing said town to issue bonds in the amount of two hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($225,000.00) for the construction and maintenance of a waterworks system." (Public Laws of 1946, ch. 1423, approved March 21, 1944) 
    An act in amendment of sections 11 and 13 of chapter 786 of the Public Laws, 1939, entitled "An act creating a waterworks commission for the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing said town to issue bonds in the amount of two hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($225,000.00) for the construction and maintenance of a waterworks system," as amended. (Public Laws of 1946, ch. 1742, approved April 24, 1946) 
    An act in amendment of sections 11 and 13 of chapter 786 of the Public Laws, 1939, entitled "An act creating a waterworks commission for the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing said town to issue bonds in the amount of two hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($225,000.00) for the construction and maintenance of a waterworks system," as amended. (Public Laws of 1951, ch. 2801, approved May 1, 1951) 
    An act in amendment of section 8 of chapter 786 of the Public Laws, 1939, entitled "An act creating a waterworks commission for the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing said town to issue bonds in the amount of two hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($225,000.00) for the construction and maintenance of a waterworks system," as amended. (Public Laws of 1952, ch. 2889, approved March 21, 1952) 
    An act in amendment of sections 11 and 13 of chapter 786 of the Public Laws, 1939, entitled "An act creating a waterworks commission for the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing said town to issue bonds in the amount of two hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($225,000.00) for the construction and maintenance of a waterworks system," as amended. (Public Laws of 1959, ch. 47, approved April 29, 1959) 
    An act providing for acquiring or developing an additional water supply system for the Town of North Kingstown and for water system improvements and extensions and authorizing the financing thereof, including the issue of not more than $300,000.00 bonds therefor. (Public Laws of 1976, ch. 119, approved May 25, 1976, ratified November 2, 1976) 
    An act providing for improvements to its water system by the Town of North Kingstown and authorizing the financing thereof, including the issue of not more than $2,000,000.00 bonds therefor. (Public Laws of 1981, ch. 112, ratified June 23, 1981) 
    An ordinance authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to issue bonds not exceeding $900,000.00 to finance a new water storage facility and related improvements and equipment. (Public Laws of 1994, Ordinance No. 94-17, adopted September 12, 1994) 
Sec. 56. - Wickford Harbor improvements. 
    An act for the improvement of Wickford Harbor. (Public Laws of 1947, ch. 1911, approved June 2, 1947) 
Sec. 57. - Zoning and building ordinances. 
    An act to authorize the Town of North Kingstown to enact zoning and building ordinances. (Public Laws of 1948, ch. 2079, approved April 30, 1948) 
    An act in amendment of Chapter 2079 of the Public Laws, 1948, entitled "An act to authorize the Town of North Kingstown to enact zoning and building ordinances." (Public Laws of 1988, ch. 481, approved June 9, 1988, ratified November 8, 1988) 
    An act relating to zoning. Sign review committee. (Public Laws of 1989, ch. 402, approved July 10, 1989, ratified November 7, 1989) 
Sec. 58. - Zoning board of review alternate members. 
    An act adding two alternate members to the zoning board of review in North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1977, ch. 181, approved May 13, 1977, ratified June 28, 1977) 
Sec. 59. - Retirement of municipal employees. 
    An act relating to the retirement of municipal employees [for the] Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 1991, chs. 406, 407, effective upon passage without the governor's signature) 
    An act relating to participation by employees of the Town of North Kingstown in the Municipal Employees Retirement System. (Public Laws of 1998, ch. 185, approved July 4, 1998) 
Sec. 60. - General powers. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to establish a municipal court in and for the Town of North Kingstown. (Public Laws of 2006, Ch. 341 and 482, enacted July 6, 2006, ratified November 7, 2006) 
    An act relating to towns and cities authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to not elect or appoint a fence viewer. (Public Laws of 2006, Ch. 117, authorized June 16, 2006) 
Sec. 61. - Septic system loan program. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to finance a community septic system loan program and to issue not more than $2,000,000 notes therefore. (Public Laws of 2006, Ch. 400 and 520, enacted July 6, 2006, ratified November 7, 2006) 
Sec. 62. - Juvenile hearing board. 
    An act authorizing the Town of North Kingstown to have the authority to create a Juvenile Hearing Board. (Public Laws of 2003, Ch. 295 and 352, authorized July 17, 2003) 
SPECIAL ACTS DISPOSITION TABLE 
    This table shows the location in Part II of the Special Acts of the General Assembly applicable to the Town of North Kingstown. 
Public Law 
Year Chapter Description Date 
Passed (P), 
Ratified (R), 
Approved (A) 
or 
Effective (E) Disposition 1895 1438 Financial town meeting  5-22-1895(P) 13 1900 734 Financial town meeting  2- 9-1900(P) 13 1903 1129 Bond issuance  4-17-1903(P) 2 1905 1280 Election of town officers  4-21-1905(A) 10 1915 1310 Election of town officers  3-18-1915(A) 10 Election of town officers  4- 8-1915(A) 10 1311 Political party caucuses  4-23-1915(A) 33 1917 1588 Financial town meeting  2-27-1917(P) 13 1919 1822 Town auditor election authorized  4-23-1919(A) 51 1923 520 Highway reconstruction appropriation  4-28-1923(A) 19 1928 1284 War memorial appropriation  3-24-1928(A) 53 1932 1991 Tax exemption for Gilbert Stuart Memorial, Inc.  4- 7-1932(A) 46 1992 School bonds  4-16-1932(A) 38 1935 2237 Building ordinances authorized  4-10-1935(A) 4 1939 696 Property grant to the United States  4- 5-1939(A) 35 786 Waterworks system  4- 3-1939(A) 54 1942 1120 Jurisdiction of district courts  2-13-1942(A) 24 1944 1422 Abandonment of portion of Ten Rod Road  3-20-1944(A) 1 1946 1423 Waterworks system  3-21-1944(A) 54 1707 Elective meetings  4-11-1946(A) 11 1715 Sale of Hamilton School House  4-16-1946(A) 37 1742 Waterworks system  4-24-1946(A) 54 1947 1911 Wickford Harbor improvements  6- 2-1947(A) 55 1948 2049 South County Hospital appropriations  4-26-1948(A) 42 2079 Zoning and building ordinances  4-30-1948(A) 56 2080 School bonds  4-30-1949(R) 38 2081 Financial town meeting  4-30-1948(A) 13 1949 2183 Financial town meeting  4- 1-1949(A) 13 2223 School bonds  4- 9-1949(R) 38 1950 2442 Deputy town treasurer  3-27-1950(A) 7 2495 Police force authorized  4-26-1950(A) 28 2506 Pojac Point Fire District incorporated  4-25-1950(A) 32 2531 Tax assessor authorized  4-25-1950(A) 43 1951 2800 School bonds  5- 1-1951(A) 38 11-18-1952(R) 2801 Waterworks system  5- 1-1951(A) 54 1952 2889 Waterworks system  3-21-1952(A) 54 2948 South County Hospital appropriations  4-25-1952(A) 42 1953 3066 Fiscal year established  3-27-1953(A) 16 3172 Trailer coach parks  5-11-1953(A) 52 1954 3260 Fire department authorized  3-17-1954(A) 14 3283 Shows and exhibitions  4-16-1954(A) 40 3315 Boundaries established  4-26-1954(A) 3 1955 3437 Charter validations and ratifications  2- 3-1955(A) 6 1956 3623 School bonds  2-23-1956(A) 38 3706 School bonds  4-16-1956(A) 38 12- 4-1956(R) 1957 149 Microfilming records  5- 8-1957(A) 26  6-25-1957(R) 1959 47 Waterworks system  4-29-1959(A) 54 131 Historic zoning  5-27-1959(A) 20 1961 8 School bonds  3-14-1961(A) 38  5-14-1961(R) 141 Probate court fees  6- 8-1961(A) 34  9-12-1961(R) 171 Financial town meeting  6- 8-1961(A) 13  9-12-1961(R) 174 Jukeboxes and mechanical amusement devices  6-13-1961(A) 23 1962 Acts 
and Resolves, 
p. 1054 Bulkhead, boat landing, etc., construction authorized  2-28-1962(A) 5 1964 26 Tax exemption for the elderly  3-25-1964(A) 45 1965 1 Charter validations and ratifications  2-19-1965(A) 6 74 Judge of probate court election authorized  5- 6-1965(A) 22 1965 S-250 Tax exemption for St. Bernard's Roman Catholic Church  3-23-1965(A) 49 1965 Acts and Resolves, p. 1186 S-251 Tax exemption for Gilbert Stuart Memorial, Inc.  4-25-1965(A) 46 1965 S-256 Tax exemption for Cocumscussoc Association  3-25-1965(A) 44 1968 127 School bonds  5-22-1968(A) 38  6-19-1968(R) 1969 209 School bonds  5-15-1969(A) 38  6- 3-1969(R) 1971 43 Police lieutenants to issue complaints without giving surety  5-20-1971(A) 29 188 Tax exemption for the elderly  7- 8-1971(R) 45 201 Police station bonds  7-14-1971(A) 31  7-27-1971(R) 1972 106 Library bonds  5- 1-1972(A) 25 11- 7-1972(R) 1972 Acts and Resolves, p. 217 Tax exemption for South County Museum, Inc.  4-15-1972(A) 48 1973 130 Earth removal  5-11-1973(A) 8 278 Tax exemption for the elderly  5- 1-1973(R) 45  5-15-1973(A) 1974 130 Regulation of public waters  5- 3-1974(A) 36 283 Tax exemption for granges  4-14-1974(E) 47 1976 119 Waterworks system  5-25-1976(A) 54 11- 2-1976(R) 1977 181 Zoning board of review alternate members  5-13-1977(A) 57  6-28-1977(R) 1978 320 Regulation of public waters  5-12-1978(E) 36 1980 47 Charter validations and ratifications  4-21-1980(A) 6 137 Interest charges on unpaid tax bills  5- 9-1980(A) 21 378 Police lieutenants to sign complaints for search warrants  5-19-1980(A) 30 1981 112 Waterworks system  6-23-1981(R) 54 401 Solid waste transfer station bonds  6-23-1981(R) 41 1982 172 School bonds  5-13-1982(A) 38 11- 2-1982(R) 1984 67 Peddler licensing and regulation  5- 2-1984(A) 27 1985 19 Charter validations and ratifications  5-21-1985(R) 6 44 Charter validations and ratifications  5-21-1985(A) 6 95 Election polls  5-30-1985(A) 9 217 Fire department call system  6-25-1985(A) 15 234 Harbors and harbor lines  6-25-1985(A) 17 1986 129 Tax exemption for totally disabled citizens  6-19-1986(A) 50 11- 2-1986(R) 1987 200 Harbor violations  6-25-1987(A) 18 241 Security personnel for housing for the elderly  6-29-1987(A) 39 393 Establishment of and opening of streets  7- 1-1987(A) 12 1988 55 Jukeboxes and mechanical amusement devices  5-23-1988(A) 23 120 Trailer coach parks  6- 1-1988(A) 52 121 Earth removal  6- 1-1988(A) 8 233 School bonds  6- 2-1988(A) 38 11- 8-1988(R) 481 Zoning and building ordinances  6- 9-1988(A) 56 11- 8-1988(R) 1989 327 Charter validations and ratifications  7- 7-1989(A) 6 332 Earth removal  7- 7-1989(A) 8 11- 7-1989(R) 357 Trailer coach parks  7-10-1989(A) 52 11- 7-1989(R) 402 Zoning and building ordinances  7-10-1989(A) 56 11- 7-1989(R) 1991 393 Charter validations and ratifications  6-20-1991(A) 6 406 Retirement of municipal employees 58 407 Retirement of municipal employees 58 1993 114 Charter validations and ratifications  7-14-1993 6 1994 409 School bonds  7-13-1994 38 1995 345 Charter validation and ratification  7- 5-1995(A) 6 1996 55 Taxation  6-28-1996(E) 50.4 61 School bonds  6-28-1996(E) 38 11- 5-1996(R) 62 School bonds  6-28-1996(E) 38 11- 5-1996(R) 1997 13 Library bonds  4-11-1997(A) 25 205 Library bonds  7- 7-1997(A) 25  6-14-1997(R) 301 Charter validation and ratification  7- 8-1997(A) 6 1998 18 School bonds  5-11-1998(A) 38  6-13-1998(R) 20 Bond issuance  5-11-1998(A) 2  6-13-1998(R) 185 Retirement of municipal employees  7- 4-1998 58 1999 261 Tax exemption for the elderly  7- 2-1999(A) 45 11- 2-1999(R) 262 Tax exemption for the elderly  7- 2-1999(A) 45 11- 2-1999(R) 272 Charter validation and ratification  7- 2-1999(A) 6 308 Charter validation and ratification  7- 2-1999(A) 6 324 Tax exemption for the elderly  7- 2-1999(A) 45 11- 2-1999(R) 396 Tax exemption for the elderly  7- 2-1999(A) 45 11- 2-1999(R) 2000 48 Tax exemption for the elderly 106 Tax exemption for the elderly 129 Bond issuance  7-13-2000(A) 11- 7-2000(R) 299 Bond issuance  7-13-2000(A) 11- 7-2000(R) 2002 126 Regulation of public water 6-14-2002(E) 2003 295, 352 Juvenile hearing board, authorized on  7-17-2003 62 2004 534 School bonds  7- 9-2004(A) 38 11- 3-2004(R) 562 School bonds  7- 7-2004(A) 38 2005 107 Charter validation and ratification  6-30-2005(A) 6 2006 117 General powers, authorized on  6-16-2006 60 118 Elections of town officers, authorized on  6-16-2006 10 341 General powers  7- 6-2006(E) 60 11- 7-2006(R) 397 Bond issuance  7- 6-2006(E) 2 11- 7-2006(R) 398 Bond issuance  7- 6-2006(E) 2 11- 7-2006(R) 399 Bond issuance  7- 6-2006(E) 2 11- 7-2006(R) 400 Septic system loan program  7- 6-2006(E) 61 11- 7-2006(R) 482 General powers  7- 6-2006(E) 60 11- 7-2006(R) 517 Bond issuance  7- 6-2006(E) 2 11- 7-2006(R) 518 Bond issuance  7- 6-2006(E) 2 11- 7-2006(R) 519 Bond issuance  7- 6-2006(E) 2 11- 7-2006(R) 520 Septic system loan program  7- 6-2006(E) 61 11- 7-2006(R) 2007 26 Tax exemptions for the elderly, Sections 1 and 6, signed by the Governor on February 28, 2007  4-24-2007(R) 45 104 Charter validation and ratification  6-30-2007(A) 6 2009 25 Bond issuance 11- 3-2009(R) 2 35 Bond issuance 11- 3-2009(R) 2 275 Tax exemptions for Cocumcussoc Association, The Gilbert Stuart Memorial, Inc. 11-13-2009(R) 44, 46 276 Tax exemptions for Cocumcussoc Association, The Gilbert Stuart Memorial, Inc. 11-13-2009(R) 44, 46 2010 263 Bond issuance 11- 2-2010(R) 2 291 Bond issuance 11- 2-2010(R) 2  
PART III - REVISED ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Revised Ordinances, Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island, 2002," and may be so cited. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 1-1-1) 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances authorized, § 1306. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of these revised ordinances and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town council: 
    Charter. Whenever the term "Charter" is used, it shall be held to mean the Charter of the Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island, as printed in part I of this volume. 
    Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Revised Ordinances, Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that the last shall be excluded if it is Sunday. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 43-3-3. 
    Council. Wherever the term "council" or "town council" is used, it shall be held to mean the town council of North Kingstown, Rhode Island. 
    County. The term "county" shall mean Washington County, Rhode Island. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 43-3-3. 
    Health officer. The term "health officer" shall mean the health officer of the town, as defined in section 815 of the Charter, or a designee of the town manager. 
    In the town and within the town. The terms "in the town" and "within the town" shall mean and include all territory over which the town has or shall acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Land. The terms "land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of incorporeal nature. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 43-3-12. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person or thing. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 43-3-4. 
    Oath. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having conscientious scruples against taking an oath. An affirmation has the same effect as an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 43-3-11. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, societies, clubs, firms, partnerships, bodies politic, foreign and domestic corporations as well as to individuals. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 43-3-6. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall include any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean that part of the street exclusively reserved for pedestrians and constructed for such purpose. 
    Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Rhode Island. 
    State law references. Whenever reference is made to "RIGL 1956," it shall mean the General Laws of Rhode Island, 1956, latest edition or supplement. Whenever reference is made to "Public Laws" or "P.L.," this shall mean the Public Laws of Rhode Island. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the town. 
    Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The term "town" shall be construed as if the words "of North Kingstown, Rhode Island" followed it. 
    Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 4-3-12. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 1-1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 1-1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Except where otherwise provided in this Code or other town ordinances, whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and cost of prosecution or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment and/or restitution in cases involving property damage or personal injury in an amount up to $2,500.00 and/or for voluntary community restitution for a town agency for not more than ten days for any one offense, unless other penalties therefor, or penalties within other limits, are specially prescribed by statute, to be prosecuted by some officer appointed for that purpose, and to be recovered to the use of the town, or of such person, and in such proportions, as the council in its ordinances and regulations shall designate. 
(b)  Each day any violation of any section of this Code or any provision of a town ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 1-1-4) 
Charter reference- Reasonable penalties authorized for violations of ordinances, § 309. 
State Law reference- Limitation of penalty for ordinance violations, RIGL 1956, § 45-6-2. 
Sec. 1-5. - Recovery of fines and penalties. 
    All fines and penalties for the violation of this Code or of any town ordinance, rule or regulation shall be recoverable by complaint, warrant, summons or other appropriate legal process, before any tribunal having jurisdiction thereof, and when recovered shall enure to the use of the town unless otherwise specially provided by general law or in the ordinance respecting the violation. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 1-1-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 12-21-1. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since such phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections would have been enacted by the town council without incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The sections appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Enacting style. The enacting style of all ordinances shall be: "The Town Council of the Town of North Kingstown hereby ordains:...." 
(b)  Publication in leaflet, pamphlet or book form. Except where otherwise provided by law, the town clerk shall cause all ordinances, including any revision of ordinances enacted, to be printed or published in leaflet, pamphlet or book form, whichever shall be the most suitable, as soon as practicable after their enactment, in sufficient quantity for the use of all the town officers and the public. Such copies of ordinances shall be kept available for distribution at the office of the town clerk. 
(c)  Publication of description and notice of hearing. The town clerk shall publish, prior to public hearing and once as soon as practical after enactment by the council, the title and a brief description of the substance of any ordinance in some newspaper of general circulation in the town or published in the town. Such notice shall give the date of the hearing of the ordinance, the title of the ordinance, and a brief description of its substance, together with notice that a copy of the ordinance may be had at the office of the town clerk. Any ordinance may, however, be published in full in such newspaper if the town council shall so direct at the time of the enactment of the ordinance. 
(d)  Contents generally; designation; numbering; record. Procedures for designation of provisions being amended, added or repealed; for numbering of ordinances; and for records to be kept by the town clerk are as follows: 
(1)  Ordinances amending this Code shall state which sections are affected thereby. When an ordinance is an addition to, amendment of or substitution for an existing section of this Code or a provision of another town ordinance, such ordinance shall so state. Ordinances repealing sections of this Code or provisions of other town ordinances shall state specifically which sections or provisions are being repealed. 
(2)  Ordinances governing subjects not contained in this Code at the time of adoption of such ordinance shall state where such ordinance is to be inserted in the Code. 
(3)  All ordinances of the town shall be numbered in the order of their adoption by a number consisting of two parts separated by a dash. The first part of such number shall state the year in which the ordinance is adopted, and the second part shall reflect the number of ordinances passed up to that time in that year (e.g., the fifth ordinance passed in 1978 would be numbered 78-5). 
(4)  The town clerk shall maintain a serial record of all ordinance actions of the town subsequent to the last ordinance contained in this Code. 
(e)  Manner of prosecuting violation; complaint without surety for costs. All violations of the sections of this Code and the provisions of other ordinances, in force or which shall be adopted, shall be prosecuted by complaint and warrant or other legal process, as the laws of this state, the sections of this Code and the provisions of town ordinances may designate, before the court of competent jurisdiction. If prosecution by complaint and warrant occurs, those appointed to make such prosecution shall be authorized to make complaint without giving surety for costs. 
(f)  Effect of repeal. The repeal of an ordinance shall not: 
(1)  Revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(2)  Affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 1-1-8-1-1-13) 
Charter reference- Ordinance powers of town council, § 309; ordinance requirements, § 310. 
State Law reference- Ordinances generally, RIGL 1956, §§ 45-6-1-45-6-8; publication of ordinances, RIGL 1956, § 45-6-7; authority of town to appoint officers to enforce ordinances, RIGL 1956, § 45-6-8. 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town, or any evidence of the town's indebtedness or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town or creating interest and sinking funds. 
(2)  Any right or franchise, permit, or other right granted by any ordinance. 
(3)  Any personnel regulations or any ordinance establishing salaries of town officers and employees or civil service rules. 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the town. 
(5)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in the town. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(7)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for improvements. 
(8)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town. 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing the official plat of the town. 
(10)  Any zoning map amendment or land use, rezoning or zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory from the town. 
(12)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations or prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones. 
(13)  Any subdivision ordinance. 
(14)  Any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes for improvements. 
(15)  Any ordinance granting specific tax exemptions. 
(16)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(17)  Any administrative ordinance. 
(b)  All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code, and such ordinances are on file in the town clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the town council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the sections of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of the Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Revised Ordinances, Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island, is hereby amended to read as follows: _______ (set out new provisions in full) _______." 
(c)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Revised Ordinances, Town of North Kingstown, Rhode Island, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation, as the case may be), to be numbered _______, which reads as follows: _______ (set out new provisions in full) _______." 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter number or other number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the town council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - References to chapters, articles, divisions and sections. 
    A reference in this Code to a chapter, article, division or section shall be to that contained in this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-13. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-14. - References and editor's notes. 
    The editor's notes, cross references and state law references appearing in this Code are merely information to assist the user of the Code and are of no legal effect. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Town council, art. III; town officers, art. IV; town manager, art. V; finance department, art. VI; other departments, art. VIII; school department, art. IX. 
Cross reference- Any administrative ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-9(17); administration of fire department, § 5-48; administration of the North Kingstown wastewater management district, § 8-151; personnel, ch. 14; administration and management of the police department, § 15-18; police officers' disability pensions, § 15-50 et seq.; taxation, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 20; purposes and administration of zoning regulations, § 21-1 et seq.; administration and enforcement of zoning chapter, § 21-10; administration of subdivision and land development regulations, app. A, art. 11.0; administrative subdivision application checklist, app. A, § 15.1. 
State Law reference- Towns and cities, RIGL 1956, title 45. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Competitive bidding required. 
    The town treasurer shall appoint a deputy purchasing agent at the school department to assist with all purchasing duties and responsibilities outlined in this section. All purchases of or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment and services made by any department shall be by competitive bidding in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Quotations. 
a.  Any department may make purchases or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment and services in an amount not greater than $5,000.00 for any one purchase. 
b.  Any department may enter into a contract for construction or projects in an amount not greater than $10,000.00 by requesting three written quotations of price. 
c.  Splitting of purchases or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment, services and/or construction projects so as not to exceed these limits is prohibited. 
(2)  Sealed bidding. No department shall make purchases or contracts for supplies, materials and services in an amount, which exceeds $5,000.00 and $10,000.00 for construction or projects without having secured sealed bids in accordance with accepted standards of procedures therefor. The governing body must award bids received under this provision. 
(3)  Exceptions to competitive bidding. The purchasing agent may recommend to the town manager and town council (or school superintendent and school committee) the competitive bidding for purchases, contracts or leases under the provisions of RIGL 1956, § 45-55-8 and this section be dispensed with if it is determined in writing that there is only one source for such supplies, materials, equipment and services or lessor thereof. A sole source provider is evident when: 
a.  The purchase, contract or lease is made directly with the manufacturer for less than wholesale list prices and it is demonstrated to be impractical, disadvantageous or unwarranted to seek competitive bids. 
b.  The purchase, contract or lease is made under the state or any state agency or governmental jurisdiction's cooperative procurement program that will allow the town to make a purchase that the jurisdiction has made available following the completion of its own internal purchasing procedures and it is demonstrated to be impractical, disadvantageous or unwarranted to seek competitive bids. 
c.  The purchasing agent determines that there is only one firm or company that is capable of providing a particular service or commodity and said service or commodity cannot be secured from any other persons or companies. All sole source determinations shall be reviewed and approved by the town manager or superintendent of schools, as may apply and shall be forwarded for approval to the town council or school committee at the next available meeting. 
(4)  Emergency purchases. The town manager or superintendent of schools may dispense with competitive bidding for purchases, contracts or leases under RIGL 1956, § 45-55-8 and the provisions of this article, if it is determined in writing that an emergency situation exists that would not have allowed sufficient time for a competitive bid process. The town manager or school superintendent should request three written emergency quotations of price, if time permits. At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body, the emergency situation shall be brought before the governing body for approval. The emergency situation must be fully documented with supporting information explaining why the emergency purchase would not have allowed for competitive bids or written quotations (if applicable). Emergency situations are classified as those where immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in work, which may vitally affect the life, health or safety of citizens or vital operations of the town or schools. Improper planning of lead time required to procure normal operating supplies or services will not be allowed under this emergency provision. 
(5)  Contract change orders. The town manager or school superintendent are authorized to approve change orders to existing contracts without governing body approval in an amount not to exceed ten percent and not greater than $15,000.00 in cumulative total of the original contract amount. If governing body approval of a change order would cause delays in work, which may vitally affect the life, health or safety of citizens, then the town manager or school superintendent may approve such change order and request ratification by the governing body after the fact with fully documented information explaining why approval of the change order was necessary. 
(6)  Preparation of bids. No outside company or affiliate shall prepare or consult in the preparation of bid specifications for purchases, contracts or leases unless that company has been contracted to do so. No outside company who has prepared or consulted in the preparation of bid specifications may be allowed to bid on said purchase, contract or lease. 
(7)  Competitive bidding for multiple departments. Whenever feasible all purchases made through one company for the same products for multiple departments shall be combined for the purpose of determining the requirement for competitive bidding. 
(8)  Contractor's insurance. All independent contractors must file certificates of insurance with the town or school department with the following minimum coverage/limits/conditions: 
a.  Commercial general liability: 
1.  Occurrence form $1,000,000.00/$1,000,000.00 (minimum coverage); 
2.  With the town named as additional insured. 
b.  Automobile liability: 
1.  $1,000,000.00; 
2.  The town named as additional insured. 
c.  Workers' compensation (if legally allowed and available): 
1.  With a waiver of subrogation against the town. 
d.  Builder's risk liability insurance. 
e.  Mold insurance. 
f.  The town manager shall have the authority to modify and/or waive the aforesaid requirements in emergency situations and/or substantial cause shown to them. 
(9)  Willful failure to comply. Willful failure by any town or school employee to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and cost of prosecution or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-1-1; Ord. No. 96-6, § 1, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 96-17, § 1, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 99-13, § 1, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-14-2008) 
Charter reference- Competitive bidding, § 1014; contracts and purchases, §§ 1015, 1016. 
State Law reference- Municipal contracts, RIGL 1956, § 45-55-1 et seq.; competitive bid requirements, RIGL 1956, § 45-55-5; sole source procurement, RIGL 1956, § 45-55-8; small purchases, RIGL 1956, § 45-55-9. 
Sec. 2-2. - Indemnification of town officials and employees. 
(a)  Statement of public policy. It is the policy and purpose of this section to facilitate the recruitment and retention of qualified and responsible citizens needed by the town in its operation and to protect such citizens from personal and financial harm in the discharge of their responsibilities on behalf of the town. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee includes all town employees. 
    Officer includes any elected or appointed town official. 
(c)  Defense in actions. The town shall have the duty to provide legal representation through the town solicitor or, in its discretion, through the selection of outside legal counsel, without charge to the person involved, to any town officer or employee in connection with any claim, suit for damages or other action against such person arising in connection with the performance of public duties by such officer or employee. However, such employee or officer may have counsel of such employee's or officer's own to assist in the defense, at the expense of the employee or officer. The officer or employee shall cooperate fully with the town in preparation and presentation of the case, and the failure to cooperate shall act as a waiver of such officer's or employee's right to indemnity under this section. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "arising in connection with the performance of public duties by such officer or employee" shall not include any action that occurs during a period of time in which the officer or employee is engaged in outside employment or the officer or employee is rendering contractual services to someone other than the town. 
(d)  Indemnification. Procedures for indemnification are as follows: 
(1)  Any officer or employee who is held liable for the payment of any claims or damages, by way of judgment or settlement, shall be entitled to indemnification by the town, where the acts resulting in such liability were done in good faith, without malice and within the course and scope of employment of the employee or officer. The town shall not be liable for settlement of any such claim or suit effected without its consent, and the town reserves the right to assert any defense and make any settlement of any claim or suit that it deems expedient. 
(2)  The indemnification provided by this section shall not be considered as other insurance for the purpose of eliminating or decreasing the coverage provided to any officer or employee under any contract of insurance, but shall be supplemental in nature and effective only if the limits of any and all other coverage under any and all contracts of insurance are exceeded. 
(3)  Whether the acts were done in good faith, without malice and within the course and scope of employment shall be determined by the town, and such determination shall be final for the purposes of the representation and indemnity of this section. However, if such representation and indemnity have been denied by the town and if, upon a trial on the merits, it is determined that the officer or employee was acting in good faith, without malice and within the course and scope of employment, the indemnification under this section shall be granted and reasonable legal expenses incurred in the defense of the claim reimbursed. 
(e)  Town's defense. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving the town's defense of governmental immunity to it or its employees or officers in any action brought against the town or such officer or employee. 
(f)  Notice. This section shall apply only when the town has been given notice of any actions brought against any employee or officer, based upon any action of such employee or officer, within the scope of the employee's or officer's authority as such. 
(g)  Conflict of interest. Nothing in this section or in any town ordinance and nothing in any agreement with the town solicitor shall be construed to require the town solicitor to provide legal services in any manner which would cause the attorney to be involved in a conflict of interest. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, §§ 1-2-1-1-2-7, 3-17-1986) 
State Law reference- Limitation on damages, RIGL 1956, § 9-31-3. 
Secs. 2-3-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Town council, art. III. 

Secs. 2-26-2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Town officers, art. IV; town manager, art. V; town solicitor, § 811; building inspector, § 816. 
Cross reference- 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-46-2-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOWN CLERK[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Town clerk, § 801; elections, § 1201 et seq. 

Sec. 2-66. - Deputy town clerk. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of deputy town clerk, who shall be appointed in the same manner as the town clerk and who, in the absence or incapacity of the town clerk or if the town clerk shall resign or die and until the appointment of a successor, shall have all the powers and duties of the town clerk as set forth in the Charter. 
(b)  The salary of the deputy town clerk shall be determined by the town manager subject to the approval of the town council. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-1-2) 
Charter reference- Town manager's responsibility to determine salaries of officers under the manager's jurisdiction, § 507(d). 
Secs. 2-67-2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS AND DIVISIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Departments not in Charter may be created by ordinance, § 402; finance department, art. VI; other departments, art. VIII; department of public works, § 812; department of public safety, § 813; department of public welfare, § 814; department of public health, § 815; department of public recreation, § 817; department of water supply, § 819; school department, art. IX. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-96-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HARBOR DIVISION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of Town of North Kingstown to appoint a harbormaster, RIGL 1956, § 46-4-6.4. 

Sec. 2-116. - Created; appointment of harbormaster. 
    There shall be within the department of public safety a harbor division, the head of which shall be the harbormaster. The harbormaster shall be appointed by the town manager and shall be responsible to the police chief for the proper performance of the duties and responsibilities of the harbor division. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-12-1; Ord. No. 18-18, § 1, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 2-117. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The harbor division shall have power and shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of all sections of this Code and provisions of town ordinances regulating the use of town wharves, docks, piers and marinas, moorings and vessels and of all sections of this Code and provisions of town ordinances regulating the speed, management and control of vessels and the size, type, location and use of all anchorages and moorings within the public waters within the town. The harbor division shall have power and shall be responsible in behalf of the town and to the extent of the town's authority for the enforcement of all federal and state laws and regulations concerning the speed, management and control of vessels, including wrecks, and shall cooperate in connection with such enforcement with such federal, state and local agencies as may, from time to time, be charged with similar or related responsibilities. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-12-2) 
Secs. 2-118-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Planning commission, §§ 802-806. 

Sec. 2-141. - Created; qualifications and duties of director. 
(a)  There shall be a department of planning and development, the head of which shall be the director of planning and development. The director shall be by education and experience a qualified professional planner and shall be appointed by the town manager. 
(b)  The director of planning and development or a qualified designee shall attend and participate in all regular public meetings of the planning commission. 
(c)  The department of planning and development shall be organized as the director of planning and development deems advisable and necessary. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-6-1) 
Sec. 2-142. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The department of planning and development shall make recommendations in writing to and consult with the planning commission in the preparation, extension and additions to a community guide plan for development of the town. The plan shall be a statement showing the general arrangement of and goals, objectives, policies and standards for land use, transportation, other public facilities and services, housing, historic preservation and environmental protection, together with a recommended program of actions deemed necessary to implement the features of the plan. The department of planning and development shall prepare and maintain an official map of the town and shall prepare and maintain such other maps, plats, charts, records and descriptive or explanatory matter pertaining to the community guide plan and the platting, zoning, subdividing or other development of land within the town. 
(b)  The department of planning and development shall serve as the secretariat to the planning commission, the zoning board of review, the platting board of review, the historic district commission, the conservation commission and such other boards and commissions as deemed appropriate by the town manager. The department of planning and development shall be responsible for the receipt, review, advertisement and recording of all matters brought before those bodies and shall file with the town clerk a complete record of the proceedings of such bodies in a manner prescribed by the town clerk. 
(c)  The department of planning and development shall be fully responsible for the detailed, technical development of a community guide plan of town territory, which may include, among other things, the following: 
(1)  The general location, character and extent of streets, bridges, parks, waterways and other public ways, grounds or spaces. 
(2)  The general location of public buildings and other public property. 
(3)  The general location and extent of public utilities, whether publicly or privately owned. 
(4)  The removal, relocation, widening, extension, narrowing, vacating, abandonment or change of use of such existing or future public ways, grounds, spaces, buildings, property or utilities. 
(5)  The general extent and location of public housing projects and slum clearance projects. 
(d)  The department of planning and development shall make recommendations in writing to and shall advise and consult with the planning commission relative to the approval or disapproval of all platting, zoning and subdivision of land within the town. 
(e)  Every proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance shall be referred to the department of planning and development, which shall prepare an advisory report to the planning commission and town council describing the planning considerations related to the proposed amendment. All applications for special exceptions and variances to the zoning ordinance shall be referred to the office of the director of planning and development for general staff review. An advisory report to the zoning board of review shall be prepared before the scheduled public hearing on such special exception or variance. All applications for building permits for commercial or industrial uses, parking lots and signs shall be referred to the office of the director of planning and development for staff review of the proposal for compliance with provisions of the zoning ordinance. All applications for variances to the subdivision regulations and all appeals from decisions of the planning commission shall be referred to the department of planning and development, which shall prepare an advisory report to the platting board of review before the scheduled public hearing on such variance. 
(f)  The department of planning and development shall prepare and submit to the town manager a capital improvement program, annual capital improvement budget and associated documents in the manner and format prescribed by the director and town manager and consistent with the community guide plan. This plan and budget shall receive the approval of the planning commission prior to its submission to the town manager. 
(g)  The department of planning and development shall have additional community development responsibilities as directed by the town manager. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-6-2) 
Secs. 2-143-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEFENSE/CIVIL PREPAREDNESS AGENCY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Civil defense, RIGL 1956, § 30-15-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-166. - Creation of agency; appointment and duties of director. 
(a)  Within the department of public safety, there shall be a division known as the defense/civil preparedness agency. The head of such agency shall be known as the defense/civil preparedness director and shall be appointed by the town manager. 
(b)  The defense/civil preparedness director shall be responsible for the administration of all matters pertaining to local defense/civil preparedness as provided in state laws. The defense/civil preparedness director shall prepare and keep updated an emergency preparedness plan which shall be submitted for review on an annual basis to the town council. The town council shall annually adopt the plan by resolution. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-3-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 30-15-12. 
Sec. 2-167. - Duties of public shelter managers. 
    In a town emergency, public shelter managers duly appointed by the defense/civil preparedness director shall open public shelters; take charge of all stocks of food, water and other supplies stored in such shelter; admit the public according to the town's shelter assignment plan; and take whatever control measures are necessary for the protection and safety of the occupants. 
Sec. 2-168. - Emergency powers of council president. 
    In a major emergency, the town manager under the direction of the council may declare that a state of emergency exists and in such event is empowered to enforce all laws, rules and regulations relating to defense/civil preparedness as contained in the emergency preparedness plan and is empowered to assume direct operational control of all civil defense forces in the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-3-3; Ord. No. 03-10, § 1, 9-8-2003) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 30-15-13. 
Sec. 2-169. - Incapacity or absence of council president during emergency. 
    If a major emergency occurs and if the president of the town council is incapacitated or absent, the senior town councilmember present shall automatically become president of the town council, pro tempore. 
Secs. 2-170-2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CODE ENFORCEMENT DEPARTMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Building inspector, § 816. 
State Law reference- State building code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-100.0 et seq. 

Sec. 2-191. - Created; organization. 
    There shall be a code enforcement department, the head of which shall be the building official. The department shall be organized as the building official deems advisable and necessary. However, if the office of local building official for the town is held by some person other than the building inspector, such local building inspector, although administratively responsible to the building official, shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the state building code within the town in accordance with the provisions thereof and the laws of the state relating thereto. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-11-1) 
Sec. 2-192. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The code enforcement department shall have power and shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the state building code and all ordinances relating to zoning, trailer or mobile home parks and soil and earth removal. The department shall administer and enforce the provisions of the Rhode Island Housing Maintenance and Occupancy Code, RIGL 1956, § 45-24.3-1 et seq., and the building official or authorized representative shall act as enforcing officer of such code. In addition, the town council or the town manager may, from time to time, direct the department to administer or enforce or assist in the administration or enforcement of other laws, codes and ordinances. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-11-2; Ord. No. 98-1, § 2, 1-12-1998) 
Secs. 2-193, 2-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEPARTMENT OF SENIOR AND HUMAN SERVICES 

Sec. 2-195. - Creation. 
    There shall be a department of senior and human services, the head of which shall be the director of senior and human services. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 2-196. - Qualifications of director. 
    The director of senior and human services shall possess such qualifications as established by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 2-197. - Appointment of director. 
    The director of senior and human services shall be appointed by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 2-198. - Powers and duties of director. 
    The director of senior and human services shall, in addition to providing a senior activities program and meal site, exercise the duties of the director of public welfare as described in section 814 of the North Kingstown Town Charter. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Secs. 2-199-2-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of committees, commissions and boards, § 415; board of assessment review, §§ 702-706; planning commission, §§ 802-806; zoning board of review, §§ 808-810; library trustees, § 818; school committee, §§ 901-911. 
Cross reference- Harbor management commission, § 7-116; personnel board, § 14-6; zoning board of review, § 21-11; planning commission, § 21-12; technical review committee, app. A, § 11.2; planning commission board of appeals, app. A, § 11.3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-216-2-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES COMMITTEE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Hazardous waste facility, local assessment committees, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.7-6. 

Sec. 2-236. - Created; purpose. 
    Pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 23-19.7-6, there is created a committee to be called the hazardous waste management facilities committee, the purpose of which shall be to negotiate siting and/or impact agreements for the siting of a hazardous waste management facility. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-13-1) 
Sec. 2-237. - Composition. 
    The entire membership of the hazardous waste management facilities committee shall be established no later than 45 days after the issuance of necessary state permits for construction or substantial alteration of a hazardous waste management facility under the provisions of the Rhode Island Hazardous Waste Management Act of 1978, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq., as amended. The committee shall consist of not less than five and not more than nine members, including the town manager; the town council president or, if the president chooses not to serve on the committee, another member of the council chosen by the council; the chair of the planning commission; and not less than two qualified electors of the town appointed by the town council president and approved by the council, at least one of whom shall be knowledgeable in environmental matters because of training or experience. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-13-2) 
Sec. 2-238. - Powers and duties. 
    The hazardous waste management facilities committee shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Establish such rules and procedures as may be necessary to carry out its function and perform its duties. 
(2)  Represent generally the best interests of the community in all negotiations with the developer of a proposed hazardous waste facility. 
(3)  Negotiate with the developer the detailed terms, provisions and conditions of a siting or impact agreement to protect the public health, the public safety and the environment of the community, as well as to promote the fiscal welfare of the community through special benefits and compensation. 
(4)  Conduct public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comments on any proposed siting or impact agreement prior to referring such agreement to the town council for ratification. 
(5)  Expend funds received from the developer, any federal or state grants and such other funds as the host community may appropriate to pay costs incurred by the committee for participation in the hazardous waste management facility siting process established by this division. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-13-3) 
Sec. 2-239. - Approval or rejection of agreements by town council. 
    Subsequent to the negotiation of a siting or impact agreement, the town council shall have the power and shall be required to approve or reject any such agreement. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-13-4) 
State Law reference- Local siting agreements, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.7-8. 
Secs. 2-240-2-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENERGY ADVISORY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-261. - Created; composition; appointment. 
    A commission to be known as the energy advisory commission is established. It shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the town council. Two members shall be experts in alternative energy and five members shall be at-large. The town council shall appoint the members of the commission to serve for two-year staggered terms. Those wishing to be considered for this commission shall submit a summary of qualifications or expertise. Four members shall be residents and qualified electors of the town. The commission shall meet at least four times per fiscal year. The dates of all meetings shall be advertised, the meetings shall be open to the public, the public shall have a right to be heard, and no business shall be transacted unless there is a quorum. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-9-1; Ord. No. 18-17, § 1, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 2-262. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the energy advisory commission is to assist the town council in determining policies, plans, and programs for more efficient energy usage, and for the utilization of alternative energy sources. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-9-2; Ord. No. 18-17, § 1, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 2-263. - Chair. 
    The energy advisory commission shall elect one of its members as chair to serve until a successor is elected. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-9-3; Ord. No. 18-17, § 1, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 2-264. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The energy advisory commission shall have the power to schedule its own meetings and adopt its own rules and order of business. 
(b)  The energy advisory commission may engage legal, technical or clerical assistance to aid in the discharge of its duties with the approval of the town council. Furthermore, the commission shall be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate ways and means to reduce utility costs on town-owned property; 
(2)  Investigate ways and means to reduce fuel costs for town-owned motor vehicles; 
(3)  Identify state, federal, and private agencies that offer energy savings programs and alternative energy programs; 
(4)  Provide a public forum for the discussion of ideas related to energy conservation and the utilization of alternative energy sources; 
(5)  Disseminate information aimed at conserving energy and utilizing alternative energy sources; 
(6)  Recommend the utilization of alternative energy sources taking into account the energy needs of the town, as well as the protection of the environment; 
(7)  Shall create an alternative energy plan; 
(8)  Shall offer recommendations to the town council regarding other matters relating to alternative energy use and assist in the drafting of alternative energy ordinances. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-9-4; Ord. No. 18-17, § 1, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 2-265. - Reports. 
    The energy advisory commission shall submit quarterly reports of its activities and recommendations to the town council and the town manager. Copies of all such reports shall also be filed with the town clerk and made available for inspection on the municipal website by the public. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-9-5; Ord. No. 18-17, § 1, 9-10-2018) 
Secs. 2-266-2-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSERVATION COMMISSION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal conservation commissions, RIGL 1956, §§ 45-35-1-45-35-4. 

Sec. 2-285. - Appointment. 
    The conservation commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the town council. The members of the commission shall be appointed for three-year staggered terms. If a vacancy occurs, interim appointments may be made by the town council to complete the unexpired term of the position. Duly incorporated and existing wildlife, conservation, sportspersons', horticultural or like organizations may present to the town council a list of qualified citizens from which list the town council must select at least three members of the commission and from which list the town council may select the remainder. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 45-35-2. 
Sec. 2-286. - Powers and duties; meetings and records. 
(a)  The duties of the conservation commission shall be to: 
(1)  Promote and develop the natural resources. 
(2)  Protect the watershed resources. 
(3)  Preserve natural aesthetic areas within the town. 
(4)  Conduct research into local land areas and coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes. 
(5)  Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its work. 
(6)  Promote and develop ordinances for the town council's consideration. 
(7)  Protect and conserve the environmental quality of the town. 
(8)  Receive, investigate and hold public hearings on all complaints pertaining to pollution of the environment and forward recommendations to the town council for its examination, evaluation and such action as the council may deem necessary. 
(b)  The commission may recommend to the town council boards or agencies a program for the better promotion, development, utilization or preservation of open areas, streams, shores, wooded areas, roadsides, swamps, marshlands and natural aesthetic areas. 
(c)  All meetings of the conservation commission shall be open to the public. Any person or such person's duly constituted representative shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before the commission before it reaches its decision. It shall keep accurate records of its meetings and actions and shall file an annual report. All records of its proceedings, resolutions and actions shall be open to public view. It shall have power to appoint, subject to approval by the town council, clerks and other employees it may from time to time require. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-2-1; Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RIGL 1956, § 45-35-1. 
Sec. 2-287. - Acquisitions; free access to public land. 
    Subject to the approval of the town council and financial town meeting, the conservation commission may receive gifts of funds, lands, buildings or other properties in the name of the town and may also acquire by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise, lease or otherwise the fee in those lands or water rights or any lease interest, development right, easement, covenant or other contractual right, including conveyances, and thereafter shall manage such funds, lands, buildings or other properties in accordance with the purposes set forth in this division. However, such power shall not be construed to deny the people access to such lands for all legitimate purposes. The town may not deny or restrict to the people free access to the lands or to any other land held by or for the town for recreation purposes. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-2-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, RIGL 1956, § 45-35-3. 
Sec. 2-288. - Officers; special meetings. 
    The conservation commission shall elect a chair and a secretary from its membership. The chair shall call such special meetings of the commission as the chair may deem necessary. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-2-3) 
Sec. 2-289. - Administrative aid from other town departments. 
    The conservation commission may require, subject to the approval of the town council, such administrative help from the various town departments as it may deem necessary. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-2-4) 
Secs. 2-290-2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Building code board of appeals, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-127.2. 

Sec. 2-311. - Composition; appointment and terms of members; alternate members. 
    The building code board of appeals shall consist of five members, each of whom shall be appointed by the town council for a term of five years. In addition, two alternate members shall be appointed by the town council as first alternate and second alternate, each of whom shall be appointed by the town council for a term of five years. In the absence of any member of the board, the first alternate shall act as a full member of the board. If a first alternate is unable to serve or if a second member is absent, the second alternate shall act as a member of the board. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-10-1; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1, 8-2-1999) 
Sec. 2-312. - Officers; adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The building code board of appeals may elect a chair and secretary from amongst its members and adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct of its business as it may see fit. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-10-2) 
Sec. 2-313. - Powers and duties. 
    The building code board of appeals shall have all the powers and duties which are set forth in RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-1.1 et seq. so as to enable it to enforce the state building code. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-10-3) 
State Law reference- State building code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-100.0 et seq. 
Secs. 2-314-2-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LEISURE SERVICES COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-321. - Created; composition; terms. 
(a)  The town council creates an 11-member committee, which shall be appointed by the town council. The committee shall further consist of at least one member of the town council and the town manager or designee, each of whom shall act in an ex officio capacity. The committee shall be known as the North Kingstown Leisure Services Advisory Committee. 
(b)  The members of the committee shall be appointed for three-year staggered terms. 
(Ord. No. 88-18, § 2, 9-26-1988; Ord. No. 96-14, § 1, 7-8-1996) 
Sec. 2-322. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the leisure services advisory committee shall be to act in an advisory capacity to the town manager and recreation director for the development, enhancement and operation of recreation and leisure services within the town, including but not limited to the golf course, Allen Harbor, and all recreational and park facilities either owned or operated by the town. 
(Ord. No. 88-18, § 2, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 2-323. - Chair. 
    The leisure services advisory committee shall elect one of its members as chair to serve until a successor is elected. 
(Ord. No. 88-18, § 2, 9-26-1988) 
Sec. 2-324. - Meetings; annual report. 
    The leisure services advisory committee shall hold at least four meetings per year, and an annual report shall be submitted to the town manager and town council for review. 
(Ord. No. 88-18, § 2, 9-26-1988) 
Secs. 2-325-2-329. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ASSET MANAGEMENT COMMISSION[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Charter reference- Asset management commission, § 820. 

Sec. 2-330. - Created; appointment; composition. 
(a)  The town council creates a nine-member asset management commission, which shall be appointed by the town council. In addition to the representatives named in subsection (c) of this section, the commission shall consist of the town manager and superintendent of schools, each of whom shall act in an ex officio capacity. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed for three-year staggered terms. 
(c)  The asset management commission shall consist of the following nine representatives, all of whom shall be residents of the town: 
(1)  A school representative who is neither an elected official nor a school department employee presented to the town council by the school committee. 
(2)  A town council representative who is not an elected official. 
(3)  A financial representative. 
(4)  A technical representative. 
(5)  Five at-large representatives. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, § 1, 3-10-1997; Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 6-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-17, § 1, 12-12-2005; Ord. No. 05-17, § 1, 12-12-2005; Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 2-9-2009; Ord. No. 13-05, § 1, 7-1-2013; Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 2-331. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the asset management commission shall be to review all capital improvement and asset protection requests related to town and school facilities, establish their priorities, determine funding levels and formulate a comprehensive capital improvement program and an asset protection plan to be presented to the town council. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, § 1, 3-10-1997; Ord. No. 05-11, § 2, 6-13-05) 
Sec. 2-332. - Duties. 
    The asset management commission shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Projecting major expenditures needed to maintain existing municipal and school facilities. 
(2)  Projecting new public facilities and reviewing the five-year, ten-year, and twenty-year capital improvement and asset protection programs. 
(3)  Developing fiscal programs, generating innovative financing options and seeking creative alternative funding for the capital improvement projects and asset protection projects for both town and school facilities. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, § 1, 3-10-1997; Ord. No. 05-11, § 3, 6-13-05) 
Sec. 2-333. - Annual report. 
    The asset management commission shall from time to time meet with the town manager or his/her designee(s) and the superintendent of schools or his/her designee(s) to ascertain and review all project submittals. The commission shall submit an annual report to the town council and the school committee in the month of January. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, § 1, 3-10-1997; Ord. No. 05-11, § 4, 6-13-05) 
Secs. 2-334-2-339. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - HOUSING BOARD OF REVIEW[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Housing board of review, RIGL 1956, §§ 45-24.2-5, 45-24.3-16. 

Sec. 2-340. - Membership. 
    The members of the building code board of appeals are appointed members of the housing board of review. The respective terms of office on the housing board of review shall coincide with the respective terms of office on the building code board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 1-12-1998) 
State Law reference- Appointment, powers and duties, etc., RIGL 1956, §§ 45-24.2-5, 45-24.3-16(c). 
Sec. 2-341. - Officers; adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The housing board of review may elect a chair and secretary from amongst its members and adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct of its business as it may see fit. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 1-12-1998) 
Sec. 2-342. - Powers and duties. 
    The housing board of review shall have all the powers and duties of a housing board of review pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 45-24.3-16. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 1-12-1998) 
Secs. 2-343-2-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - LIBRARY[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Charter reference- Library trustees, § 818. 
State Law reference- Trustees of free town libraries, RIGL 1956, §§ 29-4-5, 29-4-6. 

Sec. 2-371. - Trustees of free libraries. 
    The board of trustees of any free library in the town, in accordance with section 818 of the Charter, shall consist of seven members appointed by the town council for a period of three years. Each trustee so appointed shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-1-3) 
State Law reference- Free public libraries, RIGL 1956, § 29-4-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-372-2-376. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - JUVENILE HEARING BOARD 

Sec. 2-377. - Establishment. 
    Pursuant to Rhode Island General Laws, a juvenile hearing board is hereby established in the town for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare. The juvenile hearing board is authorized to hear all cases referred to it by the youth services bureau of the town police department or the chief of police of the town, or his/her designee, with respect to persons under the age of 18 who are charged with violating the criminal laws and status offenses of the state or of the town. 
    Said board shall be referred to as the North Kingstown Juvenile Hearing Board. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 9-29-2003) 
Sec. 2-378. - Membership. 
(a)  The membership of the juvenile hearing board (the board) shall consist of five members who shall be qualified electors of the town. In addition, there may be two auxiliary members who serve as active members in the event a regular member or members are unable to serve at any hearing or proceeding. 
(b)  The members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the town council of the town. 
(c)  The term of the appointment shall be for three years, except that the initial appoints may be for a term of less than three years in order to stagger the appointments. 
(d)  Appointed members of the board shall be eligible to be reappointed, and upon expiration of their term shall continue to serve until another be appointed in their place or until reappointed. 
(e)  The board members should be representative of the community at large. Members should have a diverse background in occupational, life and family experience as well as in terms of their formal education. At a minimum, the board should include as members; one person with professional educational experience, one person with professional medical or mental health field experience, and one person with professional social work experience. 
(f)  Members of the board are required to attend and successfully complete a training program (approximately 60 hours in duration) organized by the youth services bureau. 
(g)  One board member will be so designated by the appointing authority as the "chairperson". 
(h)  Board members are required to sign and strictly adhere to a confidentiality agreement which protects the rights and privacy of juveniles and all other participants involved in board matters. 
(i)  Board members are required to consent to a criminal history and background check to be conducted by the town police department. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 9-29-2003) 
Sec. 2-379. - Referral to juvenile hearing board. 
(a)  Persons who are under the age of 18 years may be referred to the board, which shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the Rhode Island Family Court, provided, however, that no referral shall be made in the case of any person: 
(1)  Who shall have been twice previously referred to the board; or 
(2)  Who shall have been once previously referred to the board and refused or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or to have made the restitution recommended; or 
(3)  Shall at the time of the commission of the offense be within the custody and control of the Rhode Island Family Court, with the exception of guardianship proceedings. 
(b)  No referral to the board shall be made until such person, together with his/her legal guardian or legal representative shall have in writing, waived such person's right to an initial hearing in the family court with respect to the offense charged, has admitted to the offense and has agreed to abide by the decision of the board. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 9-29-2003) 
Sec. 2-380. - Duties of the board. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to hear all cases referred to it by the youth services bureau of the town police department, the chief of police of the town police department or his/her designee. 
(b)  Board members are required to deliberate all proceedings in a fair and objective manner, with due regard for the rehabilitation and future development of the juvenile charged as well as for the rights of victims and others effected by the offense. 
(c)  The board is authorized to impose and order sanctions other than incarceration. Sanctions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Fines up to a maximum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense charged; 
(2)  Community service; 
(3)  Restitution for any injuries or property damage, where appropriate, resulting from the commission of the offense; 
(4)  Imposition of a reasonable curfew; 
(5)  Denial of driving privileges for a period of up to two (2) years; 
(6)  Appropriate counseling and/or approved diversion programs. 
In any such proceedings, the board shall, prior to the imposition of any sanctions, request the juvenile offender and his/her parents, legal guardians and legal representative to agree to the sanctions imposed, the amount of restitution ordered and the manner of making same. In ordering restitution, the board shall consider the juvenile offender's ability to pay and the amount of actual damages caused as a result of the commission of the offenses. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 9-29-2003) 
Sec. 2-381. - Quorum-Rules. 
(a)  A majority of the board's regular members shall constitute a quorum and a majority of the members present shall be required to take any action. 
(b)  The board shall have power from time to time to adopt and publish any and all rules and regulations necessary to carry out its functions under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The board shall give notice of the date, time and place (town or school department building with limited access) of its meetings to the youth services bureau of the town police department, the chief of police, or his/her designee, the juvenile offender and his/her parents, legal guardians or legal representative not less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(d)  Board proceedings shall be closed to the public and the provisions of RIGL tit. 46, ch. 42, shall not apply to such proceedings. All records of proceedings, including records concerning the arrest, apprehension or detention of any juvenile offender shall be withheld from public inspection but such records shall be available to the parent, legal guardian or legal representative of the juvenile for inspection. 
(e)  Juvenile offenders may be represented by legal counsel at all board proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 9-29-2003) 
Secs. 2-382-2-387. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - NORTH KINGSTOWN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-388. - Purpose. 
    The town council (herein "council") recognizes the need to develop a strong and vibrant economy in North Kingstown that enhances the residents' income, quality of life, and sense of place, and protects the environment. Economic development can be achieved mainly through private and public investment, expanded employment, improved business climate, and the resulting increased fiscal revenue. The council acknowledges that economic development is primarily driven by the private sector, but the town government can play key enabling and facilitating roles in collaboration with non-governmental organizations and others and with community participation. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 9-29-2003; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 8-3-2015) 
Sec. 2-389. - Created; appointment; composition. 
(a)  The council hereby creates the North Kingstown Economic Development Advisory Board to serve in an advisory capacity to the council. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed for three-year staggered terms. 
(c)  The board shall consist of seven regular members and two alternate members appointed by the council, each of whom shall serve a three-year term. A majority of the members of the board shall be qualified electors or residents of the town. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 9-29-2003; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 2-390. - Duties. 
    The town economic development advisory board shall advise the council on the following matters: 
(1)  Monitor and advise the council on progress of economic development in North Kingstown; 
(2)  Advise the council on issues of economic development policy and implementation, at the council's request or the board's own initiative; 
(3)  Collaborate with the town management on matters of economic development; 
(4)  Engage the business community and the public at large in the town's economic development policies and initiatives and in the implementation of community-wide economic development efforts; and 
(5)  Advise the council on other matters that the council may, from time to time, refer to the board. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 9-29-2003; Ord. No. 15-10, § 2, 8-3-2015) 
Secs. 2-391-2-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - NORTH KINGSTOWN VETERANS DAY AND MEMORIAL DAY PARADES COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-396. - Establishment. 
    The council hereby creates the North Kingstown Veterans Day and Memorial Day Parades Committee. 
(Ord. 04-02, § 1, 3-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-397. - Purpose. 
    The committee is established to promote, direct and supervise the town's annual Veterans Day and Memorial Day parades. 
(Ord. 04-02, § 1, 3-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-398. - Appointment. 
    The committee shall consist of ten members, appointed by the council, each of whom shall serve a three-year staggered term. The committee shall further consist of at least one member of the town council and the town manager, or designee, each of whom shall act in an ex-officio capacity. 
(Ord. 04-02, § 1, 3-8-2004) 
Secs. 2-399, 2-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - AUDIT COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-401. - Establishment; appointment; composition; charge. 
(a)  The town council hereby creates a five-member audit committee to: 
(1)  Oversee the work of the independent auditors; and 
(2)  Assist the town council and school committee in their oversight of: 
a.  The integrity of the town's financial statements and the town's system of internal controls and compliance with the town's code of ethics and whistleblower policy; 
b.  The town's compliance with legal and regulatory requirements; and 
c.  The independent auditor's qualifications and independence. 
(b)  The audit committee shall be made up of citizens of the town who are appointed for four-year staggered terms. Two of the initial members shall be appointed to two-year terms in order to stagger the appointments. Members of the committee shall be versed in reading and understanding financial statements and/or general business knowledge. In addition, at least two members of the committee shall have accounting backgrounds, one of whom shall serve as the chair of the committee. Furthermore, one member, who shall not be an elected official nor a town employee, shall be selected from a list of three names presented to the town council by the school committee. No member of the audit committee shall sit on any other body or committee of the town or school unless the town council affirmatively determines that such services will not impair such member's effectiveness. The town's finance director shall serve as a member ex-officio and provide administrative support to the audit committee. 
(c)  The ex-officio member shall have no power to second a motion or vote on matters brought before the committee. 
(d)  In the event a sitting chairperson's term expires or cannot serve for any reason, the ex-officio member shall act as chairperson pro tem of the audit committee until a new chairperson is elected by a majority of the appointed members of the committee at its next meeting at which a quorum is present. 
(e)  A chairperson shall be elected by majority vote of the appointed members of the audit committee to serve for a two-year term limited to two consecutive terms. 
(f)  The audit committee shall review their charge annually, reassess the adequacy of this charge and recommend any proposed changes to the town council. The committee shall consider changes that are necessary as a result of new laws, policies, regulations, or accounting and auditing standards. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § 1, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 10-15, § 1, 9-15-2010) 
Sec. 2-402. - Meetings. 
    The audit committee shall hold at least six regularly scheduled meetings per year, and at additional times when necessary. These meetings may be combined with regularly scheduled meetings, or may be held more frequently as circumstances may require. The audit committee may ask members of management or others to attend the meetings and provide pertinent information as necessary. The audit committee shall meet, at least annually, with each of the following: the town council, the school committee and the independent auditors to discuss results of examinations, or discuss any matters that the committee or any of these persons or firms believes should be discussed. 
    The town manager and superintendent of schools shall cooperate fully and support the audit committee in its role. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § 1, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 10-15, § 2, 9-15-2010) 
Sec. 2-403. - Duties. 
(a)  The function of the committee is oversight and follow-up on previous control deficiency recommendations. The committee has direct responsibility for the oversight of the independent auditor, including the resolution of disagreements between the town manager, superintendent of schools, and the auditor regarding financial reporting. Each member of the committee shall be entitled to rely on: 
(1)  Their reasonable assessment of the credibility of information provided by those persons and organizations within and outside the town that it receives information from; and 
(2)  The accuracy of the financial and other information provided to the committee by such persons or organizations absent actual knowledge to the contrary (which shall be promptly reported to the council). 
While the committee has the responsibilities and powers set forth in this ordinance, it is not the duty of the committee to plan or conduct audits or to determine that the town's financial statements are complete and accurate and are in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). This is the responsibility of management and the independent auditor. 
(b)  The audit committee shall review with the town manager and the school superintendent the policies and procedures with respect to both the town and North Kingstown school department. 
(c)  The audit committee shall consider, with management, the rationale for employing audit firms other than the principal independent auditors for services that the town or the independent auditor determine would not be appropriate for the principal independent auditor to perform. The audit committee shall recommend to the town council, the hiring of professional consultants as necessary, to carry out their responsibilities. 
(d)  The audit committee shall inquire of management and the independent auditors about significant risks or exposures facing the town and North Kingstown school department; assess the steps management has taken or proposes to take to minimize such risks to the town and North Kingstown school department; and periodically review compliance with such steps. 
(e)  The audit committee shall receive a review from the independent auditor, the controller/finance director of the town and North Kingstown school department, of the overall scope and plans for audits. 
(f)  The audit committee shall inquire of the town manager and finance director regarding the fiscal health of the town as well as the financial status of the town and North Kingstown school department in relation to its adopted budget. 
(g)  The audit committee shall receive, at least annually, from the school superintendent and town manager a report, of all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design and operation of internal controls and their action plan to remedy. 
(h)  The audit committee shall review the comprehensive annual financial report with management and the independent auditors. 
(i)  The audit committee shall have no investigatory authority, may not subpoena witnesses or compel the production of documents except as may be required under the provisions of subsections 14-25(e)(5) and (e)(9). 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § 1, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 10-15, § 3, 9-15-2010) 
Sec. 2-404. - Other possible duties. 
    The audit committee shall perform such other duties as the town council shall deem appropriate, such as review the town's whistleblower policy, as contained in the personnel rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § 1, 10-23-2006) 
Secs. 2-405-2-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 2-500. - Established. 
    Pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 45-2-55, there is established a municipal court in the town. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-501. - Appointment, term and qualifications of judge of the municipal court. 
(a)  The court shall be composed of one judge appointed by the town council. The judge shall serve until his successor shall be duly appointed. 
(b)  Except for the initial appointment, the term of the appointment for the judge shall be concurrent with the term of the town council. The initial term of appointment shall begin when the town council appoints the first judge, and the appointment shall be for a term to run concurrent with the term of the town council making the appointment. 
(c)  The judge shall be a lawyer admitted to practice before the state supreme court, in good standing, and shall have not less than five years' experience in the active practice of law in the state. 
(d)  The judge, his/her law partner or partners, legal associates, or any lawyer in his/her law office shall not be permitted to appear before any court, board or agency within the town, including but not limited to the town council, zoning board of review, planning commission, school committee, probate court, district court or superior court wherein the matter to be before said court, board or agency concerns a local matter or case. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-502. - Witnesses; attendance; subpoenas. 
    The court shall have the power to issue writs or summonses for witnesses, and compel their attendance, and to punish for contempt by fine or imprisonment. The court may also issue writs of habeas corpus and testificandum, upon continuance of any complaint or proceeding before it, may take recognizance to the state, with sureties in such sum as such court shall deem proper, with the condition to appear before such court and make further answer to such complaint or proceeding, and in the meantime to keep the peace, and, in want thereof, may commit the same to the state adult correctional institutions until such recognizance shall be given, or the parties lawfully discharged therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-503. - Municipal court clerk; appointment and duties. 
(a)  The town council shall appoint a clerk of such court. 
(b)  The term of the appointment for the clerk shall be concurrent with the term of office of the town council. The initial term of appointment shall begin when the town council appoints the first clerk, and the appointment shall be for a term to run concurrent with the term of the town council making the appointment. 
(c)  The clerk of court shall keep a regular docket of all cases disposed of shall record the judgments, orders and sentences of such court; and shall furnish certified copies, when required, for which copies the clerk shall charge the same fees as are by law allowed to clerks of the superior court. The clerk shall keep the office open to the public during such hours as the court shall determine and shall also serve as magistrate and bail commissioner setting bail for defendant until the court is in session. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the police department or the town administration from providing the secretarial and administrative assistance necessary for the court to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the town clerk from also becoming the municipal court clerk. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-504. - Acting judge/acting clerk. 
(a)  In cases of sickness, absence, or other disability or ineligibility of the municipal court judge or clerk which shall be less than 30 days, the judge may appoint an acting judge, and the clerk may appoint an acting clerk, at the same compensation, or at such salary as the town council may determine, for the term of such sickness, absence, disability, or ineligibility of the judge or clerk. An acting municipal court judge or acting municipal court clerk shall perform all duties of the municipal court judge or municipal court clerk, respectively. 
(b)  In case of a prolonged sickness, absence, or other disability or ineligibility of the municipal court judge or the municipal court clerk that shall be in excess of 30 days, the town council may, by resolution, appoint an acting municipal court judge or an acting municipal court clerk, respectively, for the term of such sickness, absence, disability, or ineligibility of the municipal court judge or municipal court clerk, respectively, at the same compensation, or at such salary as the town council may determine. An acting municipal court judge or acting municipal court clerk shall perform all duties of the municipal court judge or municipal court clerk, respectively, and in the performance of those duties, shall have the same effect as if performed by the municipal court judge or municipal court clerk, respectively. 
(c)  The acting municipal court judge must meet the same qualifications and shall perform all duties of the municipal court judge and in the performance of said duties shall have the same effects as if performed by the municipal court judge. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-505. - Seal; oaths. 
(a)  Seal, oaths. The municipal court shall have a seal which shall contain such words and device as the court shall adopt. 
(b)  The judge and the municipal court clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-506. - Sessions; time; place. 
    The municipal court shall be considered to be in session at all times, and at such place or places in the town as the said court, or judge holding same, shall appoint. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-507. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The town council hereby confers on the municipal court original jurisdiction to hear and determine causes involving violations of: 
(1)  Any ordinance of the town; 
(2)  Minimum housing ordinances, including any violation of RIGL 1956, § 45-24.3-1 et seq., the state housing, maintenance and occupancy code; 
(3)  Jurisdiction conferred by a vote of the town council for traffic and parking; 
(4)  Any other jurisdiction conferred by state law. 
(b)  If authorized by the town council pursuant to RIGL 45-2-55 in all cases involving traffic and parking violations, the court shall operate in a manner consistent with RIGL Title 31, Chapter 41.1, and with the procedures of the traffic tribunal of the district court. In all other cases, the court shall operate under the state district court rules of civil or criminal procedure, as amended; provided however, that a case may be charged either by complaint, or by summons or citation issued by the authorized officer or official of the town. 
(c)  Any defendant found guilty of any offense, excluding violations of such minimum housing ordinances, or RIGL 1956, § 45-24.3-1 et seq., may within seven days of such conviction, file an appeal from such conviction to the superior court and be entitled in the latter court to a trial de novo; and provided further however, that any defendant found guilty of any violation of a minimum housing ordinance, or of RIGL 1956, §45-24.3-1 et seq. within seven days of such conviction, file an appeal from such conviction to the fourth division of the district court and be entitled to a trial de novo in accordance with RIGL 1956, §§ 8-8-3(a)(4) and 8-8-3.2. 
(d)  With respect to violations of municipal ordinances dealing with minimum housing, or RIGL 1956, § 45-24.3-1 et seq., the town council hereby confers upon the municipal court, in furtherance of the aforementioned jurisdiction, the power to proceed according to equity: 
(1)  To restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate or correct a violation; 
(2)  To order the repair, vacating or demolition of any dwelling existing in violation; or 
(3)  To otherwise compel compliance with all provisions of such ordinances and statutes. 
(e)  Any defendant found guilty of an offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 8-18-3 may file an appeal as set forth in RIGL 1956, §§ 8-18-9 and 31-43-4. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-508. - Fines; penalties; imprisonment. 
    Such municipal court may impose a sentence not to exceed 30 days in jail and impose a fine not in excess of $500.00, or both, and shall be empowered to punish persons for contempt. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-509. - Complaints; warrants; writs. 
    It shall be lawful for the judge of such court to prescribe and vary the form of all complaints, warrants, writs, or other process as to make the same consistent with the organization, style, and jurisdiction of such court; and such complaints, warrants, writs, and other process shall have the same effect, validity and extent, and be served, obeyed, enforced and returned, in the same manner and by the same officers, as if issued from the district courts; and they may be served by any constables of the town who are authorized to serve process in civil or criminal cases. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-510. - Costs. 
(a)  In all cases involving offenses over which the municipal court has jurisdiction pursuant to RIGL 8-18-3, court costs shall be assessed as set forth in RIGL 8-18-4. In all other cases, costs shall be assessed as set forth in RIGL 34-41.1-4 for each offense charged. The payment of such costs shall be a part of the sentence. 
(b)  All payments shall be deposited in the municipal court enterprise fund of the town. 
(c)  The costs incurred by the town in securing a police officer's presence, upon request of the defendant, shall be charged to the defendant in the event he/she should fail to appear. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 08-34, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 2-511. - Compensation of municipal court judge and municipal court clerk. 
    Compensation of the judge of the municipal court, the municipal court clerk, the court administrators and clerical assistants shall be established by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-512. - Municipal court bailiff. 
(a)  The town council may appoint a bailiff of said court. 
(b)  The term of appointment for bailiff shall be concurrent with the term of office of the town council. The initial term of appointment shall begin when the town council appoints the first bailiff and the appointment shall be for a term to run concurrent with the term of the town council making the appointment. 
(c)  The bailiff of the court shall maintain order in the court room, assist the clerk in the administration of the court's docket and with the disposition of cases. 
(d)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the police department or the town administration from providing the assistance necessary to keep order in the court. 
(e)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the town bailiff from also serving as the town sergeant. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Secs. 2-513-2-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FLEET RESERVE 

Sec. 2-600. - Purpose. 
    To establish a policy for funding of replacement of all vehicles and motorized equipment used in the town via an internal service fund entitled the fleet reserve fund. 
(Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 2-601. - Definitions. 
    Fleet reserve fund means an internal service fund (Fund #720) used to purchase vehicles and other motorized capital equipment valued over $5,000.00 used in the town (motorized equipment under $5,000.00 is budgeted and funded from the individual function budgets). Funds are transferred from individual functions that have town vehicles. 
    Internal service fund means a fiscal and accounting entity the main purpose of which is to identify costs that are related to providing of those goods and services within a government. It is used to centralize the providing of those goods and services within a government and it provides a useful means of accounting for such centralized intergovernmental activities. 
(Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 2-602. - Policy. 
(a)  One goal of the town council and management staff of the town is to provide the highest level of service at the least cost to the taxpayer. For replacement vehicles and motorized equipment, the fleet reserve fund is the means to achieve this goal. By anticipating the future replacement cost of the vehicles/equipment and ensuring funds are on hand to replace the vehicles/equipment at the end of its life cycle, large budget variances will be eliminated bringing more stability, predictability and control to each department's function operating budget. 
(b)  All town vehicles and motorized equipment over $5,000.00 will be purchased through the fleet reserve fund. Departments with vehicles and motorized equipment will be charged an amount each year based on the future replacement value of the vehicles and equipment to finance the fund. 
(c)  The public works director will recommend to the town manager which vehicles should be purchased through the fleet reserve fund. He/she will reassign vehicles in the best interest of the town and with the town manager's approval. 
(Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 4-30-2012) 
Sec. 2-603. - Procedures. 
(a)  Vehicle purchase. 
(1)  Department heads who desire to purchase vehicles or motorized equipment during the upcoming budget will submit a list to the public works director no later than September 1. Both additions to the fleet and replacements will be considered. The list will identify the equipment or vehicle to be replaced or added, provide justification for the replacement or addition, and specify the desired new vehicle or equipment. 
(2)  The public works director will submit a prioritized list of equipment recommended for purchase to the town manager no later than October 1. He will also recommend reassignments and deletions from the fleet at this time. These lists will be based on maintenance and repair history, utilization, and departmental justification. 
(3)  The town manager will approve the list of vehicles and equipment to be purchased in accordance with guidance provided by the public works department of the town. 
(b)  Fund management. 
(1)  Each function that uses a town vehicle or equipment that has a replacement value over $5,000.00 will be assessed a unit value charge. This charge is based on the projected replacement cost of the vehicle/equipment and straight line depreciated over the life cycle of the vehicle/equipment. The public works director will provide the finance director annual charges for each function no later than January 1 for the ensuing fiscal year. The finance director will incorporate these charges into the appropriate department's function budget proposal request. 
(2)  The funds budgeted for each function plus any interest earned will be added to the fund. The fleet reserve fund will be used to purchase all vehicles and motorized equipment over $5,000.00 for the town. 
(3)  All questions concerning the purchase of vehicles and motorized equipment over $5,000.00 should be addressed to the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 4-30-2012) 
Secs. 2-604-2-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROCEDURES IN CONNECTION WITH THE ISSUANCE OF TAX-EXEMPT OBLIGATIONS AND OTHER MATTERS RELATING THERETO 

Sec. 2-700. - Findings and determinations. 
    The town council hereby finds and determines: 
(1)  The town from time to time issues tax-exempt bonds and notes and enters into tax-exempt leases to fund various capital needs. 
(2)  There are certain post-closing Internal Revenue Service requirements associated with obligations the interest on which is exempt from federal income taxation. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "code") and the regulations promulgated thereunder from time to time (the "regulations") impose certain requirements on tax-exempt obligations, including, but not limited to, restrictions on the use of bond proceeds and bond and lease financed property, arbitrage yield restrictions, and the arbitrage rebate requirement. These requirements are generally applicable throughout the period that the bonds or lease remain outstanding. The September 2011 revision to the Form 8038-G, Information Return for Tax Exempt Governmental Obligations ("Form 8038-G") requires every issuer such as the town to represent whether it has established written procedures to: 
a.  Monitor the requirements of section 148 of the code, including, but not limited to, the arbitrage rebate and arbitrage yield restriction requirements; and 
b.  Ensure that any nonqualified bonds (within the meaning of section 1.148-12(j) of the regulations) are remediated in accordance with the code and the regulations. 
(3)  Bond counsel has recommended that the town adopt written procedures in order to ensure the town's compliance with the Internal Revenue Service's post-issuance requirements relative to such tax exempt bonds, notes and leases. In addition, bond counsel has advised that formal adoption of additional procedures are recommended in order for the town to document compliance with the applicable federal tax requirements. Post-issuance tax compliance actions pursuant to these procedures are intended to assist the town in documenting compliance with the applicable federal tax requirements. Post-issuance tax compliance begins with the debt issuance process itself and includes a continuing focus on investments of bond proceeds and use of bond-financed property. Post-issuance tax compliance requires identifying the responsible people and the applicable procedures. 
(4)  The council believes it is in the best interest of the town to adopt such written procedures, including, but not limited to, a general prohibition by any officer or employee of the town or the school department of the sale or lease of any tax-exempt lease financed equipment or bond-financed facility, or the granting of a license or management contract, or any other arrangement allowing private use of a such equipment or bond financed facility, without compliance with certain procedures which are set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-30-2012) 
Sec. 2-701. - Adoption of written procedures. 
    The following procedures are hereby adopted and approved and all town departments and other instrumentalities, including the school department, shall comply therewith: 
(1)  References herein to a "bond" or to "bonds" shall apply to all forms of tax-exempt obligations including, but not limited to, lease/purchase agreements. 
(2)  Procedures. The director of finance of the town (hereinafter referred to as the "town representative") is designated as being responsible for post-issuance tax compliance. The town representative may delegate to its staff or bond counsel or contract with independent contractors (such as the town's financial advisor or an arbitrage/rebate consultant or a consulting engineer) responsibility for different aspects of post-issuance tax compliance. For example, coordinating and documenting the expenditure of bond proceeds on projects may be delegated to the consulting engineer. However, the town representative will be ultimately responsible for implementing the procedures described herein. The town recognizes that it has issued a substantial amount of tax-exempt debt prior to the adoption of these procedures. With respect to this prior issued debt, the town representative will take reasonable steps to collect and maintain appropriate documentation of compliance with these procedures. However, the town recognizes that such documentation may not exist with respect to some of the items enumerated in these procedures. 
(3)  Issuance. The town representative will: 
a.  Confirm with bond counsel the filing of the Form 8038 or Form 8038-G (or applicable successor form) with the Internal Revenue Service. Filing of the applicable Form 8038 shall be overseen by bond counsel within the required period under the code and regulations. 
b.  Obtain and store the transcript of proceedings prepared by bond counsel (which typically includes the applicable Form 8038 and the tax certificate containing the town's expectations as of the date of issuance of the bond issue). 
(4)  Recordkeeping. The town representative will: 
a.  Establish a plan for keeping relevant books and records as to the investment and the expenditure of bond proceeds. 
b.  Keep accurate records including: 
1.  Basic records relating to the bond transactions (including the bond ordinances, loan agreements, and bond counsel opinion; see transcript of proceedings above); 
2.  Documentation evidencing the expenditure of bond proceeds; 
3.  Documentation evidencing use of bond-financed property by public and private sources (i.e., copies of management contracts, leases, rental agreements, etc.); 
4.  Documentation evidencing all sources of payment or security for the bonds; and 
5.  Documentation pertaining to any investment of bond proceeds (including the purchase and sale of securities, SLGS subscriptions, yield calculations for each class of investments, actual investment income received from the investment of proceeds, guaranteed investment contracts, and rebate calculations). 
c.  Keep all records in a manner that ensures their complete access to the IRS so long as they are material. While this is typically accomplished through the maintenance of hard copies, records may be kept in an electronic format if certain requirements are satisfied, in accordance with the guidelines in revenue procedure 97-22, 1997-1 C.B. 652. 
d.  Keep the relevant records for each issue of bonds for as long as such issue of bonds is outstanding (including any bonds issued to refund such issue of bonds) plus three more years after the final redemption date of the bonds. 
(5)  Arbitrage rebate and arbitrage yield restriction. The town representative will: 
a.  Engage the services of an arbitrage/rebate consultant for assistance in compliance with arbitrage related issues, which consultant may be the town's financial advisor. 
b.  Work with the town's bond counsel, financial advisor, and/or arbitrage/rebate consultant to monitor compliance with "temporary period exceptions" for expenditure of bond proceeds, typically three years for new money bonds, and provide for yield restriction of investments or "yield reduction payments" if exceptions are not satisfied. 
c.  Work with the town's bond counsel and financial advisor to ensure investments acquired with bond proceeds are purchased at fair market value. This may include use of bidding procedures under the regulatory safe harbor (section 1.148-5(d) of the regulations). 
d.  Consult with the town's bond counsel and/or financial advisor prior to the creation of funds which would reasonably be expected to be used to pay debt service on tax-exempt bonds to determine in advance whether such funds must be invested at a restricted yield (i.e., yield restricted). 
e.  Consult with the town's bond counsel and/or financial advisor before engaging in post-issuance credit enhancement transactions (e.g., bond insurance, letter of credit) or hedging transactions (e.g., interest rate swap, cap). It should be noted, however, that the town is not authorized by state law to engage in hedging transactions. 
f.  Consult with the town's bond counsel, financial advisor, escrow agent and/or other arbitrage/rebate consultant to identify situations in which compliance with applicable yield restrictions depends upon subsequent investments (e.g., purchase of 0% SLGS from U.S. Treasury) and monitor implementation. 
g.  Work with the town's financial advisor or arbitrage/rebate consultant to arrange for timely computation of rebate/yield reduction payment liability and, if an amount is payable, for timely filing of Form 8038-T, Arbitrage Rebate, Yield Reduction and Penalty in Lieu of Arbitrage Rebate (or applicable successor form), and payment of such liability. Rebate/yield reduction payments are ordinarily due at five-year intervals. 
(6)  Private use of bond-financed facilities. The town representative will: 
a.  Create and maintain records of which proceeds of bond issues were used to finance which facilities. These records shall incorporate the refunding or partial refunding of any bond issues. 
b.  Record the allocation of bond proceeds to expenditures, including reimbursements. These records will be consistent with the expenditures used for arbitrage purposes. 
c.  Record the allocation of bond proceeds and funds from other sources in connection with any bond funded project. Review expenditure of bond proceeds with bond counsel, financial advisor and/or consulting engineer to ensure bond proceeds are used for qualifying costs. 
d.  Review with bond counsel prior to the sale or lease of a bond-financed facility, or the granting of a license or management contract, or any other arrangement allowing private use of a bond financed facility, the terms of such arrangement. 
e.  Keep records of private use, if any, of bond financed facilities to monitor the amount of private use of bond financed facilities. Private use of bond-financed facilities shall be reviewed once a year (in connection with the preparation of the annual financial statements). If a change in private use occurs, bond counsel will be consulted to determine if remedial action is necessary. 
(7)  Private use of bond-financed facilities-Prohibition. No town employee or official, including any employee or official of the school department shall sell, rent, lease or license to or enter into any management contract with any other person, company, organization or other entity with respect to any building or facility or portion thereof or other property financed in whole or in part with tax exempt leases, bonds or note without having the written approval of the town representative. 
(8)  Reissuance. The town representative will: 
a.  Consult with bond counsel to identify any post-issuance modification to the terms of bonds which could be treated as a current refunding of "old" bonds by "new" bonds, often referred to as a "reissuance." 
b.  Consult with bond counsel to determine whether any "remedial action" (see subsection (6)e. above) in connection with private use must be treated as a "reissuance." 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-30-2012) 
Secs. 2-702-2-709. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - NORTH KINGSTOWN POST ROAD FACADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-710. - Establishment. 
    The council hereby creates the North Kingstown Post Road Façade Improvement Program (PRFIP). 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-5-2018) 
Sec. 2-711. - Purpose. 
    The program is established to encourage improvement and investment in the overall revitalization of Post Road. The program is designed to retain and attract business, increase utilization of existing properties and buildings, and restore economic vitality and enhance property values. The purpose extends to, but is not limited to, the encouragement of the overall beautification of Post Road via façade and landscaping improvements. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-5-2018) 
Sec. 2-712. - Procedures. 
    Procedures and application process will be established and approved by the town council. The PRFIP program will be subject to appropriation during the annual budget process 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-5-2018) 
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Storage and removal of stable manure, § 6-2; creation of nuisance by deposit of animal or vegetable matter, § 6-4; health and sanitation, ch. 8; animal noises, § 8-95; pets and animals in mobile and manufactured home parks, § 10-4; animals in parks, § 13-3. 
State Law reference- Animals generally, RIGL tit. 4; maximum penalty for violation of dog ordinance, RIGL 1956, § 4-13-1; cruelty to animals, RIGL 1956, § 4-1-1 et seq.; poisoning animals, RIGL 1956, § 4-13-13; power of council to regulate dogs, RIGL 1956, § 4-13-1; town ordinances, contagious diseases, RIGL 1956, § 4-4-18; municipal regulation of animals, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.2-1; animals at large, RIGL 1956, § 4-15-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any dog, cat, rabbit, rodent, nonhuman primate, bird or other warm-blooded vertebrate, but does not include horses, cattle, sheep, goats, swine and domestic fowl. 
    Animal control officer means any person employed by the town as its officer to enforce this chapter. All full-time police officers of the town's police department shall be designated as deputy animal control officers. During the absence of the animal control officer, the chief of police may designate a substitute officer to act in the officer's place. 
    Animal shelter means any facility that is used to house or contain animals and that is owned, operated or maintained by a duly incorporated Humane Society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
    At large means any animal not under the restraint of its owner or an individual capable of controlling such dog or animal. 
    Dog pound and pound mean any facility designated and operated by the town for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless or abandoned dogs, cats and other animals. 
    Exposed to rabies means any animal, within the meaning of this chapter, that has been bitten by or has been exposed to any animal determined by competent authority to have been infected with rabies. 
    Kennel means a place or establishment, other than a pound or animal shelter, where animals not owned by the proprietor are sheltered, fed and watered in return for a fee; or a place or establishment where dogs or other animals are bought, bred, trained or sold for profit. 
    Leashed means a dog or other animal that is properly leashed when it has a cord or chain attached to or affixed to its collar or harness and held or being led by an individual capable of controlling such dog or animal. 
    Owner means any individual, partnership, firm, joint stock company, corporation, association, trust, estate or other legal entity which owns, keeps or harbors an animal. 
    Restraint means any animal that is under restraint, within the meaning of this chapter, if it is bound by a leash, on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets or strictly confined within the property limits of its owner or keeper. Hunting dogs (hounds, bird dogs and retrievers) in the process of training or when in legal pursuit of wild game in season are considered, for the purposes of this chapter, to be under restraint. 
    Spayed female means any female animal that has had an ovarian hysterectomy to prevent conception. 
    Veterinarian means a veterinarian licensed to practice under state laws. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-1; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-2. - Enforcement. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the animal control officer and deputy animal control officers of the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-2; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 3-3. - Restraint. 
    An owner of any animal shall keep the animal, except a cat, under restraint and shall not permit such animal to be at large, off the premises or property of the owner or keeper. 
    This section shall not apply to a person using a dog under his/her direct supervision while lawfully hunting, engaged in a supervised formal obedience class or show or during formally sanctioned field trials or to a certified seeing eye dog engaged in the act of guiding its owner. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-3; Ord. No. 11-20, § 2, 10-3-2011) 
State Law reference- Impoundment and disposition of dogs, RIGL 1956, § 4-13-15; animals at large, RIGL 1956, § 4-15-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-4. - Collaring of dogs required. 
    Every owner or keeper of a dog shall cause such dog to wear a collar around its neck distinctly marked with its owner's or keeper's name and with its registered number. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-4) 
Sec. 3-5. - Impoundment; notice to owners; penalty. 
(a)  Animals running at large. Any collared or uncollared animal found running at large shall be impounded and confined in a humane manner by the animal control officer or deputy animal control officers for a period of ten days. An animal not claimed by its owner within the time period specified in this subsection may be disposed of in a humane manner at the direction of the animal control officer. 
(b)  Notice. Immediately upon impounding a dog or other animal, the animal control officer or deputy animal control officer shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner of the dog or animal so impounded and inform such owner of the conditions whereby the owner may regain custody of the animal. An impoundment list shall be kept at the front desk of the police station for public review upon request. The preparation of this list shall be deemed a minimum reasonable effort of the animal control officer to notify owners. This list shall contain a general description of the animal together with any special marking and the area where the animal was picked up. 
(c)  Citation. When a dog or other animal is found at large, the ownership of which is known to the animal control officer, such animal need not be impounded, but may be transferred to its owner and a citation to such owner shall be issued. The citation shall be paid at the municipal court. 
(d)  Penalty. The penalty under subsection (c) of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, $25.00. 
(2)  For the second offense within one year of the first offense, $50.00. 
(3)  For a third and any subsequent offense within one year from the first offense, $100.00. 
(e)  Payment of fines. Within seven days of issuance of citation, payment of fines will be made by cash, check or credit card to the municipal court, between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. weekdays. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-5; Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 08-34, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 7-17-2017) 
State Law reference- Penalty, RIGL 1956, § 4-13-1; authority to impound, RIGL 1956, § 4-15-1; notice of impoundment, RIGL 1956, § 4-15-9. 
Sec. 3-6. - Redemption of impounded animals; adoption. 
(a)  The owner shall be entitled to regain possession of any impounded animal, except as provided in this chapter for certain animals, upon payment of the appropriate fine and fees designated in section 3-7. Licensing requirements shall also be met if a dog is unlicensed. When an owner is notified of the location of the owner's animal and acknowledges this fact, the owner will be required to reclaim the animal within 24 hours of such acknowledgment. Otherwise, the animal will be made available to a new owner. An unlicensed dog whose owner is not established within five days will then be available immediately to a new owner. 
(b)  A new owner shall not be required to pay any board, medical or veterinarian fees incurred at the pound or any fines for which the original owner might have been liable. However, a new owner of a dog or cat shall be required to pay a pickup fee of $25.00. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-6; Ord. No. 84-5, § 1, 3-12-1984; Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 3-5-2018) 
Sec. 3-7. - Impoundment fees. 
(a)  Redemption costs for impounded animals shall be as set out in section 9-4, table VII. 
(b)  An additional fine shall be imposed as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, $25.00. 
(2)  For the second offense within one year of the first offense, $50.00. 
(3)  For a third offense and any subsequent offense within one year from the first offense, $100.00. 
(c)  Payment of fees and fines will be made by cash, check or credit card to the North Kingstown Municipal Court, at the North Kingstown Municipal Offices, between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. weekdays or weekends between 6:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. at the North Kingstown Animal Shelter, excluding holidays, prior to the release of the animal, presenting the receipt to the pound or the animal control officer, as appropriate. (Please note: credit card payments not accepted at the animal shelter). 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-7; Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 08-34, § 3, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 17-13, § 2, 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 3-8. - Confinement of certain dogs and other animals; emergency destruction. 
(a)  The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure every fierce, dangerous or vicious animal and not take such animal out of such building or secure enclosure unless the animal is securely muzzled, leashed or caged. 
(b)  Any animal described in subsection (a) of this section that is found at large may be impounded by the animal control officer or deputy animal control officer and may not be reclaimed by its owner, without the express consent of the animal control officer. 
(c)  Every female animal in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel in such manner that such female cannot come in contact with another animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(d)  If a female animal in heat has been impounded, such animal shall remain impounded until the period of heat shall end, unless the owner shall reclaim such animal and provide satisfactory assurance to the animal control officer that the animal will be confined for the remainder of the period of heat. 
(e)  When, in the judgment of a veterinarian, an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be reclaimed. 
(f)  Under emergency circumstances, the animal control officer or a deputy animal control officer may destroy an animal, but only after making every reasonable effort to communicate with the owner, and if that is not possible, making every reasonable effort to procure the services of the veterinarian either to care for the animal at the scene or to transport the animal to a veterinarian's office. 
(g)  No wild animal may be kept within the town limits, except under such conditions as shall be fixed by the animal control officer. However, wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses, zoos and educational institutions, in accordance with such regulations as shall be established by the animal control officer or any deputy animal control officer of this town. 
(h)  When in the judgment of the animal control officer or the deputy animal control officer an unclaimed animal displays aggressive behavior toward humans or other animals and fails to respond to rehabilitative efforts to correct such behavior, the animal shall be deemed unadoptable and humanely destroyed. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-8; Ord. No. 04-07, § 1, 6-7-2004; Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 3-5-2018) 
State Law reference- Confinement of vicious dogs, RIGL 1956, § 4-13-19; regulation of vicious dogs, RIGL 1956, § 4-13.1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-9. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl, whether licensed or not, which, by continual howling, yelping, barking or other noises, disturbs one or more persons is unlawful and is declared to be a public nuisance, and each day of such disturbance or annoyance shall constitute a separate offense. Whenever such disturbance or annoyance shall be affirmed in writing by two or more persons residing in different dwellings or affirmed in writing by one person and verified by the animal control officer or a deputy animal control officer, the animal control officer, if the officer finds such nuisances to exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or keeper of the animal or fowl that the nuisance must be abated within a period not to exceed three days after the service of the notice. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to allow or permit any animal to trespass on private or public property so as to damage or destroy any property or thing of value. The trespass is declared to be a nuisance, and any such animal may be impounded by the animal control officer or a deputy animal control officer. Whenever it shall be affirmed in writing and signed by a town resident or by a person regularly employed in the neighborhood and such complaint has been verified by the animal control officer or a deputy animal control officer that any animal is a habitual nuisance because of trespassing, causing damage to property, being vicious or by its actions potentially vicious or in any other manner causing undue annoyance, the animal control officer, if the officer finds such nuisance to exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or custodian of such animal that the nuisance must be abated within a period not to exceed three days after the service of the notice. 
(c)  The penalty under subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense ..... $25.00 fine 
(2)  For the second offense within one year from the first offense ..... 50.00 fine 
(3)  For the third offense within one year from the first offense ..... 100.00 fine 
(d)  Payment of fines. Within seven days of issuance of citation, payment of fines will be made by cash, check or credit card to the North Kingstown Municipal Court, at the North Kingstown Municipal Offices, between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. weekdays. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-9; Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 4-10-2000; Ord. No. 03-06, § 1, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 17-13, § 3, 7-17-2017) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 8-11 et seq. 
Sec. 3-10. - Vaccination. 
(a)  Required. Except as otherwise provided in the state rabies control board regulations, the owner or keeper of a dog, cat or ferret shall have the animal vaccinated not earlier than three months of age and not later than four months of age and at regular intervals as prescribed by the state rabies control board regulations, but at no time to exceed recommendations made by the most current compendium of animal rabies control. 
(b)  Certification generally. The vaccination or immunization referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be by a veterinarian, who shall issue a rabies vaccination certificate to the owner or keeper of such animal. This certificate shall meet the minimum standards approved by the state rabies control board, which include the veterinarian's name, the veterinarian's practice name, address and telephone number; the owner's name and address; the animal's name, species, age, coloration and sex; the rabies vaccine manufacturer's name; the date of inoculation; and the signature of the doctor who administered or directed the administration of the rabies vaccine. There shall be a record kept which lists the number of the rabies tag for dogs, cats and ferrets issued in conjunction with the rabies vaccination certificate. 
(c)  Certificate prerequisite to license. No license shall be issued any dog required to be licensed in the town unless the person making application shall present to the town clerk or other person duly authorized to issue such license a current certificate of vaccination or inoculation, as provided in this section, for the dog for which such license is requested. Such certificate shall certify that the dog for which the license is to be issued has been properly vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Owning or keeping unvaccinated animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep or harbor any dog, cat or ferret within the town that is required to be vaccinated as provided in this section, unless such dog, cat or ferret shall have been vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with this section. Any dog, cat or ferret found within the town without evidence that such animal has been vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with this section shall be impounded by the animal control officer or a deputy animal control officer in accordance with section 3-6. 
(e)  Adoption. Any person who shall reside in the town adopting a dog, cat or ferret shall vaccinate such animal in the manner required by this section within 30 days of such adoption. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-10; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011) 
State Law reference- Authority of towns to require compulsory rabies vaccinations, RIGL 1956, § 4-13-31. 
Sec. 3-11. - Prohibited areas; complaint procedures; rabid animals. 
(a)  No animals are allowed in yards of public or private school property or on town beaches, either at large or under restraint, except for Seeing Eye guide dogs or hearing ear signal dogs. 
(b)  No animals are allowed in any stores or eating places within the town, whether at large or under restraint, except for Seeing Eye guide dogs or hearing ear signal dogs. 
(c)  All complaints made under this chapter shall be made to the animal control officer or deputy animal control officer and may be made orally. However, complaints of nuisance pursuant to section 3-9 shall be reduced to writing on forms provided by the animal control officer or deputy animal control officer and shall be signed by the complainant, showing the complainant's address and telephone number, if any, within 48 hours. 
(d)  An animal bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed by the animal control officer or, if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in a kennel approved by the animal control officer for six months shall be enforced. If the dog has been previously vaccinated within time limits established by the health officer based on the kind of vaccine used, revaccination and restraint (leashing and confinement) for 30 days shall be carried out. The head of the animal so destroyed shall be sent to the appropriate state official for examination and evaluation. 
(e)  The owner of a dog or other animal who wishes to dispose of such animal shall be required to assume the responsibility and cost. 
(f)  No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal biting a human, except as provided in this chapter, nor shall any person remove it from the town limits without written permission from the animal control officer. 
(g)  The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the animal control officer or deputy animal control officer. 
(h)  No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required under this section when demand is made therefor by the animal control officer or deputy animal control officer. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-11; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011) 
State Law reference- Equal rights of blind and deaf persons, RIGL 1956, §§ 40-9.1-1, 40-9.1-2. 
Sec. 3-12. - Report of bite cases. 
    It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to report to the animal control officer or to the police department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-12; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011) 
State Law reference- Regulations of the state rabies control board for reporting rabies, etc., RIGL 1956, § 4-13-29. 
Sec. 3-13. - Reporting rabies suspect. 
    It shall be the duty of every veterinarian to report to the animal control officer any animal considered by the veterinarian to be a rabies suspect. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-13; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011) 
State Law reference- Regulations of the state rabies control board for reporting rabies, etc., RIGL 1956, § 4-13-29. 
Sec. 3-14. - Right of entry of animal control officer. 
    In the discharge of the duties imposed by this chapter, the animal control officer or any deputy animal control officer shall have the authority at all reasonable times to enter upon any premises, but such authority should not include the right to enter any residence on such premises, to examine a dog or other animal that is in violation of a section of this chapter. Such officer shall have the further authority to take possession of any such dog or other animal and remove it from such premises. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-14; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011) 
State Law reference- Right of entry where animal disease suspected, RIGL 1956, § 4-4-5. 
Sec. 3-15. - Interference with animal control officer's duties. 
    No person shall interfere with, hinder or obstruct the animal control officer or any deputy animal control officer in the performance of duties or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control officer or any deputy animal control officer, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-15; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 17-13, § 4, 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 3-16. - Records of animal control officer. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of the animals coming into the custody of such officer and that proper identification be provided by all persons adopting animals. No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted to adopt an animal. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to such officer and the officer's investigation of the bite. 
(c)  The animal control officer shall keep or cause to be kept an accurate and detailed record of all monies, except fines or penalties collected by the municipal court, by such officer and shall regularly deposit such monies with the town treasurer. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-16; Ord. No. 84-5, § 1, 3-12-1984; Ord. No. 08-34, § 4, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 3-17. - Animals on sidewalks. 
    No person shall permit a cow, ox or horse owned by such person or any other cow, ox or horse over which such person, for the time being, has control and care to walk upon any sidewalk, crosswalk or footwalk in the compact parts of this town, except for the purpose of crossing the sidewalk, crosswalk or footwalk. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-19) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
Sec. 3-18. - Disposal of dead animals. 
    The carcass of any dead animal not killed for food shall be removed and disposed of within 24 hours after death by burial, incineration or other method approved by the health officer, code enforcement officer or other officer designated by the town council. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-20) 
Cross reference- Garbage, trash and refuse, ch. 6. 
Sec. 3-19. - Permit to keep swine. 
(a)  Required; inspection. Unless exempted by RIGL 1956, § 2-23-5, no person shall keep any swine within the town without first obtaining a permit from the town council. Such permit shall not be granted until the town council shall have first inspected the location and construction of the place where such swine are to be kept and shall have determined that the location and construction will not be prejudicial to the public health or constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  Removal of swine or reconstruction of premises when objectionable. If the construction or location of any place for the keeping of swine shall, after the issuance of a permit, upon inspection, be deemed by the town council prejudicial to the public health or to constitute a public nuisance, the town council may, by notice in writing, order the owner or occupant of the premises where such swine are kept to remove such swine or to reconstruct the place where such swine are kept at the owner's or occupant's own expense, within such time as the town council may deem reasonable. If the owner or occupant neglects to do so, the town council may cause such swine to be removed, and all expenses incurred thereby shall be paid by the owner or occupant, to be recovered in an action of the case brought in the name of the town. 
(c)  Notice and hearing required for feeding of swill, offal or decaying substances from another town. No person shall allow swine within the town to be fed on swill, offal or other decaying substances brought from any other town without first making application to the town council to designate the place where such swine shall be kept. No such application shall be granted by the town council until after public notice and hearing thereon. 
(d)  Inspection agent designated. The health officer, code enforcement officer or other officer designated by the council shall be the agent of the town council for carrying out inspections under this section. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 3-1-21-3-1-24) 
State Law reference- Nuisance actions for agricultural operations, RIGL 1956, § 2-23-5; authority of town to regulate and control construction, location and maintenance of places for keeping animals, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.2-1. 
Sec. 3-20. - Depositing in town water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to put, place, throw or deposit any dog, cat, sheep or other animal into the waters surrounding or near any of the compact parts of the town, where it shall become or be liable to become an annoyance or nuisance to any of the town inhabitants. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-25) 
Sec. 3-21. - Dog license fee. 
(a)  Every owner or keeper of a dog shall annually in the month of April cause such dog to be licensed from the ensuing May 1 in the office of the town clerk and shall pay the town clerk for the license so issued a fee in accordance with section 9-4, table I. All licenses shall be valid in the town during the then-current year, provided that any person shall cause a dog to be licensed as provided in this subsection within 30 days after such person becomes the owner or keeper. No license shall be required for any dog under the age of six months. 
(b)  Every person owning or keeping a dog not licensed according to this section shall be fined as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, $25.00; 
(2)  For the second offense in a 12-month period, $200.00; and 
(3)  For the third offense or subsequent offense in a 12-month period, $500.00 and proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00 covering damage or injury which may be caused by the dog. The policy shall contain a provision requiring the town to be named as additional insured for the sole purpose of notification to the town clerk of any cancellation of the policy. 
(4)  Within seven days of issuance of citation, payment of fines will be made by cash, check or credit card to the North Kingstown Municipal Court at the North Kingstown Municipal Offices, between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. weekdays. 
(Ord. No. 86-3, § 1, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 17-13, § 5, 7-17-2017) 
State Law reference- Dog license, RIGL 1956, § 4-13-4; pups exempt from license, RIGL 1956, § 4-13-9. 
Sec. 3-22. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person convicted of violating any section of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $25.00 for each violation, to be recovered for the use of the town. If the violation shall be continued, each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 3-1-17; Ord. No. 03-06, § 2, 5-12-2003) 
Sec. 3-23. - Removal of dog feces. 
(a)  Required. It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by such person's dog on any sidewalk, street or other public area. It shall, further, be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by such person's dog on any private property neither owned nor occupied by the person. 
(b)  Duty to possess means of removal. No person who owns, possesses or controls a dog shall appear with such dog on any sidewalk, street, park or other public area without the means of removal of any feces left by such dog. Furthermore, no person who owns, possesses, or controls such dog shall appear on any private property neither owned nor occupied by such person without the means of removal of any feces left by the dog. 
(c)  Method of removal and disposal. For the purpose of this section, the means of removal shall be any tool, implement or other device carried for the purpose of picking up and containing such feces, unexposed to such person or the public. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting the feces to a place suitable and regularly reserved for the disposal of human feces, to a place specifically reserved for the disposal of dog feces, or to a place so designated as appropriate by the department of public works. 
(d)  Fines for violation. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding: 
(1)  $10.00 for the first offense; 
(2)  $25.00 for the second offense within a year of the first offense; and 
(3)  $50.00 for the third and any subsequent offenses within a year of the first offense. 
Fines to be recovered by action of debt or by complaint or warrant, to use as the town council may prescribe. 
(e)  Exemption. This section shall not apply to a licensed dog accompanying any handicapped person who, because of such person's handicap, is physically unable to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-13, § 1, 7-8-1996; Ord. No. 03-06, § 3, 5-12-2003) 
Sec. 3-24. - Dog parks. 
    The town may from time to time establish certain areas or parks wherein dogs may be allowed to remain off of any leash or similar restraint mechanisms. A dog may remain off leash in such areas or parks only in the specific areas so designated by the town and only if the owner, keeper or other person having care custody or control of the dog complies at all times with the rules and regulations as established by the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 3-25. - Maximum number of dogs allowed. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of any dwelling house shall keep or permit to be kept more than five dogs in any part of any dwelling house except if said owner or occupant complies with RIGL 1956, § 4-13-10, as amended. 
(b)  Foster care of dogs kept at any dwelling house for more than 90 days will require licensing with the town. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to persons having more than five licensed dogs prior to the passage of this section. 
(d)  Any person found in violation of section 3-25 shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 3-22 of the town ordinances, the municipal court may impose a fine as set forth in RIGL 1956, § 45-2-55. 
(Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 3-26-2018) 
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of the town regarding buildings have been preempted by the Rhode Island State Building Code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-1 et seq. 
Charter reference- Trailer regulations, § 109; building regulations, § 110; zoning regulations, § 111; building inspector, § 816. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 5; garbage, trash and refuse, ch. 6; health and sanitation, ch. 8; noise from construction activities, § 8-93; building code board of appeals standards of review, § 8-158; mobile and manufactured home parks, ch. 10; inspection and report by building official, § 10-8; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; house numbering, § 17-21 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 20; zoning, ch. 21; subdivision and land development regulations, app. A. 
State Law reference- State building code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-1 et seq.; inspection of buildings where combustible materials accumulate, RIGL 1956, § 23-28.5-1 et seq.; notice to vacate unfit dwellings, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.2-8; housing maintenance and occupancy code, RIGL 1956, § 45-21.3-1 et seq.; minimum housing standards, RIGL 1956, § 45-24.2-1 et seq.; plumbers, RIGL 1956, § 5-20-1 et seq.; electricians, RIGL 1956, § 5-6-1 et seq.; electrical code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-5; plumbing code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-3. 

Chapter 5 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; stopping, standing and parking within ten feet of fire hydrants, § 11-35; stopping, standing and parking on fire lanes, § 11-44; fire hydrants, § 20-24; fire protection supplies, § 20-25. 
State Law reference- Fire safety, RIGL 1956, § 23-28.1-1 et seq.; ordinances to be equal to or more stringent than fire safety code, RIGL 1956, § 23-28.1-2; fire companies, etc., RIGL 1956, tit. 45, ch. 18 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5-1-5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF OPEN FIRES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and investigation, RIGL 1956, § 23-28.1-1 et seq.; fire safety, RIGL 1956, § 23-28.2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 5-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate open fires consistent with but outside the control of RIGL 1956, §§ 23-23-1 et seq. and 23-23.1-1 et seq., the Rhode Island Clean Air Act, and RIGL 1956, § 2-12-1 et seq., forest fires and prevention. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-1-1) 
Sec. 5-22. - Burning. 
(a)  Public property-Permit required on public grounds. No person shall set or maintain any bonfire, rubbish or other open fire of any kind or authorize any such fire to be set or maintained on any public ground without a permit issued by the chief of the fire department or the chief's authorized representative. The permit may set such limitations or conditions as determined appropriate by the chief or the chief's authorized representative. 
(b)  Construction site-Permit required during construction and demolition of buildings. During construction or demolition of buildings or structures, no waste materials or rubbish shall be disposed of by burning on the property or in the immediate vicinity without having obtained a permit issued by the chief of the fire department or the chief's authorized representative. The permit may set such limitations or conditions as determined appropriate by the chief or the chief's authorized representative. 
(c)  Residential property. No person shall set or maintain a bonfire or burn rubbish, lumber, leaves, brush or any other combustible material or authorize any other open fire to be set or maintained on any private residential land except as follows: 
(1)  A person may burn combustible material on any private residential land if the fire is contained in a burner with a closed or properly screened top, approved by the fire prevention bureau, including chimeneas or other movable, closed fire containers available for retail purchase. Such fire containers are to be located safely on private residential property no less than 15 feet from any structure and seven feet from any property line or combustible fence. 
(2)  Residential fires are limited to the period from sunrise to 11:00 p.m. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-1-4; Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 7-7-2008) 
Sec. 5-23. - Attendance at fires. 
    Every bonfire, rubbish or other open or closed fire shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished. A garden hose connected to a water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment shall be readily available for use. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-1-5; Ord. No. 08-15, § 2, 7-7-2008) 
Sec. 5-24. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department may prohibit any and all outdoor bonfires, rubbish and other open fires whenever atmospheric conditions or other local circumstances may make such fires hazardous. The chief or the chief's designee shall have the authority to order extinguished any fire determined to be a public safety risk. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department may authorize exceptions to this article and allow additional burning when the chief deems it necessary for the public convenience or welfare. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-1-6; Ord. No. 08-15, § 3, 7-7-2008) 
Sec. 5-25. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-1-7) 
Secs. 5-26-5-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Firefighters, etc., RIGL 1956, § 45-18-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-46. - Created. 
    The town council hereby establishes a permanent fire department for the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-1) 
Sec. 5-47. - Composition. 
    The fire department shall consist of a chief of the fire department and such additional personnel of other ranks and grades as the town manager may from time to time determine. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-2) 
Sec. 5-48. - Administration generally. 
    All matters relating to fire department administration shall be considered by the director of public safety who, with the chief of the fire department, shall be responsible to the town manager for the administration and management of the department. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-3) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Secs. 5-49-5-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CHIEF[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Officers, § 2-46 et seq. 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of fire chief, etc., RIGL 1956, § 23-37-1 et seq. 

Sec. 5-71. - Exclusive control of firefighting activities; funds for volunteer departments. 
    There shall be only one fire chief in the town and, subject to the direction of the director of public safety, the chief shall have charge of all firefighting activities. Any call or volunteer department that might be organized separate from the regular fire department shall not receive pay or funds from the town if it has an officer higher in rank than a deputy chief. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-4) 
Sec. 5-72. - Head of department; powers and duties generally. 
    The head of the fire department shall be the fire chief. The chief of the fire department shall enforce the laws of the state, sections of this Code and provisions of other ordinances relative to fire protection and shall exercise and perform the powers and duties by law imposed upon and required of the fire department and the fire chief in the several towns of the state. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-5) 
Sec. 5-73. - Appointment; qualifications. 
    The fire chief shall be appointed by the director of public safety with the approval of the town manager. Any person appointed as fire chief shall be appointed solely on the basis of qualifications and shall have had 15 years of firefighting experience, including ten years of increasingly responsible experience in the supervision of a permanent fire department of a town or city, and shall possess all other qualifications for a member of the fire department. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-6) 
Sec. 5-74. - Filling vacancy. 
    If a vacancy occurs in the office of fire chief, the director of public safety, with the approval of the town manager, shall designate an officer of the permanent fire department to be acting chief until a fire chief has been appointed. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-7) 
Sec. 5-75. - Duties as executive officer of department. 
    The fire chief shall be the executive officer of the fire department and shall have direct control and management of all members and other personnel of the department in the lawful exercise of the duties of such members and personnel, according to law. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-8) 
Sec. 5-76. - Adoption of rules and regulations; disciplinary action. 
    The fire chief shall adopt, subject to approval of the director of public safety and town manager, reasonable rules and regulations covering government, discipline, uniforms and equipment of firefighters and fixing such firefighter's duties and prescribing penalties for violations of any of such rules and regulations. The chief shall maintain discipline so as to secure complete efficiency in the fire department and may, with the approval of the director of public safety, impose penalties as are set forth in the department rules and regulations. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-9) 
Sec. 5-77. - Control of property and equipment. 
    The fire chief shall have custody, care and control of all property and equipment of the fire department, subject to the direction of the director of public safety and the town manager. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-10) 
Sec. 5-78. - Records and reports. 
    It shall be the duty of the fire chief to keep accurate and complete records of all fires. The fire chief shall submit to the director of public safety and town manager a monthly report and an annual report of all transactions and activities of the fire department. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-11) 
Sec. 5-79. - Formulation of training program; filing qualifications for membership in department. 
    The fire chief may formulate, under the direction of the director of public safety, a program of training and may incur such expense within the appropriation therefor as may be approved by the town manager. The fire chief shall keep on file printed lists of the qualifications necessary for appointment to the fire department for the use of any and all applicants for training or for appointment to the force. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-12) 
Secs. 5-80-5-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MEMBERS 

Sec. 5-101. - Appointment generally. 
    Each member of the fire department and all other personnel of the fire department shall be appointed by the director of public safety, subject to approval of the town manager, pursuant to law and ordinance, and with the approval and recommendation of the fire chief. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-13) 
Sec. 5-102. - Provisional appointment. 
(a)  Required. Each appointment of a member of the permanent firefighting force shall be provisional for a period of 12 months. During such period, each appointee shall temporarily possess all the powers of the position to which appointed, but the appointee shall not be a member of the permanent fire department during such probationary period. 
(b)  Physician's certificate required. Before any applicant shall be appointed as a provisional member of the permanent fire department, the applicant shall present a certificate from a physician appointed by the town manager that the applicant is mentally and physically qualified. 
(c)  Residency requirement; age limitations; exception. The applicant for provisional appointment as a member of the permanent fire department must be a resident of the town. The applicant must not be under 18 years of age and not over 35 years of age when first appointed. This subsection shall not be applicable to persons who were firefighters on call on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(d)  Termination. Any provisional appointment, as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, may be terminated by the director of public safety at any time during the 12-month period following a written recommendation by the fire chief. 
(e)  Regular appointment. At the end of 12 months, a provisional appointee shall become a member of the permanent fire department if ordered by the director of public safety. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 5-2-14-5-2-18) 
Sec. 5-103. - Suspension, reduction in rank and removal. 
    The fire chief and any member of the permanent fire department may be suspended by the director of public safety, and the suspended person shall be subject to reduction in rank or to removal from office by the director of public safety for misconduct, incapacity, neglect of duty or insubordination of such a character as the director of public safety may deem a disqualification for such office. All such reductions or removals shall be by the director of public safety upon charges made in writing, if requested by any such officer, and of which the officer complained of shall have notice and opportunity at a time appointed to be heard thereon. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-19) 
Sec. 5-104. - Subject to order of fire chief. 
    Members of the fire department shall be subject to the orders of the fire chief and shall perform such duties as the fire chief shall assign them. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-20) 
Sec. 5-105. - Recall to duty in emergency. 
    In any emergency, all members of the fire department who are off station duty will be subject to recall to duty on any call issued by the chief of the fire department or by the fire chief's authority. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-21) 
Sec. 5-106. - Devotion of full time to department duties. 
    The fire chief and each member of the permanent fire department shall devote full time to fire department duties and shall not engage in any other business, profession or occupation, either directly or indirectly, unless with the approval of the director of public safety. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-22) 
Sec. 5-107. - Uniforms. 
    Every member of the permanent fire department while on duty shall wear a uniform which shall comply with rules and regulations. The fire chief may issue specific orders authorizing the performance of certain duties while not in uniform. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-23) 
Sec. 5-108. - Badges. 
    Each member of the permanent fire department shall wear a suitable badge to be furnished by the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-24) 
Sec. 5-109. - Accounting for town property on termination of services. 
    Whenever any member of the permanent fire department shall terminate services of the fire department for any reason, the member shall deliver the badge and all other town property in the member's possession to the chief of the fire department, and all sums due such member shall be withheld pending such final settlement. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-25) 
Sec. 5-110. - Compensation. 
    All regular firefighters shall receive such compensation within the appropriation therefor as the town council may determine. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 5-2-26) 
Secs. 5-111-5-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENTIAL FIRE PROTECTION CISTERNS 

Sec. 5-120. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to specify, in accordance with RIGL 1956 § 23-28.1-2(b)(3), requirements for fire safety, additional to those imposed by the Rhode Island Fire Code, for residential dwellings located in subdivisions not serviced by public water. 
(Ord. No. 01-22, § 1, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 5-121. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article: 
    Not served by public water supply shall mean, with respect to a lot, a lot which (1) does not have frontage on road containing a water main which is connected to the town water system and (2) is not within 500 feet of fire hydrant connected to the town water system. With respect to a subdivision, "not served by public water supply" shall mean a subdivision in which the residential dwellings are not to be connected to the town water system. 
    Residential dwelling shall mean a one-, two-, or three-family dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 01-22, § 1, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 5-122. - Application. 
    This article shall apply to any residential subdivision, or any phase thereof, which is not served by public water supply and which receives final plan approval from the town planning commission or planning department on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Ord. No. 01-22, § 1, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 5-123. - Fire cisterns required. 
    All residential subdivisions to which this article applies shall contain fire cisterns approved by the town fire marshal which are installed and maintained in accordance with N.F.P.A. Standard 1142, 1999 Edition, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 01-22, § 1, 12-10-2001) 
Secs. 5-124-5-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 5-130. - General requirements. 
(a)  Any person, including any partnership, corporation or association, undertaking the erection, extension, alteration, repair, or moving of a structure, or undertaking any changes that may affect the fire safety of a building or any portion thereof, shall first make application for an inspection and for a plan review to the fire prevention office. Said application shall be made at least 21 calendar days prior to the start of any construction or work, and shall be accompanied by the proper fee or fees as specified in table X, "Fire Department Fees" of section 9-4 of the Town Code of Ordinances. No construction or work shall be started until the required application has been approved by the fire prevention office. 
(b)  In all matters relating to plan review, the interpretations and decisions of the fire prevention office shall be binding. If the applicant disagrees with the decision of the fire prevention office, the applicant may request a variance or seek an appeal in accordance with the state fire safety code. 
(c)  All construction work which is requested to be approved shall be in complete compliance with the state fire safety code. 
(d)  All fees shall be based on full valuation of current construction costs. Construction costs, per square foot, shall be determined on the basis of the applicable building permit issued by the building official. 
(e)  Payment of fees shall be made to the fire prevention office upon application. All fees shall be made payable to the town. 
(f)  No fees shall be due for a fire safety inspection, which is required for a license renewal. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-10-2004) 
Chapter 6 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND REFUSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Disposal of dead animals, § 3-18; buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; health and sanitation, ch. 8; accumulation of rubbish and debris, § 8-17; sewage disposal, § 8-21 et seq.; depositories for garbage, rubbish and refuse at public fairgrounds and carnivals, § 8-44; mobile and manufactured home parks, ch. 10; garbage and rubbish in mobile and manufactured home parks, § 10-6; utilities, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Refuse disposal, RIGL 1956, § 23-18.9-1 et seq.; recycling, RIGL 1956, § 23-18.8-1 et seq.; solid waste management corporation, RIGL 1956, § 23-19-1 et seq.; hazardous waste management, RIGL 1956, §§ 23-19.1-1 et seq., 23-19.7-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Removal of accumulations from premises; garbage containers; dumpsters. 
(a)  The owner of premises upon which persons reside or which are frequented for pleasure or business shall keep such premises free from accumulations of garbage, rubbish, rags, tin cans, paper, empty barrels, boxes or any material that, because of its character, condition or improper storage, may invite the breeding or collecting of flies, mosquitoes or rodents or that may in any other manner be prejudicial to the public health. All garbage shall be kept in flytight containers until disposal. 
(b)  In all zoning districts within the town, no dumpster-type trash receptacle shall be located between the principal structure and the street or right-of-way. Dumpsters shall be considered as one-story accessory structures and must conform to the appropriate setback requirements contained within the zoning ordinance in chapter 21. All dumpsters shall be screened from public view. Dumpsters utilized during the construction or rehabilitation of any or all property shall not be subject to this chapter. The town building official shall in those instances determine the proper placement and duration of use. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-3-1; Ord. No. 86-5, § 2, 2-25-1986) 
Sec. 6-2. - Storage and removal of stable manure. 
    In closely settled districts, stable manure must be kept in a covered, watertight pit or chamber and shall be removed at least once each week during the period from May 1 to October 1 and during the other months at intervals sufficiently frequent to maintain a sanitary condition satisfactory to the health officer. Manure on farms or isolated premises other than dairy farms need not be so protected and removed unless ordered by the health officer. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-3-2) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 3. 
State Law reference- Nuisance regarding agricultural operations, RIGL 1956, § 2-23-5; authority to adopt health regulations, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-3. - Storage and removal of manufacturing, industry or utility wastes or materials. 
    Materials or waste products from any mill, factory, slaughterhouse, rendering or fertilizing works, junk establishment or other industry or utility shall not, without treatment, be stored or deposited in such manner as to cause the surrounding atmosphere, land or water to be polluted or contaminated, creating offensive conditions and tending to be injurious to the public health. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-3-3) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 20. 
Sec. 6-4. - Creation of nuisance by deposit of animal or vegetable matter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to put, place or deposit in any part of this town any animal or vegetable matter which shall be or become a nuisance to any of the town inhabitants. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-3-4) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 3. 
Sec. 6-5. - Dumping. 
    No rubbish, debris or waste material of any nature shall be deposited in any manner on any property, public or private, within the town except in a location designated for dumping by the town council. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-3-5) 
Sec. 6-6. - Refuse disposal. 
    Disposal of refuse shall be permitted only in sanitary landfills, transfer stations or other solid waste management facilities approved by the state department of environmental management and the town. 
(Ord. No. 83-17, § 1(a), 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 93-14, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-7. - Protection of transported trash and garbage. 
    All vehicles transporting trash or garbage on the public highways in the town shall be tightly covered with a heavy canvas or other similar material so that none of the contents of such vehicles can come out upon the public highway. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-18) 
State Law reference- Prevention of leakage of load, RIGL 1956, § 31-25-9. 
Secs. 6-8-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATIONS, UTILIZATION AND LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Refuse disposal, RIGL 1956, § 23-18.9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Refuse means putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, and including garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings and solid market and industrial waste. 
    Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of refuse on land without creating nuisances or hazards to public health or safety, by reducing it to the smallest practical volume and by covering it with a layer of earth at the conclusion of each day's operation or at such more frequent intervals as may be necessary. 
    Transfer station means a waste disposal facility at which refuse is temporarily collected or processed for disposal at another facility without creating nuisances or hazards to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 83-17, § 1, 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 93-14, § 3, 9-13-1993) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-22. - Hours of operation of transfer station. 
    Hours of operation for the town's transfer station shall be as established by the town manager, with the approval of the town council. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-3-7; Ord. No. 83-17, § 2, 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 99-14, § 2, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 6-23. - Rules and regulations for salvaging, recycling and operation of transfer station. 
    The town manager is authorized to issue rules and regulations necessary to control salvaging and recycling and to ensure the efficient operation of the town's transfer station and to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-3-8; Ord. No. 83-17, § 2, 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 99-14, § 3, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 6-24. - Utilization of transfer station. 
(a)  Use of the town's transfer station is limited to residents and businesses within the town, at the discretion of the director of public works, for the purpose of disposing of solid waste, including household waste, metal, brush, wood waste, demolition material, appliances, leaves and yard waste. Contractors providing a service to town residents will be allowed utilization of the transfer station for town residents only, provided that they are properly licensed for transportation of solid waste over town roads. A resident, for the purposes of this section, shall be defined as any person who has established legal residence in the town. 
(b)  Residents, businesses and contractors providing a service to town residents may be required to show proof of eligibility to use the transfer station to the satisfaction of the director of public works or the director's designee. 
(c)  Use of the transfer station shall be a revocable privilege and may be suspended in accordance with subsection 6-27(g). Use of the transfer station shall be subject to and governed by this article and all the rules and regulations issued in accordance with section 6-23. 
(Ord. No. 99-14, § 4, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 6-25. - Commercial haulers. 
(a)  Classification. There are two classes of commercial haulers of solid waste as follows: 
(1)  A privately contracted refuse hauler engaged in the collection and transportation of solid waste generated by persons other than the contractor in the town (commercial for hire). 
(2)  A person who delivers to the town disposal facility nonresidential solid waste which is generated at that person's place of business or which is a waste product of a person's trade or business (commercial not for hire). 
(b)  User fee. All commercial haulers shall pay an appropriate tipping fee as established by the town council or may opt to deliver household waste generated by town residents to the transfer station in plastic bags using a designated town tag around the neck of the bag. There shall be a 100-pound minimum placed on all materials deposited at the commercial rate. Invoicing shall be made monthly; payment dates and terms will be set forth on the invoice. Failure to submit payments within 30 days will result in suspension of transfer station privileges. The commercial hauler agrees to pay carrying charges of one percent per month, which the town may impose on any overdue invoice. If any invoices are placed for collection, the commercial hauler agrees to pay the cost and expense of collection including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-3-10; Ord. No. 87-16, § 2, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. 88-12, § 1, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 99-14, § 5, 6-21-1999) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Sec. 6-26. - Out-of-town refuse; limits on kinds of refuse deposited at transfer station. 
(a)  No person shall bring refuse from without the town limits and store or dispose of such refuse within the town limits. Industrial refuse may not be deposited at the town's transfer station facility, but business, commercial and multifamily residential refuse generated by town residents and businesses may be deposited at the town's transfer station facility. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, refuse shall be deemed to be industrial, business, commercial or multifamily residential if it is generated by a source which would be classified in that category by the town zoning ordinance. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-3-11; Ord. No. 83-17, § 2, 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 87-16, § 3, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. 99-14, § 6, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 6-27. - License for trash haulers. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport for hire garbage, combustible waste, noncombustible waste, ordinary waste, ordinary commercial waste or industrial waste on or over the streets or other public ways of the town without having first obtained a license from the town council for each such vehicle so engaged. 
(b)  Application. Application for a license to transport garbage, combustible waste, noncombustible waste, ordinary waste, ordinary commercial waste, or industrial waste shall be made to the town council, which shall issue such license if the applicant is found to have suitable equipment for transporting such waste and has complied and indicated a willingness to comply with this article and all applicable sections of this Code and town ordinances. 
(c)  Bond. The license granted for any such person shall be conditioned upon such licensee furnishing bond to the town with corporate surety in the sum of $1,000.00 to insure faithful compliance with the sections of this Code and town ordinances. 
(d)  Renewal; revocation. Any expired license may be renewed under the same condition applicable to the issuance of an original license. A license or renewal of the license issued pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 next following its issuance. Any license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked forthwith by the town council upon failure of the license holder to comply with all the applicable sections of this Code and town ordinances. 
(e)  Equipment and vehicles. Any person operating under such a license to transport any waste material on or over the state or other public ways of the town shall use such equipment and vehicles as will keep such waste material under cover while in transit and prevent the material from escaping from the vehicle. Inspection of such vehicle may be made at any time by the director of public works or by persons designated by the director. All vehicles must be in compliance with the state's motor vehicle laws and regulations. 
(f)  Liability insurance. The approval of any application to any person to transport garbage, combustible waste, noncombustible waste, ordinary waste, ordinary commercial waste or industrial waste shall be conditioned upon that person having such liability and other insurance as shall be required by the town council. 
(g)  Penalties. Any person who shall violate any section of this article or the rules and regulations established in accordance with section 6-23 shall be fined in accordance with section 1-4. In addition to these fines, any person violating any section of this article or any of the rules and regulations established in accordance with section 6-23 may, after a hearing by the director of public works, be excluded from the use of the town's transfer station facility. The duration of the denial of the use of the town's transfer station facility shall be a maximum of 20 days for the first violation, 40 days for the second violation, 60 days for the third violation and 120 days for the fourth and subsequent violation. The decision of the director of public works may be appealed to the town manager. The town solicitor, upon direction of the town council, is empowered and authorized to institute injunctive or other legal proceedings to restrain violations of this article. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 7-3-12-7-3-20; Ord. No. 83-17, § 2, 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 99-14, § 7, 6-21-1999) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Secs. 6-28, 6-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Refuse disposal, RIGL 1956, § 23-18.9-1 et seq.; Hazardous Waste Management Act, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq.; Hard-to-Dispose-of Material Control and Recycling Act, RIGL 1956, § 37-15.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-30. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disposal of solid waste means the final disposition of solid waste. 
    Groundwater means water collected and stored in the saturated zone beneath the ground surface as designated in subsections 21-186(b) and 21-187(a) of the zoning chapter. 
    Hazardous waste means any waste as defined in the state Hazardous Waste Management Act, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.9.4(4), or in regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as amended. 
    Polluting means the causing of pollution. 
    Pollution means the alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of groundwater, surface water and/or air quality. 
    Recyclable means any material listed as a recyclable in state commercial or municipal recycling regulations or the state battery deposit and control regulations or oil subject to the hard-to-dispose-of tax as stated in RIGL 1956, § 37-15.1-1 et seq., the Hard-to-Dispose-of Material Control and Recycling Act. 
    Sanitary landfill means a licensed land disposal site employing an engineered method of disposal of solid waste in a manner that absolutely minimizes environmental hazards, including spreading the solid waste in thin layers, compacting the solid waste to the smallest practical volume and applying cover materials at the end of each operating day or at such more frequent intervals as may be necessary. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and agricultural services, but does not include hazardous waste as defined in the Hazardous Waste Management Act, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq. For purposes of this article, the term also includes asphalt, concrete, Portland concrete cement and tree stumps. Stump dumps incidental to a residential, commercial or industrial development approved by the planning commission or department of planning and development shall be exempted from the licensing requirements of this article, but shall comply with subdivision and development regulations pertaining to such stump dumps. 
    Solid waste management facility means any plant, structure, equipment and/or real and personal property operated for the purpose of processing, treating, recycling or disposing of solid waste and which is privately owned. 
    Surface water means a body of water whose top surface is exposed to the atmosphere. 
    Wellhead protection area means the critical portion of a three-dimensional zone surrounding a public well or well field through which water will move toward and reach such well or well field as designated by the town and/or the director of the state department of environmental management. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 5, 9-13-1993) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-31. - Location and licensing of solid waste facility. 
    No person shall dispose of, process or recycle solid waste in any manner on any property, public or private, within the town, except in a location designated and licensed for a solid waste facility by the town council. This section shall not apply to the composting of vegetative materials used for noncommercial use, not to exceed three cubic yards. This section shall not apply to stump dump operations undertaken and completed in compliance with state regulations regarding the operations. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 5, 9-13-1993) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 21. 
Sec. 6-32. - Licensing authority. 
(a)  The town council may issue licenses and regulate activities for solid waste management facilities. All licenses issued under this article shall be subject to the requirements set forth in this article, and no such license shall be issued until a public hearing has been held by the town council. Notice of the public hearing shall be advertised for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the town prior to the date of the hearing. The newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement and shall include the place, time and date of the hearing; the name of the applicant; a description of the license sought; the street address, plat and lot numbers of the property in question; and shall advise those interested where and when a copy of the license application may be examined or obtained. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners by certified mail, return receipt requested, within 2,500 feet of the boundary of the property upon which the solid waste management facility is proposed to be operated. Such notice to property owners must, at a minimum, contain all information required for the display advertisement and must be sent at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  Any and all costs incurred by the town for necessary notice and advertising shall be reimbursed by the applicant prior to the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 5, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-33. - License requirements. 
    Every applicant for a solid waste management facility license shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements in this section, which shall be deemed to be preconditions to license approval. No license shall be issued unless the town council has expressly made an affirmative finding of compliance with regard to each and every one of the following requirements, identified as subsections (1) through (11): 
(1)  The proposed site is located in a zoning district which permits the proposed facility either as a permitted use or by special exception. 
(2)  If applicable, a license for the operation of a solid waste management facility has been issued by the state director of the department of environmental management. 
(3)  The solid waste management facility shall be operated in a manner as to not cause or be likely to cause pollution of the groundwaters, the surface waters or the air of the town. 
(4)  The facility will be operated in a manner so as to be in compliance with any and all other sections of this Code and town ordinances. 
(5)  The applicant has sufficient financial resources to be able to complete the requirements of any closure and/or other restoration required under this article. The town council shall require the applicant to post with the town adequate security to guarantee the applicant's obligations pursuant to the closure plan for the site and/or for any restoration required. Such performance guarantee shall also include but not be limited to the cost to repair roadway damage incurred through the transportation of solid waste to and from the facility, the removal of solid waste, protection from soil erosion and sedimentation, and the restoration of surface conditions. The town engineer shall prepare an estimate of the required performance guarantee based on the closure plan or restoration plan submitted by the applicant. Such plan must provide sufficient detail as to site changes proposed and quantities of material anticipated. The town engineer shall also prepare a report based on recommendations from other town departments of anticipated impacts from the licensing of a solid waste management facility. Such report will provide the documentation for the performance guarantee in addition to any requirements of the closure plan or restoration plan. No license will be issued until the town council approved performance guarantee has been received by the department of finance. 
(6)  The applicant has granted to the town a perpetual easement allowing the town the perpetual right to enter upon the land at reasonable times for the purposes of inspecting the solid waste management facility or for the purpose of conducting tests where the solid waste management facility is located. 
(7)  For any temporary or final disposal of solid waste, no solid waste shall be disposed of within eight feet of the wet season groundwater table. The applicant shall have prepared by a registered engineer, experienced in the field of environmental engineering, a plan for monitoring wells for the site proposed. Such monitoring wells shall be installed by the applicant to verify the groundwater elevations and shall be used to ensure the protection of the groundwaters on site and outside site boundaries or surface water bodies, if any. Monitoring well plans will be reviewed by the town for consistency with the objectives of this article and any other sections of this Code and town ordinances. Based on town review, the town council will receive a report recommending a monitoring program for the site proposed. Such monitoring program will identify, at a minimum, the locations to be tested, the frequency of tests, and the types of tests to be conducted. The town council shall review the report and use the report for establishing any necessary conditions to the license approval. 
(8)  All solid waste management facilities shall, in addition to all of the other requirements of this chapter, comply with all of the rules and regulations for solid waste management facilities, adopted and as amended by the state department of environmental management, division of air and hazardous materials. 
(9)  The granting of a license shall include the right of the town to conduct on-site inspections as well as review manifests and records without notice during operating hours. 
(10)  The applicant certifies that no chemical processes intended to facilitate recycling activities will be used. 
(11)  All activities of all solid waste management facilities shall be conducted within structures approved for such use. No outside storage, temporary or permanent, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 5, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-34. - Special conditions of license. 
    The town council may establish special conditions for each license as part of licensing approval under this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 5, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-35. - Information required on license application. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license under this article shall, at the time of filing the application, submit the following information for review and approval by the town council: 
(1)  A site plan containing the following: 
a.  The entire premises owned and the limits of the areas for which a license is sought. 
b.  Existing contours of the tract of land at two-foot contours. 
c.  The limits of any proposed extraction activities; the maximum depth of excavation. 
d.  The final contours of the tract of land upon completion of the proposed activities. 
e.  The location of all existing and proposed buildings and the intended use of such buildings. 
f.  The surrounding land use, zoning, structures and circulation patterns within one mile of the entire parcel. 
g.  The location and direction of flow of all natural watercourses, brooks, streams, drainage swales, ponds, swamps, wetlands, flood hazard areas, groundwater recharge and wellhead districts; and groundwater reservoir districts. 
h.  The location of proposed monitoring wells. 
i.  All other requirements for site plan review based on the type of use proposed and as described in article IV(H) of the town subdivision and development regulations. 
(2)  An operating plan, including but not limited to the specifications of the following: 
a.  Hours of operations. 
b.  Site security. 
c.  Transportation routes. 
d.  Street sweeping and repair schedules. 
e.  Manifest reporting program. 
f.  Types of equipment that will be used on site accompanied by a description of operation processes for equipment. 
(3)  A closure plan or restoration plan. 
(4)  A groundwater monitoring plan. 
(5)  An emergency or contingency plan for addressing potential fire hazards, hazardous waste, or other unacceptable waste that may be delivered to the solid waste facility. 
(6)  In addition, a hazardous materials use plan documenting quantities and storage location for all hazardous materials. 
(7)  A traffic impact analysis, including but not limited to a report that identifies the number of trips generated per day, the proposed routes for traffic accessing the site and the location of the site relative to state and local roads. Additionally, the report should identify expected impacts and any measures proposed for mitigating identified impacts. 
(8)  Legal documents including easements, monitoring well program, and insurance policies which insure compliance with all license requirements and which indemnify the town from any liability. Any general liability or environmental coverages shall include the town as a coinsured party. 
(9)  Documentation that the applicant has the financial resources to complete the closure plan or restoration plan. 
(10)  Fees for the following: 
a.  Review of the site plan and associated documents. 
b.  Review of the traffic impact analysis. 
c.  Preparation of the impact analysis. 
(11)  Names and mailing addresses of all property owners within 2,500 feet of the subject property. 
(12)  Anticipated life of the facility and amount of material to be disposed. 
(13)  Specifications for the liner. 
(b)  Upon receipt of all submittal requirements, the town clerk shall forward the application for such license to the town planning department and the planning and conservation commissions with a request for such department's and commissions' review and recommendation for approval and/or denial or for setting special conditions on any approval. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 5, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-36. - Renewal of license. 
    A license issued pursuant to this article shall expire after one year. A license authorized by the town council may be renewed annually, following a public hearing, if a renewal application is filed by the licensee. An application for license renewal shall be accompanied by the licensee's affidavit that the facility is operating according to plan and in accordance with any and all conditions of approval. In addition, any request for license renewal shall be accompanied by fees and license requirements, including but not limited to new or revised performance and restoration guarantees as required by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 5, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-37. - Revocation of license. 
    Solid waste management facility sites shall be inspected on a regular basis by the town building official and town engineer. If operations are not proceeding in conformance with this chapter or with any condition of town council approval or with any approved operations plan, the town council may immediately suspend the license and, after notice and hearing, may revoke any license issued under the authority of this article for any violation of any of the sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 5, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-38. - Violations. 
(a)  Suit may be brought in the superior court in the name of the town to restrain any violation of this article or to compel compliance with this article or any condition of approval. 
(b)  The town will require strict compliance with the terms of this article and with any conditions of approval as set forth by the town council. By application for a license, the applicant consents to injunctive relief to the town's benefit until such time as the operator can certify and demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the town, the removal of violations and certify that future operations shall be conducted pursuant to the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 5, 9-13-1993) 
Secs. 6-39-6-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RECYCLING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Recycling, RIGL 1956, § 23-18.8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appliance means any device or instrument operated by electricity or gas and designated for household use, including but not limited to stoves, washers, refrigerators and dryers. Nothing in this definition shall waive compliance with the rules and regulations for generation, transportation, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. 
    Bulk item means an item of solid waste larger than two feet by two feet by four feet or that cannot be placed in the recommended 34-gallon plastic bag or that is heavier than 35 pounds. 
    Hazardous waste means any waste as defined in the state Hazardous Waste Management Act, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.1-4, or in regulations adopted pursuant thereto and as may be amended. 
    Household hazardous waste means hazardous municipal solid waste generated by town residents. 
    Mixed recyclables means recyclable materials that are required to be removed from municipal solid waste at the source and placed in the 96-gallon cart provided by the town for transport to the nearest materials recovery facility for recycling. 
    Municipal solid waste means solid waste generated by the town residents in the course of daily living of residents, the disposal of which the town council has undertaken in the discharge of its duties to protect the health of the town. The term does not include solid waste generated by town residents in the course of such residents' employment or that is generated by any manufacturing or commercial enterprise. 
    Recyclable materials means materials separated from municipal solid waste for reuse, as defined by the department of environmental management maximum recycling program, or as specified by the director of the department of environmental management and listed in section 4 of municipal recycling regulations and within this article. The materials to be included may change from time to time depending upon new technologies, economic conditions, waste stream characteristics, environmental effects or mutual agreement between the state and municipalities. 
    Refuse disposal arrangements means the process by which the town plans for and carries out the separation, weighing, collection, hauling and disposal of solid waste generated within the town. 
    Resident means any person whose principal place of residence is within the corporate limits of the town. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and agricultural sources, but not including solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or sewage sludge or hazardous waste as defined in the Hazardous Waste Management Act, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq. 
    Source separation means the removal by the generator of recyclable materials, including mixed recyclables, from all other solid waste generated by the household, and conveyance of the recyclables to the curbside or other location designated by the town or its agents. 
    Transfer station means a facility operated by or for the town whose purpose is the temporary storage and accumulation of municipal solid waste prior to its transport to and disposal at a state solid waste management corporation landfill or other designated facility. 
    White goods means major kitchen or laundry appliances, including but not limited to stoves, washers, refrigerators and dryers. Nothing in this definition shall waive compliance with the rules and regulations for generation, transportation, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989; Ord. No. 99-14, § 8, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 10-1-2012) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-51. - Implementation. 
    There is established a program for the mandatory separation of certain recyclable materials from municipal solid waste by the town residents and the collection of segregated municipal solid waste at the resident's curbside or at other specified locations. The collection of separate recyclables shall be made under the supervision of the director of public works and recycling coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989; Ord. No. 99-14, § 9, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 6-52. - Responsibility of director of public works. 
    The director of public works, at the direction of the town manager, shall have the responsibility for the implementation of this article. The director shall be responsible for providing support to the recycling coordinator so as to enable the recycling coordinator to adequately perform the duties under state law and this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-53. - Recycling coordinator. 
    The town manager may appoint an individual, either full time or part time, to coordinate the recycling program with the department of public works, private refuse haulers, recycling facilities and the public. One of the primary tasks of the recycling coordinator shall be to encourage public education about recycling. These tasks shall be accomplished in a manner consistent with all federal, state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989; Ord. No. 99-14, § 10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 6-54. - Enforcement by chief of police. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-55. - Pretreatment and collection of mixed recyclables. 
(a)  The town shall provide for the automated collection of single stream recyclables every other week from residents in dwellings with one to four dwelling units. The materials shall be placed at the curbside, or other locations approved by the director of public works, in the designated 96-gallon cart; no materials shall be placed curbside outside of designated cart. The town shall also provide containers at the town's transfer station for cardboard and acceptable recyclables included in the single stream program. For the purpose of this section, the acceptable single stream recyclables to be collected are as follows: 
(1)  Mixed recyclables: glass food and beverage containers, aluminum and steel/tin cans, aluminum foil and scrap (e.g., pie plates), metal lids, empty aerosol and paint cans, plastic beverage containers (milk jugs, juice and soft drink bottles), plastic tubs and containers holding fewer than two gallons (liquid ounce), clear plastic deli style containers, and clear plastic take-out containers in a clamshell style (molded with a hinge-style top), and paper milk, juice, soup or broth cartons and juice boxes; and 
(2)  Paper recyclables: mail, magazines, catalogs, writing paper, corrugated cardboard, paperboard (e.g., cereal boxes), newspaper, brown (Kraft) paper bags, and telephone directories; and 
(3)  Corrugated cardboard: cardboard shall be flattened and placed inside designated cart. 
(b)  All mixed recyclables shall be pretreated prior to being placed in the designated cart. The pretreatment required shall be as follows: 
(1)  All containers shall be rinsed and the lids removed from glass, aluminum and steel/tin containers; caps should be replaced on plastic bottles; metal lids should be recycled. 
(2)  No broken glass shall be placed in the cart. 
(3)  Aluminum furniture shall have the webbing removed, and all glass shall be removed from aluminum windows. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989; Ord. No. 97-14, § 1, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 99-14, § 11, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 08-11, §§ 1-3, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 12-10, § 2, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 6-56. - Publication of collection schedules. 
    The director of public works shall prominently publish the schedule for collection of recyclable materials and shall publish a new schedule whenever there is a change in either materials to be collected, collection procedures or schedules. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-57. - Placement of materials; containers. 
    Recyclable materials shall be deposited at the curb or edge of the roadway so as to not impede traffic or pedestrians, in special recycling carts provided by the town to residents, prior to 7:00 a.m. on scheduled collection day; once emptied, carts shall be removed from curb or edge of roadway. These carts shall be the property of the town and shall be initially distributed to every household participating in the program; each cart will be identified by a control number assigned to a street address and shall remain at assigned address. Carts removed from assigned location shall be subject to a fee specified by the town council. If there are more recyclables than can be accommodated in the cart, an additional cart may be purchased for a fee specified by the town council. Only town designated carts will be collected in the curbside program. Recyclable materials shall be prepared for collection according to directions published by the town. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989; Ord. No. 11-12, § 1, 5-23-2011; Ord. No. 12-10, § 3, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 6-58. - Licensed public events. 
    The town shall require the separation of recyclables as a condition of licensing or authorizing public events at which significant solid waste will be generated. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-59. - Commercial recycling. 
    Business firms shall be subject to state and federal recycling regulations. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-60. - Compliance required. 
    All residents, taxpayers and others doing business in the town shall separate recyclables from the nonrecyclable portion of such persons' solid waste and shall prepare them for recycling according to the terms of this article and directions published by the town. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-61. - Collection by private parties and nonprofit groups. 
    Residents are allowed to give recyclables to individuals and to private and nonprivate organizations that have been duly licensed and whose collections are reported in a manner specified by the director of public works to be in compliance with department of environmental management reporting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-62. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    Violation of this article shall be punished by the following means: 
(1)  For the first offense, the collector shall pick up the solid waste and recyclables and shall attach a notice to the recycling container advising the resident of the resident's duties under the law. The collector shall keep a record of the street addresses of those who have received a warning notice and shall report the addresses on a weekly basis to the director of public works. 
(2)  For the second offense, the director of public works shall send a written warning advising that subsequent violations can result in the imposition of fines. 
(3)  For the third offense, the director of public works shall send a written warning advising that a subsequent violation shall result in the imposition of fines. 
(4)  For the fourth and any subsequent offense, the resident shall be subject to fines in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-63. - Duty of noncomplying resident to remove waste. 
    A resident in noncompliance with this article continues to be under a duty to remove the resident's solid waste from the street and to properly dispose of the solid waste so as not to create any hazard or nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-64. - Creation of hazard or nuisance. 
    No person having custody or control of residential, industrial or business premises from which solid waste, including recyclables, is collected for disposal by the town shall permit or cause any solid waste, including recyclables, within such person's control to become a hazard to public travel, health or safety or a nuisance of any sort. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-65. - Ownership of recyclables; unauthorized collection; penalty. 
(a)  Once municipal solid waste has been deposited in the designated place, be it curbside or transfer station, the solid waste shall become the property of the town. No person engaged in the business of separation, recovery, collection, removal, storage or disposition of solid waste shall pick up or procure any recyclable materials, as defined under this article, or any valid regulation, within the town, except as specifically authorized by the director of public works. This restriction shall also include any resident, taxpayer or other person who might engage in such practice for personal gain. 
(b)  Any person violating the terms of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-66. - Permit for volunteer collection. 
    The director of public works may issue permits to private parties or charitable organizations to collect recyclable materials on the condition that a report is filed by the party or organization detailing the amount of each material collected in compliance with the department of environmental management's reporting requirements and provided that the director determines that the collection does not defeat the purpose of cost effectiveness of the town's recycling program nor conflict with the town's local implementation program. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-67. - Recycling contracts. 
    The town manager is empowered to supervise, facilitate and contract with either state recycling facilities, as mandated by state laws, or with commercial firms for the receipt and processing of recyclable material, in a manner consistent with the town's local implementation program, that yields the best rate of recycling and the most cost effective result for the town. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Sec. 6-68. - Additional regulations. 
    The director of public works, subject to town council approval, is authorized to prepare and publish regulations governing the implementation of the recycling program. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 3-13-1989) 
Secs. 6-69-6-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECYCLING FACILITIES 

Sec. 6-80. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Groundwater means water collected and stored in the saturated zone beneath the ground surface as designated in subsections 21-186(b) and 21-187(a) of the zoning chapter. 
    Polluting means the causing of pollution. 
    Pollution means the alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of groundwater, surface water and/or air quality. 
    Recycling means the reuse of recovered resources in manufacturing, agriculture, power production or other processes and/or uses. 
    Recycling facility means a facility, building or enclosed structure where solid waste or recyclable materials are collected, sorted, separated or processed for reuse. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and agricultural services, but does not include hazardous waste as defined in the Hazardous Waste Management Act, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq. For purposes of this article, the term also includes asphalt, concrete, Portland concrete cement and tree stumps. Stump dumps incidental to a residential, commercial or industrial development approved by the planning commission or department of planning and development shall be exempted from the licensing requirements of this article, but shall comply with subdivision and development regulations pertaining to such stump dumps. 
    Surface water means a body of water whose top surface is exposed to the atmosphere. 
    Wellhead protection area means the critical portion of a three-dimensional zone surrounding a public well or well field through which water will move toward and reach such well or well field as designated by the town and/or the director of the state department of environmental management. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 6, 9-13-1993) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-81. - Location and licensing of facility. 
    No person shall recycle solid waste in any manner on any property, public or private, within the town, except in a location designated and licensed for a recycling facility by the town council. This section shall not apply to the composting of vegetative materials used for noncommercial use, not to exceed three cubic yards. This section shall not apply to stump dump operations undertaken and completed in compliance with state regulations regarding the operations. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 6, 9-13-1993) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 21. 
Sec. 6-82. - Licensing authority. 
    The town council shall issue licenses and regulate activities for recycling facilities. All licenses issued under this article shall be subject to the requirements set forth in this article, and no such license shall be issued until a public hearing has been held by the town council. Notice of the public hearing shall be advertised for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the town prior to the date of the hearing. The newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement and shall include the place, time and date of the hearing; the name of the applicant; a description of the license sought; the street address, plat and lot numbers of the property in question; and shall advise those interested where and when a copy of the license application may be examined or obtained. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners by certified mail, return receipt requested, within 2,500 feet of the boundary of the property upon which the recycling facility is proposed to be operated. Such notice to property owners must, at a minimum, contain all information required for the display advertisement and must be sent at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 6, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-83. - License requirements. 
(a)  Every applicant for a recycling facility license shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section. The requirements of this subsection shall be deemed to be preconditions to license approval. No license shall be issued unless the town council has expressly made an affirmative finding of compliance with regard to each and every one of the following requirements, identified as subsections (a)(1) through (a)(11): 
(1)  The proposed site is located in a zoning district which permits the proposed facility either as a permitted use or by special exception. 
(2)  If applicable, a license for the operation of a recycling facility has been issued by the director of the state department of environmental management. 
(3)  The recycling facility shall be operated in a manner so as to not cause or be likely to cause pollution of the groundwaters, the surface waters or the air of the town. 
(4)  The facility will be operated in a manner as to be in compliance with any and all other sections of this Code and municipal ordinances. 
(5)  The applicant has sufficient financial resources to be able to complete the requirements of any closure and/or other restoration required under this article. The town council shall require the applicant to post with the town adequate security to guarantee the applicant's obligations pursuant to the closure plan for the site and/or for any restoration required. Such performance guarantee shall also include but not be limited to the cost to repair roadway damage incurred through the transportation of solid waste to and from the facility, the removal of solid waste, protection from soil erosion and sedimentation, and the restoration of surface conditions. The town engineer shall prepare an estimate of the required performance guarantee based on the closure plan or restoration plan submitted by the applicant. Such plan must provide sufficient detail as to site changes proposed and quantities of material anticipated. The town engineer shall also prepare a report based on recommendations from other town departments of anticipated impacts from the licensing of a recycling facility. Such report will provide the documentation for the performance guarantee in addition to any requirements of the closure plan or restoration plan. No license will be issued until the town council approved performance guarantee has been received by the department of finance. 
(6)  The applicant has granted to the town a perpetual easement allowing the town the perpetual right to enter upon the land at reasonable times for the purposes of inspecting the solid waste management facility or for the purpose of conducting tests where the recycling facility is located. 
(7)  No solid waste shall be stored or disposed of, temporarily or permanently, at or near a recycling facility unless otherwise licensed as a solid waste disposal facility by the town and the state. The applicant shall have prepared by a registered engineer experienced in the field of environmental engineering a plan for monitoring wells for the site proposed. Such monitoring wells shall be installed by the applicant to verify the groundwater elevations and shall be used to ensure the protection of the groundwaters on site and outside site boundaries or surface water bodies, if any. Monitoring well plans will be reviewed by the town for consistency with the objectives of this article and any other sections of this Code and town ordinances. Based on town review, the town council will receive a report recommending a monitoring program for the site proposed. Such monitoring program will identify, at a minimum, the locations to be tested, the frequency of tests and the types of tests to be conducted. The town council shall review the report and use the report for establishing any necessary conditions to the license approval. 
(8)  All recycling facilities shall, in addition to all of the other requirements of this chapter, comply with all of the rules and regulations for solid waste management facilities, adopted and as amended by the state department of environmental management, division of air and hazardous materials. 
(9)  The granting of a license shall include the right of the town to conduct on-site inspections as well as review manifests and records without notice during operating hours. 
(10)  The applicant certifies that no chemical processes intended to facilitate recycling activities will be used. 
(11)  All activities of recycling facilities shall be conducted within structures approved for such use; no outside storage, temporary or permanent, shall be permitted. 
(b)  Any and all costs incurred by the town for necessary notice and advertising shall be reimbursed by the applicant prior to the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 6, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-84. - Special conditions of license. 
    The town council may establish special conditions for each license as part of licensing approval under this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 6, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-85. - Information required on license application. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license under this article shall, at the time of filing the application, submit the following information for review and approval by the town council: 
(1)  A site plan containing the following: 
a.  The entire premises owned and the limits of the areas for which a license is sought. 
b.  Existing contours of the tract of land at two-foot contours. 
c.  The limits of any proposed extraction activities; the maximum depth of excavation. 
d.  The final contours of the tract of land upon completion of proposed activities. 
e.  The location of all existing and proposed buildings and the intended use of such buildings. 
f.  The surrounding land use, zoning, structures and circulation patterns within a half mile of the entire parcel. 
g.  The location and direction of flow of all natural watercourses, brooks, streams, drainage swales, ponds, swamps, wetlands, flood hazard areas, groundwater recharge and wellhead districts; and groundwater reservoir districts. 
h.  The location of proposed monitoring wells. 
i.  All other requirements for site plan review based on the type of use proposed and as described in article IV(H) of the town subdivision and development regulations. 
(2)  An operating plan, including but not limited to the specifications of the following: 
a.  Hours of operations. 
b.  Site security. 
c.  Transportation routes. 
d.  Street sweeping and repair schedules. 
e.  Manifest reporting program. 
f.  Types of equipment that will be used on site accompanied by a description of operation processes for equipment. 
(3)  A closure plan or restoration plan. 
(4)  A groundwater monitoring plan. 
(5)  An emergency or contingency plan for addressing potential fire hazards, hazardous waste or other unacceptable waste that may be delivered to the recycling facility. 
(6)  A traffic impact analysis, including but not limited to a report that identifies the number of trips generated per day, the proposed routes for traffic accessing the site and the location of the site relative to state and local roads. Additionally, the report should identify expected impacts and any measures proposed for mitigating identified impacts. 
(7)  Legal documents including easements, monitoring well program, and insurance policies which insure compliance with all license requirements and which indemnify the town from any liability. Any general liability or environmental coverages shall include the town as a coinsured party. 
(8)  Documentation that the applicant has the financial resources to complete the closure plan or restoration plan. 
(9)  Fees for the following: 
a.  Review of the site plan and associated documents. 
b.  Review of the traffic impact analysis. 
c.  Preparation of an impact analysis. 
(10)  Names and mailing addresses of all property owners within 2,500 feet of the subject property. 
(11)  Anticipated life of the facility and amount of material to be recycled on a daily basis. 
(b)  Upon receipt of all submittal requirements, the town clerk shall forward the application for such license to the town planning department and planning and conservation commissions with a request for such department and commissions' review and recommendation for approval and/or for setting special conditions on any approval. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 6, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-86. - License renewal. 
    A license issued pursuant to this article shall expire after one year. A license authorized by the town council may be renewed annually, following a public hearing, if a renewal application is filed by the licensee. An application for license renewal shall be accompanied by the licensee's affidavit that the facility is operating according to plan and in accordance with any and all conditions of approval. In addition, any request for license renewal shall be accompanied by fees and license requirements, including but not limited to new or revised performance guarantees as required by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 6, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-87. - Revocation of license. 
    Recycling facility sites shall be inspected on a regular basis by the town building official and town engineer. If operations are not proceeding in conformance with this article or with any condition of town council approval or with any approved operations plan, the town council may immediately suspend the license and, after notice and hearing, shall revoke any license issued under the authority of this article for any violation of any of the sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 6, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 6-88. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the sections of this article or of any conditions of approval shall be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1-4. Each and every violation and nonconformance of this article or each day that any section of this article shall have been violated shall be construed to be a separate and distinct violation. 
(b)  Suit shall be brought in the superior court in the name of the town to restrain any violation of or compel compliance with this article or any condition of approval. 
(c)  The town will require strict compliance with the terms of this article and with any conditions of approval as set forth by the town council. By application for a license, the applicant consents to injunctive relief to the town's benefit until such time as the operator can certify and demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the town, the removal of violations and certify that future operations shall be conducted pursuant to the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 6, 9-13-1993) 
Chapter 7 - HARBORS, WHARVES AND PUBLIC WATERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Mobile and manufactured home parks, ch. 10; parks and recreational areas, ch. 13; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; zoning, ch. 21; public access to water, § 21-281. 
State Law reference- Authority granted to Town of North Kingstown regarding waters within its jurisdiction, RIGL 1956, § 46-4-6.4; harbor and harbor lines, powers of the North Kingstown Town Council regarding its public waters, Public Laws of 1985, ch. 234; harbor violations in North Kingstown to be heard by the division of administrative adjudication, Public Laws of 1987, ch. 200. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Purpose and definitions. 
(a)  Scope. This chapter addresses the regulation of uses and activities within the public waters of the town, as described in this chapter, consistent with the authority granted the town under RIGL 1956, § 46-4-6.4 and any amendments thereto. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Anchorage means an area for the anchoring of transient vessels. 
    Charter means a legal arrangement between two parties for the use of a vessel. The charterer has full care, custody, control, and exclusive use of the vessel. The vessel owner shall not participate in the use of the vessel for the specified time. 
    Commercial craft means any vessel, the primary function of which is to engage in an income-producing operation. This category includes any vessel engaged in commercial fishing not meeting the requirements of a commercial fishing boat, as described in this subsection, and any boat for charter, hire or rent. A boat for charter, hire or rent must be engaged in such business at least 75 percent of the time that it goes to sea. 
    Commercial fishing boat means any vessel, the primary function of which is to garner marine organisms from the sea or its tidal estuaries and then to sell this catch. While this vessel is berthed at a town-owned wharf, it must be engaged in commercial fishing operations on the average of at least three days a week for at least six months of the year, and at least 75 percent of the time that the vessel goes to sea it must do so for purposes of commercial fishing. 
    Commercial service mooring means a mooring permit granted to an individual or business engaged in the full time business of selling, leasing, storing, servicing or maintaining vessels and who uses the mooring covered by the permit in connection with such a business. Use by any single vessel for more than 30 days per season, unless registered to the permittee, or rental of the mooring is expressly forbidden. 
    CRMC refers to the state coastal resources management council. 
    Division means the harbor division of the department of public safety of the town. 
    Harbor management commission means that commission created and appointed by the town council to be the local advisory body to regulate the public waters and harbor areas of the town. 
    Harbormaster means that person appointed by the town manager, with the approval of the town council, who is responsible for the administration and enforcement of all sections of this Code and all ordinances regulating the uses and activities on public waters. 
    High speed operations refers to any operation of a vessel at speeds in excess of five miles per hour. 
    Mooring permit means the contract between the town and the permittee granting the permittee the privilege of using an assigned mooring space within town waters for a specified season. The contract is granted on a year to year basis for the exclusive, personal use of the permittee for a vessel registered in his/her name. 
    Mooring service providers means companies approved by the harbor division to provide mooring service, installation, and inspections in town waters. To be considered for this list, a company must be in the full-time business of mooring service, have a vessel suitable for mooring service and inspections, and be insured. 
    Moorings: 
(1)  Mooring means any object or device, including a piling, to which a vessel may be secured other than a wharf, dock, slip, pier or aid to navigation. 
(2)  Mooring field means an area containing five or more moorings, and designated for a relatively high density of moorings. Each mooring field will be designated by a name as shown on the harbor management map. A boundary shall be defined in state plane coordinates which serves as the perimeter of the mooring field. 
(3)  Mooring inspector means the person approved by the harbor division to inspect moorings. 
(4)  Mooring permit means the contract between the town and the permittee granting the permittee the privilege of using an assigned mooring space within town waters for a specified season. 
(5)  Mooring tackle means the hardware used to secure a vessel mooring to the bottom of a waterway. 
(6)  Shallow mooring means any mooring located in sheltered waters having a depth of two feet or less at mean low water. Shallow water moorings are limited to riparian moorings. 
(7)  Deep mooring means any mooring other than a shallow mooring. 
(8)  Riparian mooring permit is a mooring permit issued to a waterfront property owner, for a mooring located within the seaward extensions of the lot lines of their associated waterfront property. 
    Permitted vessel means that vessel identified on the permit for a private mooring. 
    Permittee means the individual person or entity to whom a mooring permit is issued by the division. For the purpose of this chapter, a mooring permittee shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Commercial means a permittee who is engaged in the business of renting or leasing moorings; or a person who is engaged for profit in the business of selling, leasing, storing, servicing or maintaining vessels and who maintains and uses the mooring covered by the permit in connection with such business. 
(2)  Private means any permittee other than one classified as commercial, yacht club or town under this definition. 
(3)  Town means the Town of North Kingstown acting by and through the division. 
(4)  Yacht club means a nonprofit yachting or boating association. 
    Powered vessel means any vessel propelled in whole or in part by mechanical means, either inboard or outboard, and using a motor powered by gasoline, diesel fuel, naphtha, kerosene, steam, fuel oil or electricity. 
    Prohibited area means an area of the public waters where the navigation of vessels is prohibited. Law enforcement and life guard vessels may operate in prohibited areas when required by the duties of law enforcement and life guards. 
    Public waters means the public waters within the confines of the town, as delineated on the harbor management map of the town. 
    Rafting means two or more vessels tied abreast to a single mooring. 
    Rhode Island State Plane Coordinate System means the state plane coordinate system consisting of two systems of plane coordinates, established by the national ocean/national geodetic survey, that can be used for defining and stating the geographic positions or locations of points on the surface of the earth within the state. These two systems are known as the Rhode Island Coordinate System of 1927 and the Rhode Island Coordinate System of 1983. A more technical definition of these systems can be found at RIGL 1956, § 34-8.4-1 et seq. 
    Riparian privileges means the privileges of a person owning land containing or bordering on a watercourse related to access to the water, certain privileges regarding its uses and the benefits of accretions and reliction. 
    Sheltered waters means the Wickford Harbor complex, Allen Harbor and any other sheltered water areas of the town's waters as designated by the harbor division. 
    Thoroughfare means any area of the public waters reserved for the unobstructed navigation of vessels and designated as such on the harbor management map of the town. 
    Town dock means the town-owned floating transient dock located behind the town parking lot off of Brown Street in Wickford. 
    Town wharf means the town-owned wharf located at the east end of Main Street in Wickford. 
    Transient mooring means a mooring that has been designated by the Harbormaster for temporary use. 
    Wickford Harbor complex is a collective term which includes Wickford Harbor, Wickford Cove, Fishing Cove, Mill Cove and Mill Creek. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 08-35, § 1, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 3-6-2017) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 7-2. - Enforcement. 
    The regulations set forth in this chapter shall be enforced by the harbormaster. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-3. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates a section of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum penalty allowed under state laws. 
(b)  If any offense continues more than one day, each day the offense continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-4. - Authority of harbor division. 
(a)  The harbor division shall have the authority to recommend to the town council rules and regulations to carry out this chapter and shall furnish all permittees with a copy of such rules and regulations (subsection 7-52(a)). 
(b)  The harbor division shall have the authority to monitor the number and location of boats in mooring fields and marinas and to recommend to the town council the maximum number of moorings possible for each mooring field. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 99-20, § 1, 9-13-1999) 
Secs. 7-5-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BERTHING SPACES AT TOWN WHARF 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-21. - Purpose of article. 
    This article sets forth the town policy pertaining to the use of town wharves in Wickford as it relates to the berthing of boats and establishes the priorities and fees for such a permit for berthing space and the rules and regulations governing such use. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-22. - Use priorities. 
(a)  In Wickford, berthing space at town-owned wharves, exclusive of space needed by the harbor division for administrative and enforcement purposes, shall be allocated and posted by the harbor division in the following order of priority: first, commercial fishing vessels; second, other commercial vessels; and third, pleasure vessels. The town shall maintain, permanently, berthing space for transient vessels according to the rules set forth in section 7-54. 
(b)  In Allen Harbor, berthing space at town-owned wharves, exclusive of space needed by the harbor division, shall be allocated and posted by the recreation department exclusively for pleasure vessels. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-23. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow any vessel to occupy any berthing space at any wharf, other than one which has been designated and posted as transient space in accordance with section 7-54, unless: 
(1)  The owner of such vessel is the holder of a valid permit issued under this article which authorizes such vessel to occupy such berthing space; or 
(2)  The occupation of such space by such vessel is in accordance with a day-to-day rental approved by the harbor division pursuant to section 7-51. 
(b)  No person shall cause or allow any vessel to occupy or obstruct any berthing space at any wharf which has been designated and posted as transient space, except in accordance with section 7-54. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-24. - Swimming prohibited. 
    No person shall swim from any town-owned dock or wharf nor shall swimming be permitted from any vessel moored to any town-owned dock or wharf. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Secs. 7-25-7-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOWN WHARF PERMITS 

Sec. 7-46. - Criteria for issuance; application; waiting list. 
(a)  Annual permits for berthing space at the town wharf shall be issued by the finance department to boat owners, pursuant to applications approved by the harbor division. Such applications shall certify ownership; boat name, registration and pertinent licenses; and other information as requested by the division. Permits, once issued, are renewable without reference to waiting lists by all commercial fishing boats. 
(b)  Annual assignments of remaining berthing spaces shall be made according to the priority classes set forth in section 7-22 and placed, in order of application date, on the waiting list appropriate to that class. Such lists shall be maintained by the harbor division. 
(c)  A person on the waiting list shall reapply annually between May 1 and May 31 of each year to maintain the relative position on the waiting list. This application will reconfirm the person's desire for a slip and will provide the size of the vessel and other pertinent data. Individuals not reapplying annually, as specified in this subsection, will be dropped from the waiting lists. An application shall be mailed annually by regular mail to each person on the waiting list to the person's last known address before May 1 to allow such person to maintain the place on the list. 
(d)  An initial application fee will be charged to those applying for the waiting list. Thereafter, a yearly renewal fee will be charged. The amount of the fee shall be as prescribed in section 9-4, table VI. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No 16-13, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 7-47. - Changes in use. 
(a)  If a change of boat is proposed or if there is a change in other pertinent characteristics related to the permit application of record, as provided in this division, the permittee shall submit full particulars to the harbor division for its approval. 
(b)  A permittee shall not sell, trade, sublet or assign the permit or the usage of the permittee's assigned space. 
(c)  If a permittee sells or otherwise transfers a portion of such permittee's boat ownership interest, and this fact is properly reflected in the boat registration, the harbor division may issue a new permit recognizing such multiple ownership without regard to the waiting list, provided that the original permittee actively participates in the usage of the boat at the assigned berth. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-48. - Billing and payment of berth space fees. 
    Fees for berth space at the town wharf for each year shall be paid annually in advance by June 30 for the next fiscal year. Remittance shall be made payable to the town and sent to the Director of Finance, 80 Boston Neck Road, North Kingstown, Rhode Island 02852, or it may be paid at the town hall. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-49. - Unpaid berth space fees. 
(a)  If a berth fee remains unpaid on the first business day of July, the permit issued pursuant to this division shall be automatically terminated. 
(b)  The town shall have a lien upon the vessel using such space for any money due it for fees that are in default, which lien may be enforced by the harbormaster through sale of such vessel in accordance with the maritime laws of the United States, if any applicable, or otherwise in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 34-35-1 et seq. and any amendments thereto. 
(c)  The owner of such vessel or the owner's agents shall be liable for arrest for trespassing on town property while fees remain in default. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-50. - Responsibilities of permittee. 
(a)  Berthing spaces at the town wharf are occupied at the sole risk of the user thereof. 
(b)  The permittee shall not permit other craft to tie up alongside without the permission of the harbormaster. 
(c)  The permittee shall take care to maintain the assigned berthing space in a clean and orderly condition and shall take care that no garbage, oil, refuse or other substance shall be discharged or thrown into the public waters. 
(d)  The permittee shall not store gear, barrels, equipment or other material on wharf surfaces, except gear in transit, without the permission of the harbormaster. Storage of bait on the town wharf shall by kept to a minimum, not to exceed a three-day supply. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-51. - Vacated berthing space. 
(a)  If a boat owner vacates the assigned berthing space during the year in which the space is assigned, such space may be assigned for the duration of that year to another boat owner according to the priority classes set forth in section 7-22. 
(b)  An owner who fails to use the assigned berth for a period of 60 days during the period of May to November 1 may have the berthing permit revoked, the berth to be filled by another boat owner according to the priority classes set forth in section 7-22. 
(c)  When an assigned berth shall be unoccupied for a period exceeding 48 hours, such information shall be transmitted to the harbormaster. The harbormaster shall be authorized to rent this space on a day-to-day basis as prescribed in section 9-4, table VI. 
(d)  Exceptions to this section can be arranged through the harbormaster. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-52. - Revocation; vacating berth for maintenance and repairs. 
(a)  The harbormaster shall have the authority to revoke a permit for berthing space at the town wharf on ten days' notice for violation of any rules and regulations made under this article. Any person aggrieved by such revocation may appeal to the town council or any appeals board designated by the council within 20 days of receiving notice thereof by filing the reason of appeal in writing with the town clerk. 
(b)  On notice by the harbormaster, a permittee shall vacate the berth to allow for maintenance and repair work. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-53. - Floating docks. 
(a)  Installation of floating docks at any berthing space at the town wharf by any permittee is prohibited unless the harbor division has obtained an assent for such docks from the coastal resources management council. 
(b)  If approved, floating docks shall be constructed and maintained by the permittee according to the provisions of the assent. These docks shall not be more than two-thirds the length of the craft assigned to that berth. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-54. - Transient vessels. 
(a)  The harbor division shall designate and post berthing space at the town wharf for transient vessels. Such space shall not be occupied by the same vessel for more than two consecutive hours, after which a fee as prescribed in section 9-4, table VI, shall be charged, and the harbormaster may, at the harbormaster's discretion, cause such vessel to be removed. 
(b)  When a vessel must overstay the two-hour time limit because of unsafe or disabling conditions, the vessel owner must promptly notify the harbormaster. The harbormaster may then waive the limit and/or any fee for a period of time deemed reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-55. - Use of town-owned wharfs and landings by commercial passenger vessels. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a commercial passenger vessel shall not use town-owned wharfs or landings to load or discharge passengers without first obtaining a permit to do so from the harbormaster. 
(b)  Requirements for a permit shall include: 
(1)  Copies of U.S. Coast Guard vessel certification and captain's license. 
(2)  A certificate of insurance, satisfactory to the town showing liability coverage of at least $1,000,000.00 per occurrence with the town as an additional insured in connection with the use of the town's wharfs, landings and other facilities. 
(3)  A written business plan outlining the proposed operation, including season, days and hours of operation, frequency of trips, whether trips originate in the town, numbers of passengers per trip, any associated trucks or buses and a parking plan with respect to trips originating in the town. 
(4)  The harbormaster shall not issue a permit unless he/she is satisfied that the proposed operation, as outlined in the written business plan, will not, when considered together with other permitted operations and scheduled events, be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding area. In that regard, the harbormaster may, in his/her discretion, refuse to issue a permit for trips which originate in the town unless off-site and/or off-street parking is made available by the applicant. 
(5)  An application fee, as specified in section 9-4 of the Code of Ordinances, shall be paid with the application for the permit. 
(6)  The harbormaster is authorized to revoke the permit when the approved business plan has not been followed or when the operation adversely affects the surrounding area by giving notice to the holder of the permit. 
(7)  Permits shall be issued for a specified period of time not to exceed one year. 
(8)  Exceptions to these requirements may be made by the harbormaster. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § 1, 5-10-2004) 
Secs. 7-56-7-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VESSELS, ANCHORAGES AND MOORINGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Waters and navigation, RIGL 1956, tit. 46; regulation of boats, RIGL 1956, § 46-22-14. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-76. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the speed, management and control of vessels and the size, type, location and use of all anchorages and moorings within the public waters within the town in accordance with the power conferred upon the town council by RIGL 1956, § 46-4-6.4. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-77. - Harbor management map. 
(a)  There shall be harbor management maps of the town. The harbor management commission shall update and keep current the harbor management maps as required. Amendments to the maps shall be approved by the town council and kept on file in the office of the town clerk. 
(b)  The maps shall delineate, for the purposes of this article, the public waters within the town and shall depict the approximate size and location of all anchorages, mooring fields, swimming areas, prohibited areas, sheltered waters and thoroughfares established and regulated by this article. 
(c)  The maps may be amended, from time to time, by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-78. - Water skiing/high speed operations prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)  Water skiing or any other high speed operations are prohibited anywhere inside the Wickford Harbor breakwater, except in the following locations: 
(1)  In Fishing Cove, north of a line from Wickford Point dock to the northern tip of Cornelius Island, and north of a line from the eastern tip of Cornelius Island to the southern tip of Sauga Point; 
(2)  In any prohibited or mooring areas. 
(b)  No water skier or vessel towing a skier or any vessel conducting any high speed operations shall approach closer than 200 feet to any person, marked swimming area, vessel or object, stationary or moving, including the shore, except the person being towed or otherwise as may be incidental to the starting or finishing of a run. 
(c)  Further, water skiing is prohibited in all designated channels, fairways, and mooring areas. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 03-01, § 2, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 08-35, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 17-05, § 2, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 7-79. - Management and control of vessels. 
(a)  Every person operating a vessel within the public waters shall navigate in a careful and prudent manner so as to not endanger the life, limb or property of any person or so as to not interfere with or damage other vessels within the public waters. 
(b)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any vessel, other than law enforcement vessels, within any prohibited area that is designated as such on the map and that is marked by buoys or other devices by the division. 
(c)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated on Belleville Pond and Secret Lake any powered vessel, except electric motors, as defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-80. - Speed of vessels. 
(a)  No vessel within the public waters of the town shall proceed at a greater speed than is reasonable and prudent having due regard to weather and traffic conditions. 
(b)  No vessel shall proceed within the public waters of the Town at a speed sufficient to cause a wake capable of imparting substantial motion to anchored or moored vessels; to vessels docked or berthed at any wharf, dock, pier or marina; or to smaller vessels that are underway. Fines for failure to obey will be $50.00 first offense, $100.00 second offense, $200.00 third offense. 
(c)  To the extent not otherwise prohibited by subsections (a) and (b) of this section, no vessel shall proceed at a speed in excess of five miles per hour in the following locations: 
(1)  In Allen Harbor, in Little Allen Harbor or in the public waters between Spink Neck and Calf Pasture Point. 
(2)  In any waters located inside the Wickford breakwater with the exception of Fishing Cove as allowed by subsection 7-78(a)(1). 
(3)  In Belleville Pond and Secret Lake. 
(4)  In close proximity to any anchored or moored vessel. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 12-05, § 2, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 17-05, § 3, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 7-81. - Designation of thoroughfares; mooring, anchoring and swimming in thoroughfares; swimming areas. 
(a)  Thoroughfares may be established by the division to allow vessels unobstructed passage to and from all anchorages, wharves, docks, piers, marinas and launching areas within the public waters and through all channels within the public waters. When established, these thoroughfares shall be marked by the division and shown on the harbor management map. 
(b)  All channels as marked by the United States and this state within the public waters, together with the areas delineated as such on the map and marked by the division, are declared to be thoroughfares for the purpose of this article. 
(c)  Except in an emergency, no person shall moor or anchor any vessel in any thoroughfare or otherwise obstruct or cause the obstruction of any thoroughfare except by the reasonable and proper navigation of a vessel. 
(d)  Swimming is prohibited in all designated channels and fairways. 
(e)  Scuba diving or snorkeling is prohibited in all thoroughfares and mooring areas except when conducting underwater search and/or salvage operations, in which case prior permission for these operations must be obtained from the harbormaster. A division vessel must be on site for safety and traffic control for the duration of these operations. 
(f)  All public and private club, association or public entity swimming areas in town waters must be designated as such and approved by the harbor commission in conformance with the harbor management plan and indicated on the harbor management map. The commission will issue an approval for each swimming area on a yearly basis. Every public and private club, association or public entity maintaining a swimming area shall apply to the commission for designation by March 31, on a yearly basis, with a letter of intent. For the safety of swimmers, all such areas will be enclosed with a continuous line of buoys. Each club, association or public entity will be responsible for maintaining the buoys within the designated areas. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 08-35, § 3, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 7-82. - Boat sewage waste. 
(a)  The town will prohibit the overboard discharge of untreated vessel-generated waste by endorsing RIGL 1956, § 46-12-39 and directing the harbormaster to enforce the law. Any person who violates this section shall be punished in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 46-12-40. 
(b)  In accordance with RIGL 1956, § 46-12-41, the harbormaster shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of RIGL 1956, § 46-12-39 and, in the exercise thereof, shall have the authority to stop and board any vessel subject to RIGL 1956, tit. 46, ch. 12. The provisions of RIGL 1956, § 46-12-41 provide the authority to enforce these prohibitions. 
(c)  All mooring areas shall be adequately serviced with operational and properly maintained pump-out systems. 
(Ord. No. 99-20, § 2, 9-13-1999; Ord. No. 08-35, § 4, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 7-83. - Transient docks. 
(a)  The transient docks that are parallel to Brown Street are for temporary use only. The maximum stay is two hours. Owners and operators who stay at these docks longer than two hours will incur fines of $50.00 for first offense, $100.00 for second offense, $200.00 for third offense. 
(b)  Docks parallel to Brown Street designated as "Load and Unload Only" will be available for a maximum of 20 minutes. Violators will be subject to a fine of $50.00 for first offense, $100.00 for second offense, $200.00 for third offense. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 3, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 12-05, § 3, 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 7-84. - Transient moorings. 
(a)  Moorings designated by the harbormaster as "transient moorings" will be available for a nightly rental fee of $35.00. Fee will be collected by the harbor division. Stays will be limited to three days (harbormaster may extend stay if demand permits). 
(b)  Fines for failure to pay will be $50.00 first offense, $100.00 second offense, $200.00 third offense. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 4, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Secs. 7-85-7-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANCHORAGES AND MOORINGS 

Sec. 7-106. - Mooring permit required; application contents; denial and restrictions on anchorages. 
(a)  No person shall place, cause to be placed or maintain any mooring in the public waters, as designated on the harbor management map of the town, without first receiving from the division a permit therefor. 
(b)  All applications for permits shall specify the location of the mooring, the dimensions and type of vessel to be secured to the mooring, the type of mooring and such other information as the division may require. 
(c)  No person shall anchor or moor a vessel in any anchorage, mooring area or mooring field in a manner or in a location which, under the circumstances existing, creates a probability of damage to other vessels moored or anchored nearby. 
(d)  The harbormaster may order the relocation of any vessel anchored in the public waters as is deemed necessary and appropriate for the protection of other vessels and/or property. 
(e)  A vessel may anchor on its own anchor in the coastal waters of North Kingstown except prohibited areas for a period not to exceed 72 hours. Prohibited areas are: inside Wickford Harbor Breakwater, federal navigation channels, navigation fairways, mooring fields, swimming areas, rights-of-way, ingress and egress areas, and launching ramp areas. No vessel anchored under such conditions shall be left unattended overnight. In an emergency and/or storm, the vessel operator shall contact the harbormaster. 
(f)  The division may deny any mooring permit when it determines the following: 
(1)  There is insufficient space in the area requested; 
(2)  The location poses an unreasonable risk to other vessels in the area; 
(3)  The proposed mooring will endanger the life or property of any person; or 
(4)  The location of the mooring, in conjunction with other moorings already located in the same general area, will have an adverse effect on the water quality. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No 16-13, § 2, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 7-107. - Mooring permit issuance; waiting list; renewal; restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall place, cause to be placed or maintain any mooring in town waters unless the division has issued a permit therefor specifying the particular mooring field for which it is issued, the location of the mooring in such mooring field and the dimensions of the vessel or type of vessel to be secured to the mooring. All vessels on non-riparian moorings must be kept within the perimeter limit of a CRMC approved mooring area. 
(b)  The division shall not issue a mooring permit for an additional mooring in any mooring field until a determination has been made, after acting on all applications for renewal of mooring permits which were in effect during the immediately preceding year, that there is adequate space in that mooring field to accommodate the vessel or type of vessel specified in the application. 
(c)  In the assignment of initial mooring space and the reallocation of existing mooring space, the North Kingstown Harbor Division shall maintain a ratio of no more than three residents to every one non-resident. In the assignment of moorings located within a federal navigation project (mooring area), mooring permits shall be allocated on an open to all on an equal basis (first come, first served) with no preference for residents. 
(d)  The harbor division shall maintain a waiting list of applicants for additional mooring permits in each mooring field, except Allen Harbor which is maintained by the recreation department, on which list shall be placed the names of all applicants. 
(e)  A person on the waiting list shall reapply in writing annually between May 1 and May 31 of each year in order to reconfirm the person's desire for a mooring, with the size of the vessel and other pertinent data. When an individual annually reapplies for the list, the date of an individual's earliest consecutive application shall be used in determining position on the waiting list. An individual not reapplying annually, as specified in this subsection, will be dropped from the waiting lists. An application shall be mailed annually by regular mail to each person on the waiting list to the person's last known address before May 1 to allow the person to maintain the position on the waiting list. An initial application fee will be charged. Thereafter, a yearly renewal fee will be charged. The amount of the fee shall be prescribed in section 9-4, table VI. 
(f)  Permits for all riparian moorings are subject to the following, dependent upon space available and water quality degradation: 
(1)  A riparian property owner outside of Wickford Harbor will be allowed one mooring per household, for a boat registered in such owner's name plus one guest mooring in front of the property. However, in no case shall the number of moorings exceed that allowed by CRMC. If the vessel is not registered, appropriate proof of ownership will be required. 
(2)  A riparian property owner in Wickford Harbor will be allowed one mooring for a vessel registered in such owner's name. 
(3)  Riparian mooring permits cannot be rented or sold. 
(4)  A riparian owner in Wickford Harbor will take precedence over others on the mooring waiting list, if space becomes available in front of such owner's property, for one mooring. 
(5)  Riparian moorings need not be located within designated mooring fields and are not included in the total mooring count for designated mooring areas. 
(g)  Additional mooring permits for any mooring field shall be issued first to applicants on the waiting list in the following order of priority: 
(1)  The division's applications for town moorings. 
(2)  Length of time on the waiting list, provided that when the space available will not accommodate the vessel or type of vessel covered by the oldest application on the waiting list, the division may issue a permit to the oldest application which covers a vessel or type of vessel which can be accommodated by the space available. 
(h)  A mooring permit, when approved, is for a specific vessel of record, as identified on the permit. The vessel must be registered to the permittee. A copy of the vessel's current registration is required to be provided with both the initial private mooring permit application and, also, with each annual permit renewal. 
(i)  The temporary use of a private mooring by a vessel other than that for which the permit was issued may be authorized by the harbormaster. 
(j)  A mooring permit shall be renewed by the division when a timely application for renewal is filed by the permittee in accordance with subsection (d) of this section indicating that the dimensions of the vessel or type of vessel to be secured to the mooring is not substantially different from that designated in the prior permit and that the components of the mooring meet the requirements of section 7-113. If the vessel or type of vessel to be secured to the mooring is substantially different from that designated in the prior permit, the division shall not renew the permit unless such different vessel or type of vessel may be, in the opinion of the division, accommodated in the mooring area or mooring field and unless the applicant agrees to pay the costs of any relocation of moorings deemed necessary by the division to accommodate such different vessel or type of vessel. The division may refuse to renew a mooring permit for failure of the applicant to comply with this article or the orders, rules and regulations of the division concerning the location and use of moorings during the immediately preceding year. 
(k)  The location of a permitted mooring within a mooring field shall be subject to the final determination of the harbormaster. The harbormaster, as deemed necessary and appropriate for the conservation of space or for the protection of other vessels, may order the relocation of any mooring. 
(l)  No mooring permit or the right to renew such a mooring permit shall be sold, assigned, rented, leased or otherwise transferred by the permittee, provided that: 
(1)  A commercial mooring may be rented by the permittee to a customer of the permittee, provided that such permittee designates such mooring as a rental mooring in the application and the division is notified by June 30 or, for moorings not rented by June 30, within ten days of the rental of the mooring of the required information, including the identity of any vessel and the owner thereof which is to be secured for more than seven consecutive days to the rental mooring. 
(2)  A commercial service mooring may be granted to an individual engaged in the full-time business of selling, leasing, storing, servicing or maintaining vessels and who uses the mooring covered by the permit in connection with such a business. Use by any vessel for more than 30 days in a season, unless registered to the permittee, or rental of the mooring is expressly forbidden. Permits of this type are limited to a maximum of ten at any given time, are subject to the same fee as a commercial mooring, and are not automatically transferable as part of the sale of such business. 
(3)  Any yacht club mooring may be rented to a regular member of the permittee or rented for a period not to exceed seven consecutive days to a nonmember of the permittee. 
(4)  A private mooring permit, when approved, is issued for a specific vessel of record, as identified on the permit. A copy of the vessel's current registration is required to be provided with both the initial private mooring permit application and, also, with each annual permit renewal. The temporary use of a private mooring by a vessel other than that for which the permit was issued may be authorized by the harbormaster. 
(m)  Ensure mooring areas are not established, nor any vessel moored or anchored, so as to interfere with the free and unobstructed use of channels, fairways, or shoreside facilities within the harbor. Public mooring areas shall provide, where possible, a 50 foot setback from all residential docks, piers, floats, public launching ramps, federal navigation channels, fairways, anchorages, and/or turning basins. Setback limits from riparian moorings and shoreline public rights of way shall be sufficient to allow for ingress and egress and to prevent interference with the exercise of private or public rights in these areas. 
(n)  New mooring areas shall be setback at least three times the US Army Corps of Engineers authorized project depth from federal navigation projects. 
(o)  No mooring or mooring area controlled by a commercial entity shall be located within a federal navigation project. 
(p)  No mooring or mooring area may be sited where they may substantially interfere with access to designated shellfish management areas, traditional fishing grounds as defined by the CRMC. public recreational areas, and conservation areas. 
(q)  All new and significantly expanded mooring fields shall be sited to ensure that tides and currents aid in flushing the mooring area. 
(r)  All new and significantly expanded mooring areas shall be sited to avoid adverse effects on water quality. 
(s)  Mooring areas shall be sited so as to not significantly effect finfish and or shellfish resources, wetlands, submerged aquatic vegetation and other important aquatic habitats. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 99-20, § 3, 9-13-1999; Ord. No. 03-01, § 4, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 08-35, § 5, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-16-2014; Ord. No. 17-05, § 4, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 7-108. - Mooring permit term; application and renewal; revocation. 
(a)  Mooring permits issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a one-year period from April 1 of the year of issuance until March 31 of the succeeding year. 
(b)  Application for a mooring permit and for renewal of a mooring permit shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations established and promulgated by the division on forms provided by the division and shall be fully completed by the applicant. An incomplete application will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant for completion. 
(c)  If a commercial or yacht club mooring permit is being applied for, the application shall contain the identity and dimensions of the vessel or type of vessel to be secured to the mooring, a description of the components of the mooring, the permitted use intended to be made of such mooring (commercial, commercial rental, yacht club or private) and such additional information as may be required by the division. 
(d)  An application for renewal of a commercial mooring shall indicate the size of the largest vessel that will be allowed to occupy the mooring. 
(e)  Application renewals shall be accompanied by full payment (non-refundable) and shall be filed with the division between the first and last days of March. Application renewals and payments filed or postmarked between April 1 and April 30 will be subject to a late fee of $50.00. Application renewals and payments filed or postmarked between May 1 and May 31 will be subject to a late fee of $100.00. Application renewals and payments filed after May 31 will not be considered. 
(f)  The annual fee for a mooring permit shall be as prescribed in section 9-4, table VI. 
(g)  Each mooring for which a permit has been issued shall be marked in accordance with subsection 7-113(e). 
(h)  If a permittee fails to place a mooring in the designated location during the mooring permit period, the permit will not be renewed the following year. Exceptions can be arranged through the harbormaster. 
(i)  A private mooring left unoccupied by the permitted vessel during the permit period may not be renewed if there is a waiting list. 
(j)  A private mooring may transfer to an immediate family member (brother, sister, mother, father, spouse, children or grandchildren) upon written notice to the harbormaster which shall include the name and address change. Such transfers shall be strictly limited to a one time basis to those individuals holding a valid permit on the date that the CRMC approves the town harbor management plan and harbor ordinances. No immediate family member to whom a private mooring has been transferred shall then be allowed to transfer that private mooring under any circumstance. Thereafter, all private moorings that are forfeited by or not renewed by a holder of a valid mooring permit shall be made available to individuals on the waiting list. 
(k)  If a corporation is dissolved, its mooring permit will be revoked. 
(l)  The harbormaster may revoke any mooring permit for violation of any section of this article or for refusal to comply with any order of the division issued pursuant to this article. Twenty days' written notice must be provided via certified mail sent to the permittee at the address shown in the application. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 08-14, § 1, 6-23-2008; Ord. No. 08-35, § 6, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 17-05, § 5, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 7-109. - Unauthorized use of moorings. 
    No person shall cause a vessel to be secured to the mooring of another without first having received permission to do so from the permittee or the permittee's agent and the harbormaster. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-110. - Removal and relocation of moorings, vessels and structures. 
(a)  The harbormaster may remove or relocate or cause the removal or relocation of the following: 
(1)  Any mooring within the public waters for which a permit is not in effect or which is situated in a location other than that specified in the permit or which is in violation of any order of the division concerning the location or relocation of the mooring. 
(2)  Any unpermitted vessel secured to the town wharf without notification and permission of the harbormaster or any vessel secured to the town transient dock in excess of six hours during the period of July 1 to October 30 or in excess of 12 hours during the period of November 1 to June 30. Exceptions may be granted if the owner/operator of such vessel has notified the harbormaster of a bona fide casualty to the vessel that prevents it from getting underway and subsequently receives permission from the harbormaster to remain at the dock. 
(3)  Any vessel anchored too close to or otherwise endangering another vessel on a mooring, anchored in or obstructing a channel or thoroughfare, secured to the mooring of another in violation of section 7-109 or secured to a mooring the harbormaster has determined to remove or relocate in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The harbormaster, in accordance with this section, shall have the authority to remove or cause to remove any wrecked, derelict, sunken or abandoned vessels or docks; any abandoned hulk, barge or pilings; or any unlawful or unauthorized structure or thing that is deposited or found adrift in the public waters or washed ashore within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(c)  The division shall give notice of the intent to remove or relocate to any person known as the owner of such vessel or known to have any interest therein or as having or exercising any control over the vessel as master, agent, insurer or otherwise or, for any other unlawful or unauthorized obstruction, to the person who either alone or with others built, deposited or caused the obstruction or who is known as owning, maintaining or using the structure in whole or in part. 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and shall order the removal of such vessel or other obstruction within 72 hours of the date of such notice or such extension of time as may be granted by the division. 
(2)  It shall be deemed sufficient notice to all owners and other persons if the notice is served upon any one or more of such owners and persons by delivering the notice in hand; by leaving it at the usual place of business, residence or abode; or by duly mailing it to the last known post office address of the owner or other person on whom such notice is to be served. 
(d)  If such vessel or other obstruction is not removed within the time specified by such notice and in a manner and to a place satisfactory to the division or if no such owner or other person is known to the division upon whom such notice can be served, the harbormaster may proceed to remove such vessel or other obstruction or to complete the removal thereof or to cause the removal to be done in such a manner and to such a place as the harbormaster, in conjunction with the director of public works, the director of public safety and the town manager, shall deem to be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  The owner or any person having any interest in any vessel, mooring or other structure removed or relocated in accordance with this section shall be liable to pay the cost of such removal or relocation, together with the cost of storage following the removal or relocation, and these charges and expenses, until paid, shall constitute a lien on the vessel, mooring or other structure in favor of the town. 
(f)  Failure to comply with such notice shall result in the imposition of the penalties provided for in section 7-3, and each day the failure to comply continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 00-19, § 2, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 03-01, § 5, 2-10-03) 
Sec. 7-111. - Enforcement of liens. 
(a)  A lien acquired by the town on any vessel, mooring, mooring component or other object by virtue of this article may be enforced by the harbormaster through sale of such vessel, mooring, mooring component or other property in accordance with the maritime law of the United States, if applicable, or otherwise in accordance with the procedures set forth in RIGL 1956, tit. 34, ch. 35 and any amendment thereto. 
(b)  If the vessel, mooring or other structure upon which a lien has been acquired is determined to be of no value or only worth scrap value, the division may dispose of the vessel, mooring or other structure in any manner that it deems best. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-112. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the harbormaster made under this article may appeal to the town council or any appeals board designated by the council within 20 days of notification of the decision. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-113. - Minimum mooring tackle requirements. 
(a)  Anchors. Only standard type mushroom anchors, with shanks, are authorized for all mooring areas. Shallow water (inverted) mushrooms are authorized only for shallow moorings as defined in subsection 7-1(b), and then only for vessels 20 feet or less in length in Fishing Cove and Mill Cove. In Wickford Harbor, shallow water (inverted) mushroom anchors are permitted only in the catboat area and for shallow moorings along Pleasant Street and must be at least twice the minimum weight as specified in subsection (b) of this section. Anchor types other than mushrooms may be authorized by the harbor division on a case-by-case basis, depending upon the particular circumstances; however, in each case this authorization must be in writing. The harbor division will maintain records of any mooring anchor deviations authorized in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Ground tackle sizes for Wickford Harbor and Allen Harbor. The mooring tackle specifications listed in this subsection are minimums for issuing mooring permits for private moorings. Use of at least one size larger for all components is strongly encouraged for greater safety. Commercial and yacht club moorings shall consist of components large enough, as specified in this subsection, for any vessel assigned to the moorings. The minimum mooring tackle specifications are as follows: 
TABLE 1. MINIMUM MOORING SPECIFICATIONS 
FOR WICKFORD AND ALLEN HARBORS 
Boat Length 
(feet) Mushroom Anchor 
(pounds) Bottom Chain 
(inches) Top Chain 
(inches) Pennant 
(inches) Up to 16  75 1/2 3/81/2 Over 16 to 19 150 1/2 3/81/2 Over 19 to 22 200 1/2 1/2 1/2 Over 22 to 25 250 5/81/2 1/2 Over 25 to 30 300 5/81/2 1/2 Over 30 to 35 400 3/4 1/2 5/8Over 35 to 40 500 3/4 1/2 3/4 Over 40 to 50 600 3/4 1/2 1 Over 50 to 65 800 1 1/2 11/4  
(c)  Ground tackle lengths. Ground tackle lengths shall be as follows: 
(1)  In Wickford Harbor complex and Allen Harbor, the total length of both the heavy chain and the light chain shall be determined as follows: Take the water depth (in feet at mean high water) at the mooring location and add five feet for storm surge. Multiply the result by two to get the total chain length. A minimum of 70 percent of this length shall be the heavy chain, with the remaining 30 percent being the light chain specified in subsection (b) of this section. Use of all heavy chain as specified in subsection (b) of this section is encouraged. 
(2)  Pennant length shall be determined as follows: Take the distance from the chock to the water line, multiply this by three, and add the distance from the chock to the bow cleat. The result is the authorized pennant length. On some vessels it may be necessary for the harbor division to authorize a multiplier of four times the distance from the chock to the water line. Shorter scope than that specified in this subsection compromises safety and is not authorized. 
(3)  Use of greater scope (longer chain and pennant) increases holding power and is encouraged wherever space permits. However, use of increased scope also increases the space a given vessel occupies and may result in dangerous overlaps in vessel swing circles. The harbormaster is authorized to determine if excessive scope is being used on moorings. If the determination is made that a mooring has excessive scope, the permittee shall be so notified and directed to reduce scope. Failure or refusal of the permittee to reduce scope may be cause for permit revocation. 
(d)  Shackles and chains. For three-eighths-inch top chain, 7/16 -inch shackles shall be used. For one-half-inch top chain, five-eighths-inch shackles shall be used. All shackles shall be properly seized with safety wire or electrical ties. Shackles and chains are to be forged, not cast. 
(e)  Marking of mooring floats. All mooring floats shall display the permit number in black numbers no less than three inches high. The owner's name or the vessel's name are optional on the float or stake, but do not eliminate the requirement for the permit number. All commercial, yacht club and town moorings must have the anchor weight marked on the float in black numbers and letters no less than two inches high. 
(f)  Display of permit number. Any mooring not properly displaying a mooring permit number and a current mooring permit sticker will be considered an unpermitted mooring. Unpermitted moorings and any vessels attached thereto will be removed in accordance with this chapter. 
(g)  Winter stakes. For safety of navigation and to facilitate off-season identification of moorings, winter stakes shall be required to float near vertically, and at least one foot of the stake must be showing above the water at all times. A minimum of the top 12 inches of the stake shall be painted white. Permit numbers no less than two inches high shall be painted in black on this white background. Winter stakes, as well as the stakes' associated mooring tackle, not meeting these requirements may be removed or caused to be removed by the harbormaster. Winter stakes cannot be set before September 15, and must be removed no later than June 15. 
(h)  Mooring pennants. Mooring pennants shall be of nylon, Dacron or other material approved by the division and of the minimum size specified in subsection (b) of this section. Larger diameter line is encouraged, if chock and cleat size permit. Double pennants are encouraged, particularly during heavy weather. Adequate chaffing gear should be used on all pennants. 
(i)  Additional rules and regulations. Additional rules and regulations including colors, sizes and marking of mooring floats, pickup floats and winter stakes will be developed and promulgated by the harbor division. 
(j)  Minimum mooring specifications for Narragansett Bay. The minimum mooring specifications for Narragansett Bay are as follows: 
(1)  The total minimum length of chain, both bottom and top, shall be determined as follows: the depth of water at mean high tide, plus five feet for storm surge, times three. 
(2)  Block anchors shall be of concrete or granite. Approximate shape shall be square both top and bottom, with tapered sides (trapezoidal). Maximum block height shall be two feet. Block shall not be allowed to become a hazard. Link shall be of material not less than one inch in diameter, one inch chainlink or equivalent. Link shall be securely imbedded in block and thoroughly secured by a crisscross pattern of not less than one-half inch reinforcing rod. Link for granite blocks shall be secured on the underside by welding to a heavy steel plate. All shackles must be one size larger than the chain. All shackles must be properly seized with wire or electrical ties. All shackles shall be forged, not cast. 
TABLE 2. MINIMUM MOORING SPECIFICATIONS FOR NARRAGANSETT BAY 
Boat Length 
(feet) Mushroom Anchor 
(pounds) Block 
Anchor 
(pounds) Bottom Chain 
(inches) Top Chain 
(inches) Pennant 
(inches) Up to 16 150 500 1/2 1/2 1/2 16 to 19 200 1,000 1/2 1/2 1/2 19 to 22 250 1,500 1/2 1/2 1/2 22 to 25 300 1,500 5/81/2 1/2 25 to 30 400 2,000 3/4 1/2 1/2 30 to 35 500 2,000 3/4 5/85/835 to 40 600 4,000 
(2-2,000) 3/4 5/83/4 40 to 50 800 5,000 
(3-2,000) 1 3/4 1 50 to 60 1,000  6,000 
(3-2,000) 1 3/4 11/4  
(k)  Pilings. Pilings used for mooring vessels shall be permitted in the same manner as single point moorings. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 17-05, § 6, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 7-114. - Mooring inspections. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the mooring permittees to maintain mooring tackle in a safe condition. Any chain, shackle, swivel or other component that has become bent or worn by more than 25 percent of the minimum requirements set forth in subsection 7-113(b) for the vessel being placed on the mooring must be replaced. 
(b)  Annual inspection of mooring tackle is strongly encouraged. Mooring tackle shall be inspected every three years by a mooring service provider approved by the harbor division. Self-inspections are not allowed. A copy of the inspection is required to be provided to the division. The harbor commission will establish the schedule for the initial inspections. The inspection shall be made by raising the mooring. The purpose of this inspection is to determine compliance with the mooring standards of section 7-113. Moorings not inspected in accordance with this section may be removed at the direction of the division and the mooring space reallocated in accordance with this article. 
(c)  The harbormaster may inspect or have inspected any mooring at any time to determine compliance with this article. If noncompliance with section 7-113 is discovered, the division shall notify the permittee of this fact and of the provisions of this section within five working days, and may remove or direct the removal of any vessel on the mooring until such noncompliance is corrected. The permittee then has 30 days from receipt of notification to correct the violation and to file a reinspection report with the division. Failure of the permittee to correct the violation within the allocated time shall be cause for the mooring to be deemed an unpermitted mooring. The harbormaster may then revoke the permit and remove the mooring in accordance with section 7-110. 
(d)  If the size of a permitted vessel on a mooring is being increased, prior approval of the division is required, and a new mooring inspection may be required by the division. 
(e)  The inspector shall provide the permittee with a copy of each inspection report within ten days of the inspection. 
(f)  Any change to the mooring tackle configuration by or at the direction of the permittee shall be reported, in writing, to the division. The division may require that the mooring be reinspected as a result of the change in configuration. 
(g)  Mooring inspections are the responsibility of the permittee. The costs associated with performing the inspections, as well as the cost of replacing mooring tackle components in order to meet the requirements of this section, shall be the responsibility of the permittee and shall be paid directly to the inspector or contractor, as appropriate. 
(h)  If a vessel drags a mooring, the owner shall notify the harbormaster. Failure to comply with this requirement may result in revocation of the mooring permit. The division shall maintain records of these dragged moorings, including the assigned location of the mooring, vessel size and type, weather conditions and details of the mooring tackle involved. The division may require that the mooring be inspected. 
(i)  The date of the next required mooring inspection, as determined by completed inspection forms on file with the division, will be indicated on the annual mooring permit renewal form. Permittees are responsible for providing the division with a copy of the most recently completed inspection form. Lack of a current inspection form on file with the division will be cause for nonrenewal of mooring permits. A separate inspection form is required for each mooring permit. A copy of the most recent inspection form shall be kept on file by the division. 
(j)  The harbormaster may promulgate additional rules and regulations, as required, addressing mooring inspections. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995; Ord. No. 03-01, § 6, 2-10-03) 
Sec. 7-115. - Rafting on moorings. 
    Vessels are permitted to raft on any mooring for a period not to exceed 48 hours, provided that the rafted vessels do not endanger any other moored vessels in the vicinity and that they do not intrude into any channel or thoroughfare. Rafted vessels must be manned at all times. Rafting is not permitted when small craft advisories or other severe weather warnings are in effect, and rafted vessels must separate when these conditions are announced. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-116. - Harbor management commission. 
(a)  Created. A harbor management commission shall be created to be the local advisory body authorized to recommend policy for the public waters and harbor areas of the town, consistent with the harbor management plan. The harbor management commission shall adopt rules of procedure and operation for its meetings and is authorized to: 
(1)  Recommend to the town council the adoption of rules, regulations, fees, penalties and other amendments to the harbor management plan and its subsequent ordinances which may be necessary to fulfill the goals and objectives of the harbor management plan and meet the requirements of its ordinances. 
(2)  Recommend additional duties and responsibilities for the harbor division, as detailed in the harbor management plan. 
(3)  Review and suggest revisions as necessary to the harbor management plan and its subsequent ordinances for town council and coastal resources management council approval. The harbor management plan and its ordinances shall be reviewed at least once every five years. 
(b)  Composition. The commission shall consist of seven members, with recommended representation from each of the following groups: 
(1)  Recreational boating community; 
(2)  Commercial fishing industry; 
(3)  Marina and/or boatyard operators; 
(4)  Environmental/conservation groups; 
(5)  Public access interests; 
(6)  Waterfront property owner; and 
(7)  One citizen at large. 
(c)  Appointments. Members shall be appointed by the town council for terms consisting of two years. The appointments shall be staggered. 
(d)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled as necessary and in accordance with the initial appointment. 
(e)  Absences. Any member absent more than two consecutive meetings, without good cause, would be considered as a resignation from the commission. An affected member would be afforded an appeal to the remaining commission members, and a majority vote would be required to reverse the action. 
(f)  Officers; meetings. A chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary shall be elected by the members of the commission. The commission shall meet monthly, and all meetings shall conform to open meeting laws. Any additional meetings shall be called by the chairperson or at the request of at least four members of the commission. The secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings and shall file such minutes with the town clerk. 
(g)  Powers and duties. The commission shall be the local advisory body to the town council, authorized to recommend policy for the coastal waters and harbor areas of the town consistent with the harbor management plan and any subsequent ordinances. The commission shall adopt rules of procedure and operation for its meetings and is authorized to: 
(1)  Recommend to the town council the adoption of rules, regulations, fees, penalties and other amendments to the harbor management plan and its subsequent ordinances that may be necessary to fulfill the goals and objectives of the harbor management plan and meet the requirements of its ordinances. 
(2)  Recommend additional duties and responsibilities for the harbor division. 
(3)  Review and revise as necessary the harbor management plan and its subsequent ordinances for town council and coastal resource management council approval. The harbor management plan and its ordinances shall be reviewed and revised at least once every five years. 
(h)  Ex-officio members. Ex-officio members shall be as follows: 
(1)  The harbormaster shall be a nonvoting, ex-officio member of the commission. 
(2)  To enable the commission to coordinate issues of mutual concern between adjacent coastal municipalities, there may be one nonvoting, ex-officio member from the harbor commissions of Warwick, Narragansett, South Kingstown and Jamestown. 
(3)  The town council may appoint other ex-officio members. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-216 et seq. 
Sec. 7-117. - Funding of harbor management activities. 
    A harbor management budget line item shall be established under the administrative guidance and control of the town finance department, accountable to the town manager and town council. The revenues and expenses of the harbor management shall be identified in the town budget. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-118. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-05, § 7, adopted March 6, 2017, repealed § 7-118, which pertained to the memorandum of agreement for coordination of harbor management authorities and derived from Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, adopted March 13, 1995. 
Secs. 7-119-7-127. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-128. - Liability. 
    Persons using the coastal waters and harbor areas of the town shall assume all risk of personal injury and damage or loss to such persons' property. The town assumes no risk on account of accident, fire, theft, vandalism or acts of God. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-129. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this chapter is held invalid or inoperative, the remainder shall continue in full force and effect as though such invalid or inoperative provisions had not been made. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Sec. 7-130. - Compliance with state and federal regulations. 
    The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter shall be subordinate to all existing federal and state statutes and regulations and are not intended to preempt or conflict with any other valid laws. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1, 3-13-1995) 
Chapter 8 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public health, § 815. 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; garbage, trash and refuse, ch. 6; mobile and manufactured home parks, ch. 10; utilities, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Health, RIGL 1956, § 23-2-16 et seq.; contagious diseases, RIGL 1956, § 23-6-1 et seq.; quarantine, RIGL 1956, § 23-8-1 et seq.; rodent eradication, RIGL 1956, § 23-7.1-1 et seq.; local health regulations, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Animals as public nuisance, § 3-9. 
State Law reference- Nuisances, RIGL 1956, §§ 11-30-1-11-30-13. 

Sec. 8-11. - Conditions constituting public nuisances. 
    The following conditions are specifically declared to constitute public nuisances: 
(1)  Breeding places for flies, vermin or rodents. Barns, stables, hogpens, chicken yards or manure piles or accumulations of organic material so maintained as to be a breeding place for flies, vermin or rodents. 
(2)  Sewage, garbage or raw organic filth in public places. The discharge of or exposure of sewage, garbage or other raw organic filth into any public place in such a way that transmission of infective material may result thereby. 
(3)  Certain privies. Privies not screened against flies in populous districts and privies likely to pollute the groundwater or surface water from which the water supply is obtained. 
(4)  Improper transportation of garbage, night soil or other organic filth. Transportation of garbage, night soil or other organic filth, except in tightly covered wagons which prevent leakage or access to flies. 
(5)  Certain stagnant water. Stagnant water likely to afford breeding places for mosquitoes within a residential district or within a distance of 1,000 feet therefrom. 
(6)  Rendering establishments, soap works or other trades. Bone boiling, fat rendering establishments, tallow or soap works or other trades when they can be shown to affect health or produce serious offense. 
(7)  Dilapidated buildings. Buildings or any parts thereof that are in a dilapidated condition which may endanger the life or health of persons living in the vicinity. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-1-2) 
State Law reference- Nuisances, RIGL 1956, § 11-30-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-12. - Abatement. 
(a)  Upon information of the existence of a nuisance or any pollution occurring within the respective district, the local health officer, when any such nuisance or pollution comes to such officer's attention, shall, within a reasonable time, investigate and, upon finding such nuisance or pollution to exist, shall issue an order in writing for the abatement of the nuisance. 
(b)  Such order shall specify the nature of such nuisance or pollution and shall designate the time within which such abatement or discontinuance must be accomplished. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-1-3) 
Sec. 8-13. - Condition of vacant property generally. 
    No person owning abandoned or vacant property shall allow such property to remain in a condition which permits or invites the creation of a nuisance or other abuses prejudicial to the public health. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-1-4) 
Sec. 8-14. - Spitting in public places. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall spit upon the floor of any hall or office; in any hotel, restaurant, apartment house, tenement house or lodginghouse which is used in common by the guests or tenants thereof; or upon the floor, platform, steps or stairs of any public building, church, theater, bus, car or railroad station, store, factory or any public conveyance. 
(b)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "spitting" denotes the act of expelling any secretion from the chest, throat, mouth or nose. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-1-5) 
State Law reference- Spitting in public, RIGL 1956, § 23-6-2. 
Sec. 8-15. - Use of common towels in hotels. 
    All cloth towels provided by a hotel for the use of guests therein or by any lavatory in a place of public assemblage shall be individual towels and, where used and discarded by the individual, shall not be used again until thoroughly cleansed by washing and drying. Each guest occupying a room in any hotel shall be furnished with thoroughly cleansed and dried towels. In any public washroom, there shall be kept at all times, in sight and within easy access, a sufficient supply of individual towels. The owner, manager, agent or person in charge of any hotel or public lavatory who shall fail to comply with this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-1-6) 
State Law reference- Common towels, RIGL 1956, § 23-6-1. 
Sec. 8-16. - Drinking receptacles in public places. 
    The owner, manager, agent or person in charge of any public building, hotel, restaurant, theater, public hall, schoolhouse, store or public conveyance is prohibited from providing or allowing the use of a common drinking cup on such premises, but may provide bubbling fountains, paper receptacles which should be discarded after individual use or easily washable receptacles such as glass tumblers. The use of easily washable receptacles is restricted to premises where adequate washing and cleansing facilities for such receptacles, approved by the health officer, are readily available. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-1-7) 
State Law reference- Common drinking cups, RIGL 1956, § 23-6-1. 
Sec. 8-17. - Accumulation of rubbish and debris. 
(a)  Prohibited. The accumulation of rubbish and unsightly debris on private or public property in the town shall constitute a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(b)  Determination by town manager. The determination that there is an accumulation of rubbish and unsightly debris on public or private residences or business property shall be made by the town manager or designee. 
(c)  Notice to remove. The owner of private property on which rubbish or unsightly debris is stored or located shall be responsible for its removal upon appropriate notice. Such notice shall be in writing signed by the building official and shall be served by mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by the police department by delivering a copy of the notice to the person to which the notice is directed or by leaving a copy of the notice at the last and usual place of abode of such person if within the state. If the premises are unoccupied or the residence of such person is unknown or without the state, the notice may be served by posting a certified copy of the notice on the premises and by advertising in one or more newspapers in such manner and for such length of time as the town council may direct. 
(d)  Hearings. Within 20 days after the service of such notice, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the person to whom the notice is directed or the person's duly authorized agent may file a written request for hearing before the town council for the purpose of defending the charges. Such hearing shall be held as soon as is practicable after the filing of the request, and the person to whom the notice is directed shall be advised of the time and place of such hearing at least five days in advance of the hearing. At any such hearing, the town and the person to whom the notice has been directed may introduce such witnesses as are deemed necessary and proper by the town council. 
(e)  Removal and disposal by town. If the violation in the notice as set forth in subsection (b) of this section has not been remedied within 20 days after service or if a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed and the existence of a violation is affirmed by the town council after the hearing is held, the department of public works shall have the right to remove and dispose of such rubbish and unsightly debris at the expense of the owner of the rubbish and debris or at the expense of the owner of the land where the rubbish and debris is located, jointly and severally. The cost of such removal shall be recovered in an action brought in the name of the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-2-9) 
Cross reference- Garbage, trash and refuse, ch. 6. 
Sec. 8-18. - Depositing substances on highways, streets or sidewalks prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall put, place, throw or deposit or allow to be deposited in any public street or highway in this town, except under the direction of the surveyor of highways, any ashes, soot, cinders, shavings, manure, old tin, iron, timber or wood; any shells; any bones; any fish, animal or vegetable matter; any dirt, dust or stones; or any other matter or thing. 
(b)  No person shall throw or cause to run into or upon any public street or highway, sidewalk, crosswalk or footwalk, in any of the compact parts of this town, any filthy water, slops or swill. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-19) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
Secs. 8-19, 8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Garbage, trash and refuse, ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate removal and disposal of sewage, cesspools, etc., RIGL 1956, § 23-19.2-2; septic system maintenance act of 1987, RIGL 1956, § 45-24.5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-21. - Scope of article. 
    As set forth in this article, all human excreta and industrial wastes must be disposed of in properly managed sewers, treatment tanks, cesspools, privy vaults or by other methods approved by the state department of health. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-2-1) 
Sec. 8-22. - Construction and cleanliness of privy vaults, cesspools or toilets. 
    Every privy vault, cesspool or toilet shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and must be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the escape of odors and to exclude animals, poultry and flies. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-2-2) 
Sec. 8-23. - Deposit of sewage, wastes or water in streets, public places or state waters. 
    No sewage, kitchen waste, industrial waste or laundry water shall be allowed to discharge or flow into any gutter, street, roadway, public place or into any waters of the state. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-2-3) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; utilities, ch. 20. 
Sec. 8-24. - Protection of state waters. 
    No human excrement or material containing human excrement or industrial waste shall be disposed of in such a manner that it is likely to gain access to any waters of the state except under conditions approved by the department of health and the state department of health. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-2-4) 
Sec. 8-25. - Servicing and cleaning septic tanks. 
(a)  In the interest of the public health and control of nuisance conditions, no person shall service or clean septic tanks, seepage pits, cesspools or privies or dispose of or transport the contents thereof within the town limits without complying with the following: 
(1)  All persons engaged in such business shall provide airtight tanks which shall be kept tightly closed in transit, and the cleaning, transporting and removing of the contents shall be done in an inoffensive manner. Inspections of such equipment may be made at any time by the director of public works or someone designated by the director. 
(2)  No person shall remove or cause to be removed the contents of any septic tanks, seepage pits, cesspools or privies from without the town limits and dispose of the contents thereof within the town limits except as provided in this article. 
(3)  Licensed commercial cesspool and septic tank cleaners may operate within the town limits, provided that: 
a.  The liquids and solids, known as night soil, are pumped into a liquid tank truck, which shall be closed airtight during the transportation of night soil and maintained free of all leaks. 
b.  All liquids and solids, known as night soil, must be disposed of into a commercial or municipal sanitary disposal plant within or without the town. 
c.  No liquids or solids, known as night soil, will be transported from within or without the town to be disposed of into any type of private cesspool or septic tank within the town. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to the penalty provided for in section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-2-5) 
State Law reference- Regulation of removal of night soil, cleaning cesspools, etc., RIGL 1956, § 23-19.2-2; licensing cesspool and sanitary tank cleaners, RIGL 1956, §§ 23-19.4-1-23-19.4-5. 
Secs. 8-26-8-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC FAIRGROUNDS AND CARNIVALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Amusement ride safety act, RIGL 1956, § 23-34.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-41. - Compliance with article. 
    No premises shall be used as a public fairground or for the purposes of a carnival unless there is compliance with this article. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-4-1) 
Sec. 8-42. - Water supply. 
(a)  Any water supply available for drinking or washing dishes on any premises used for a public fairground or carnival shall be of safe, sanitary quality as determined by the division of sanitary engineering of the state department of public health. 
(b)  Any water on any premises used as a public fairground or carnival found unsafe for human consumption shall be either eliminated or purified by a process approved by the state department of public health or shall be kept posted conspicuously with placards definitely warning persons against its use. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-4-2) 
Sec. 8-43. - Toilet facilities. 
    Approved sanitary facilities shall be provided and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition on any premises used as a public fairground or carnival. Separate installation for men and for women shall be provided, and they shall be adequate for the accommodation of all persons attending or using the grounds. The location of all toilets shall be plainly indicated by signs. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-4-3) 
Sec. 8-44. - Depositories for garbage, rubbish and refuse. 
    Supervision and equipment sufficient to prevent littering of the ground with rubbish, garbage or other refuse shall be provided and maintained on any premises used as a public fairground or carnival. Flytight depositories for such materials shall be provided and conspicuously located. These depositories and any final places of deposit shall not be permitted to become foul smelling, unsightly or breeding places for flies. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-4-4) 
Cross reference- Garbage, trash and refuse, ch. 6. 
Sec. 8-45. - Protection of foodstuffs and eating and drinking facilities. 
(a)  All foodstuffs stored or exposed for sale on any premises described in this article must be protected from flies and dust by suitable covers. The term "foodstuffs" includes both raw and cooked foods, candy and any other food not sold in single-service flytight containers, except food in the process of cooking. 
(b)  Single-service cups, dishes, spoons and drinking straws shall be protected from flies and dust. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-4-5) 
Sec. 8-46. - Protection of drinking beverages. 
    All drinking beverages on any premises described in this article not bottled or canned must be kept in flytight containers from which the liquid may be removed only by faucets. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-4-6) 
Secs. 8-47-8-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SANITATION OF PLACES DISPENSING FOOD OR BEVERAGES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Sanitation in food establishments, RIGL 1956, § 21-27-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-61. - Compliance generally. 
    No person shall operate or maintain within the town any place where food or beverages are served to the public without compliance with this article and the laws of the state. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-5-1) 
Sec. 8-62. - Cleanliness of premises generally. 
(a)  The premises of all public eating or drinking places where food is served or prepared for serving to the public shall be kept free of litter or rubbish. All wastes shall be properly disposed of. Garbage shall be kept in flytight containers. None of the operations connected with preparing or serving food to or for the public shall be conducted in any room used as sleeping quarters. 
(b)  Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for employees' clothing, and these shall be kept clean. Soiled linen, coats and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for this purpose. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-5-2) 
Sec. 8-63. - Identification and cleanliness of vehicles of itinerant food vendors. 
    The vehicle of any itinerant food vendor shall have the name and address of the person responsible for the operation legibly printed on both sides of the vehicle. Such vehicle shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 7-5-3) 
Sec. 8-64. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person in the town shall conduct a food handling service for the public without obtaining a local license to operate the establishment. 
(b)  Prerequisites to issuance. No license required by subsection (a) of this section shall be issued except on written application by the owner or manager containing an agreement that the owner or manager agrees to comply with and be responsible for compliance by employees with the requirements of the sanitary codes of the town and of the state. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 7-5-4, 7-5-5) 
Secs. 8-65-8-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE 

Sec. 8-81. - Statement of public policy. 
    The town council finds and declares that: 
(1)  Excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare and quality of life in the town. 
(2)  A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive noise can be substantially abated without serious inconvenience to the public. 
(3)  Certain noise-producing equipment in this community is essential to the quality of life and should be allowed to continue at reasonable levels with moderate regulation. 
(4)  Each person has a right to an environment reasonably free from noise which jeopardizes health or welfare or unnecessarily degrades the quality of life. 
(5)  It is the declared policy of this town to promote an environment free from excessive noise or otherwise properly called noise pollution, which unnecessarily jeopardizes the health and welfare and degrades the quality of lives of the residents of this community, without unduly prohibiting, limiting or otherwise regulating the function of certain noise-producing equipment which is not amenable to such controls and yet is essential to the economy and quality of life of the community. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-1), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-82. - Purpose, title and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish standards for the control of noise pollution in the town by setting maximum permissible sound levels for various activities, to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  This article may be cited as the "Noise Control Ordinance of the Town of North Kingstown." 
(c)  This article shall apply to the control of all noise originating within the town limits, excepting those areas where the town council has determined that, because of public acceptance of the activity producing a particular noise, such noise is deemed acceptable to the town residents. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-2), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-83. - Measurement of sound. 
    Decibel measurements under this article shall be made with a sound level meter, which shall be an instrument in good operating condition, meeting the requirements of a type I or type II meter, as specified by ANSI standard 1.4-1971. For purposes of this article, a sound level meter shall contain A-weighted scale and both fast and slow meter response capability. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-3), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-84. - Definitions. 
    Definitions of technical terms used in this article shall be obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambient sound level means the noise associated with a given environment, exclusive of a particular noise being tested, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and far, exclusive of intruding noises from isolated identifiable sources. 
    A-scale (dBA) means the sound level in decibels measured using the A-weighted network as specified in ANSI 1.4-1971 for sound level meters. The level is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
    Construction means any and all activity necessary or incidental to the erection, assembling, altering, installing, repairing or equipping of buildings, roadways or utilities, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling. 
    Decibel (dB) means a logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
    Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar property. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or portion of the building regularly used for residential occupancy. 
    Dynamic braking device means a device, used primarily on trucks and buses, to convert the motor from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of vehicle braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger. 
    Impulsive sound means a sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop-forge impacts and the discharge of firearms. 
    Lot means any area, tract or parcel of land owned by or under the lawful control of one distinct ownership. Abutting platted lots under the same ownership shall be considered a "lot." The lot line or boundary is an imaginary line at ground level which separates a lot and its vertical extension owned by one person from that owned by another. 
    Mixed use means a dwelling unit or school located in a business or industrial zone. 
    Motorboat. See Watercraft. 
    Motorcycle means any motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground. The term includes motorized bicycles and motor scooters. 
    Motor vehicle means any motor-operated vehicle licensed for use on the public highways, but not including a motorcycle. 
    Narrow band sound means sound characterized by normal listeners as having a predominant pitch or series of pitches; sound described by such listeners as "whine" or "hiss," "toot," or "wail"; a sound whose frequencies occupy an octave band or less. 
    Noise control office means the town department having responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound that: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the safety or health of humans. 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
(3)  Endangers or injures personal or real property. 
    Noise sensitive activities means activities that should be conducted under conditions of exceptional quiet, including but not limited to the operation of schools, libraries open to the public, churches, hospitals and nursing homes. 
    Noise sensitive area means any area designated pursuant to section 8-87 for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet and clearly posted with noise sensitive area signs, because of the noise sensitive activities conducted therein. 
    Nonconforming use has the same meaning as defined by chapter 21, zoning. 
    Off-road recreational vehicle means any motor vehicle, including road vehicles, but excepting watercraft, used off public roads for recreational purposes. 
    Person means any individual, association, partnership or corporation, including any officer, department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of the United States, a state or any political subdivision of that state, including the town. 
    Physical characteristics of sound is a descriptive term, encompassing the steady, impulsive or narrow band property of the sound, the level of the sound and the extent to which it exceeds the background sound level. 
    Plainly audible (sound) means any sound for which the information content of that sound is unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as but not limited to understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal or comprehensible musical rhythms. 
    Port facilities means any and all public or private facilities used for the repair, loading or unloading of ships within the town, including but not limited to shipyards, repair yards and dry docks. 
    Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne model plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, highway, boulevard, alley, easement or public space which is owned by or controlled by a public government entity. 
    Public space means any real property, including any structure thereon, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Pure tone means any sound that can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or set of single pitches. 
    Real property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property divisions. 
    Receiving land use means the use or occupancy of the property which receives the transmission of sound, as defined in this section. 
    Residential means any property on which is located a building or structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes. 
    Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
    Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network such as A, B or C as specified in the American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971 or the latest approved revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output or display meter, and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels, which complies with American National Standards Institute standard 1.4-1971. 
    Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
    Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micronewtons per square meter (20 × 10 6 n/m 2 ). The sound pressure level is denoted LP or SPL and is expressed in decibels. 
    Steady sound means a sound whose level remains essentially constant ( 2 dBA) during the period of observation when measured with the fast response of the sound level meter. 
    Used and occupied include the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied." 
    Watercraft means any contrivance used or capable of being used as a means of transportation or recreation on the water. 
    Zone means a classification of area of the town as described in chapter 21 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-4), 2-14-1983) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-85. - Exceptions to article. 
    This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency. 
(2)  The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(3)  Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any private property, public space or public right-of-way, except those activities controlled by section 8-91. 
(4)  The unamplified human voice. 
(5)  Agricultural activities. 
(6)  The emission of sound in the performance of military operations, exclusive of travel by individuals to or from military duty, except airports which are regulated under another authority. 
(7)  The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons or in fireworks displays licensed by the town from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(8)  The emission of sound in the operation of snow removal equipment. 
(9)  The emission of sound relative to permitted construction and demolition activities, provided such activity does not occur between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(10)  The emission of sound in a residential area made in the course of the maintenance of a dwelling and/or property from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-5), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-86. - Noise disturbance prohibited. 
    No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, except as permitted, any noise disturbance as defined in this article or any noise in excess of the limits for such noise established in this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-6), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-87. - Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use; immediate threat. 
(a)  Maximum permissible sound levels. With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized or allowed in this article, the following are the maximum permissible sound levels allowed at or within the real property boundary of a receiving land use: 
TABLE 1. SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE 
Zoning Category of Receiving Land Use Time Sound Level Limit, dBA Residential, and open space  8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m. to  7:00 a.m. 60 
50 Business (neighborhood, waterfront and general) At all times 65 Business (heavy, planned and industrial) At all times 70 Noise sensitive area At all times 60  
(b)  Correction for character of sound. For any source of sound which emits a pure tone, the maximum sound level limits set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be reduced by five dBA. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to activities covered by sections 8-88, 8-91, 8-92, 8-93, 8-94 and 8-99. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-7), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-88. - Emergency signaling devices. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit the intentional sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall occur at the same time of day each time the test is performed, but not before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall the test time exceed 60 seconds. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-8), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-89. - Specific activities prohibited. 
(a)  Loading and unloading. No person shall so load, unload, open, close or handle crates, containers, garbage cans and dumpsters, building material or similar objects outdoors between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following morning so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive area. This subsection shall not apply to activities covered by section 8-92. 
(b)  Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. No person shall repair, rebuild, modify or test any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or outdoors within a noise sensitive area. 
(c)  Powered model vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the operation of powered model vehicles in a public or private space out-of-doors or within a noise sensitive area between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-9), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-90. - Musical instruments and similar devices. 
    No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any drum, musical instrument or similar device which produces sound in such a manner so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or outdoors within a noise sensitive area. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-10), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-91. - Sound equipment and sound amplifying equipment. 
(a)  Generally. Except for activities open to the public and for which a permit has been issued by the town under this article, no person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, stereo, tape deck/recorder or other similar device so as to create a noise disturbance as follows: 
(1)  Across a residential real property boundary or outdoors within a noise sensitive area. 
(2)  Fifty feet from the device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space or in a boat on public waters. 
(3)  To any person other than the operator of the device when operated by any passenger or a common carrier. 
(b)  Permit required for sound equipment. Sound equipment shall be in compliance with the following: 
(1)  No person shall use, operate or cause to be used or operated any radio, record player, tape deck or other device for producing or amplifying sounds, referred to in this subsection as "sound equipment," upon any premises, public or private, if the sound from the equipment shall be plainly audible from any public street or public place within the town, unless the person: 
a.  First obtains a permit in accordance with this article; 
b.  Complies with the conditions imposed by the permit, including the maximum permitted sound level shown therein; and 
c.  Complies with all other applicable sections of this article. 
(2)  Furthermore, sound equipment shall not include the following: 
a.  Equipment used for public health and safety purposes. 
b.  Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes. 
c.  Parades or processions for which a parade permit has been issued, provided there is compliance with the conditions of the permit. 
d.  Automobile radios, tape decks or players or other standard automobile equipment used and intended for the use and enjoyment of occupants, provided the sound emitting from such equipment is not audible for more than 50 feet from the vehicle. 
e.  Recorded music used in a nonresidential district in conjunction with a civil or religious celebration. 
f.  Unamplified live music provided, sponsored or funded, in whole or in part, by a governmental entity. 
g.  Mobile radio or telephone signaling devices. 
(c)  Places of public entertainment. No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in any place of public entertainment at a sound level greater than 90 dB(A) as read by the slow response on a sound level meter at any point therein that is normally occupied by a customer, unless a conspicuous and legible sign is located outside such place, near each public entrance, stating "Warning: Sound levels within may cause permanent hearing impairment." 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-11), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-92. - Motorized vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate the engine providing motive power or an auxiliary engine of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more for a consecutive period longer than 20 minutes, provided that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels as prescribed by section 8-87, while such vehicle is standing and located within 150 feet of property zoned and used for residential purposes, except where such vehicle is standing within a completely enclosed structure. This section shall not apply to delivery or pickup vehicles that require the operation of the engine to unload or load the vending loads of such vehicles. 
(b)  No person shall operate within the speed limits specified in this subsection either a motor vehicle or a combination of vehicles of a type subject to registration at any time or under any condition of grade, load, acceleration or deceleration in such manner as to exceed the noise limit listed in this subsection for the category of motor vehicle, based on the legal speed limit, posted or not, of the road or way on which operated. Such noise shall be measured at a distance of not more than 50 feet from the centerline of travel under test procedures established by subsection (c) of this section. If the distance of the measuring instrument from the centerline of travel is less than 25 feet, such listed noise limits shall be corrected to reflect the equivalent noise limits for the actual distance. 
NOISE LIMIT IN RELATION TO 
LEGAL SPEED LIMIT Type of Vehicle 35 mph or less Over 35 mph (1) Any motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more and any combination of vehicles towed by such motor vehicle 86 dB(A) 90 dB(A) (2) Any motorcycle 82 dB(A) 86 dB(A) (3) Any other motor vehicle and any combination of motor vehicles towed by such motor vehicle 76 db(A) 82 dB(A)  
This section applies to the total noise from a vehicle or combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other section of this Code relating to motor vehicle muffler or noise control. 
(c)  The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute or its successor body. The instrument shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. The microphone during measurement shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required. Traffic, aircraft and other transportation noise sources and other background noises shall not be considered in taking measurements except where such background noise interferes with the primary noise being measured. 
(d)  Every motor vehicle and motorboat shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. 
(e)  Furthermore, in addition to subsections (a) through (d) of this section, no person shall: 
(1)  Operate a recreational vehicle or permit the operation of one or more recreational vehicles, individually, in a group or in an organized racing event, whether on public or private property, in such a manner that the sound level resulting from such operation exceeds 73 dB(A) for a total of three minutes in any continuous one-hour period or exceeds 90 dB(A) for any period of time during such operation. Sound levels which exceed the limits described in this subsection at the real property boundary of the receiving land use shall be deemed a noise disturbance. 
(2)  Permit the conducting of any part of an organized racing event which involves a contest between or among recreational vehicles on public or private property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. the following morning. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-12), 2-14-1983) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11. 
Sec. 8-93. - Construction activities. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment in construction, drilling or demolition work or in preventive maintenance work for public service utilities between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any manner that creates a noise disturbance, as defined in section 8-84, across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive area. 
(b)  The terms of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Emergency work or repair work performed by or for governmental entities or public service utilities, for public safety and welfare. 
(2)  The use of domestic power tools or equipment subject to sections 8-85 and 8-87. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-13), 2-14-1983) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4. 
Sec. 8-94. - Stationary nonemergency signaling devices. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit the sounding of any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place, for more than one minute in an hourly period. 
(b)  Devices used in conjunction with places of religious worship shall be exempt from the operation of this section. 
(c)  Exemptions for sound sources covered by this section, but not exempted under subsection (b) of this section, may be granted by the appropriate authority under the procedure set forth in section 8-89. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-14), 2-14-82) 
Sec. 8-95. - Animal noises. 
    Animal noises are regulated in accordance with section 3-9. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-15), 2-14-1983) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 3. 
Sec. 8-96. - Powers and duties of police department for enforcement. 
(a)  The noise control program established by this article shall be implemented, administered and enforced by the town police department. 
(b)  To implement and enforce this article, the police department shall have the additional power to: 
(1)  Conduct research, monitoring and other studies related to sound. 
(2)  Conduct programs of public education regarding the causes, effects and general methods of abatement and control of noise, as well as the actions prohibited by this article and the procedures for reporting violations. 
(3)  Coordinate the noise control activities of all municipal departments. 
(4)  Review public and private projects, including those subject to mandatory review or approval by other departments, for compliance with this article if these projects are likely to cause sound in violation of this article. 
(5)  Enter and inspect, upon presentation of proper credentials, any private property or place and inspect any report or records at any reasonable time when granted permission by the owner or by some other person with authority to act for the owner. 
(6)  Issue sound variances pursuant to section 8-99. 
(7)  Prepare recommendations for consideration by the town council, after publication of notice and public hearing, for establishing the boundaries of noise sensitive areas. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-16), 2-14-1983) 
Cross reference- Police department, ch. 15. 
Sec. 8-97. - Departmental actions. 
    All town departments and agencies shall carry out department and agency programs in furtherance of the policy of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-17), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-98. - Sound permits. 
(a)  Administration. Administration for issuance of a sound permit shall be as follows: 
(1)  The chief of the police department or the chief's designee shall be the administrative officer of this article and shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to grant sound permits. 
(2)  If, in granting a permit, it shall be determined that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the permit is sought into strict compliance with this article would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community or on other persons, the chief of police shall balance the hardship of not allowing the permit against any adverse impact on health, safety and welfare of persons and property affected which would result from its issuance. Applicants for sound permits are required to submit any information the chief of police may reasonably require. A determination shall be rendered in writing by the chief of police within ten days of receipt of a signed application. 
(3)  The chief of police shall grant the permit with or without conditions, deny the permit or refer the application to the director of pubic safety for public hearing. An application shall be referred in this manner only when it is determined that there is sufficient reason to warrant a hearing in order to ensure due process. The issuance of a sound permit requires posting of the permit by the police department, within 24 hours of such issuance, in clear public view on the site. The permit shall remain in place as posted until the expiration of the appeal period. 
(b)  Appeal. Any party claiming to be adversely affected by the granting or denial of a sound permit may file a written, signed statement of appeal with the director of public safety within 15 days of that determination by the chief of police or within 15 days of the initial emission of the subject sound. The director of public safety shall, in conformance with this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, the determination from which the appeal was filed and may modify that determination. 
(c)  Public hearing . If a referral by the chief of police or an appeal by a party claiming to be adversely affected occurs, the director of public safety shall schedule a public hearing, shall sit as the hearing officer and shall have all of the powers of the administrative officer of this article. The appellant or, if a referral occurs, the applicant shall be required to give notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to property owners within 100 feet of the proposed noise source at least ten days prior to the scheduled hearing. In hearing an appeal, the director of public safety shall consider the same criteria outlined in subsection (a) of this section. A decision shall be rendered within ten days of the closure of the public hearing. This decision shall be placed on public record with the town clerk, together with specific reasons for the rendering. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-18), 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 8-99. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  The first offense shall be punished by the issuance of a written warning to cease and desist the violation. 
(2)  The second offense shall be punished by a fine of $25.00. 
(3)  The third offense and all subsequent offenses shall be punished by a fine of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 1 (7-6-19), 2-14-1983) 
Secs. 8-100-8-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GROUNDWATER RESERVOIRS AND GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS 

Sec. 8-120. - Policy and intent. 
    The groundwater underlying the town is the sole source of its existing and future drinking water supply. Discharges of toxic and hazardous materials and sewage discharge threaten the quality of such groundwater supplies and related water resources posing potential public health and safety hazards and threatening economic losses to the community. Therefore, it is the policy of the town that: 
(1)  Water is vital to life and comprises an invaluable natural resource which is not to be abused; that the chemical, physical and biological integrity of its groundwater must be protected from pollutants to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  The groundwaters of the town are a critical renewable resource which must be protected to ensure availability of safe and potable drinking water for present and future needs. 
(3)  The town shall protect the purity of present and future drinking water supplies by protecting aquifers, groundwater reservoirs and recharge areas from pollutants. 
(4)  The town shall require that the quality of groundwater is of a quality consistent with its use for drinking supplies without treatment. 
(5)  No discharge or introduction of pollutants into groundwaters in concentrations that are known to be toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic or teratogenic or that constitute a hazard to the public health shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 92-15, § 1, 9-21-1992) 
Sec. 8-121. - Designation of reservoirs and recharge areas as water sources. 
    The town designates those groundwater reservoirs or groundwater recharge areas identified on a map, entitled "State of Rhode Island `208' Areawide Water Quality Management Plan-Water Related Sensitive Area" prepared by the statewide planning program (project number FRC-JF-01-13) as groundwater reservoir and recharge areas. Further, the town, based upon hydrogeologic data obtained from Hydrologic Characteristics and Sustained Yield of Principal Groundwater Units Potowomut-Wickford Area, Rhode Island, Geological Survey Water Supply Paper 1775; Availability of Groundwater Upper Pawcatuck River Basin, Rhode Island, Geological Survey Water Supply Paper 1821; and Geohydrological Data for the Upper Pawcatuck River Basin, Rhode Island, U.S. Geological Survey, Rhode Island Geological Bulletin No. 13, hereby designates such groundwater reservoirs and groundwater recharge areas as existing or planned public drinking water sources. 
(Ord. No. 92-15, § 1, 9-21-1992) 
Sec. 8-122. - Contaminants and pollutants. 
    No person shall discharge, cause to be discharged or permit contamination of or by any pollutant into the groundwater reservoirs or groundwater recharge areas identified in section 8-121 in excess of the following maximum limits: 
Substance Limits Inorganic chemicals: Arsenic 0.0025 mg/l Barium 0.5 mg/l Cadmium 0.005 mg/l Chromium (hexavalent) 0.025 mg/l Fluoride 2 mg/l Lead 0.025 mg/l Mercury 0.001 mg/l Nitrate (as N) 5 mg/l Selenium 0.005 mg/l Silver 0.025 mg/l Organic chemicals: Aldicarb (Temik) 0.0015 mg/l Aldicarb sulfone 0.001 mg/l Aldicarb sulfoxide 0.002 mg/l Endrin 0.0001 mg/l Lindane 0.002 mg/l Methoxychlor 0.05 mg/l Toxaphene 0.0025 mg/l 2, 4-D 0.05 mg/l 2, 4, 5-TP (Silvex) 0.005 mg/l Total trihalomethanes 0.05 mg/l Benzene 0.0025 mg/l Carbon tetrachloride 0.0025 mg/l p-Dichlorobenzene 0.0375 mg/l 1, 2-Dichloroethane 0.0025 mg/l 1, 1-Dichloroethylene 0.0035 mg/l Methyl tertiary butyl 0.02 mg/l Ether (MTBE) tetrachloroethylene 0.0025 mg/l 1, 1, 1-Trichloroethane 0.1 mg/l Trichloroethylene (TCE) 0.0025 mg/l Vinyl chloride 0.001 mg/l Microbiological: Total coliform bacteria Zero Radionuclides: Gross alpha particle activity 7.5 pCi/liter Gross beta particle activity 2 mrem/yr Radium 226 and radium 228 combined 2.5 pCi/liter  
(Ord. No. 92-15, § 1, 9-21-1992) 
Sec. 8-123. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $100.00 per day per violation. 
(Ord. No. 92-15, § 1, 9-21-1992) 
Secs. 8-124-8-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - NORTH KINGSTOWN WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 20. 

Sec. 8-140. - Authority. 
    This article has been drafted in accordance and under the authority of RIGL 1956, § 45-24.5-1 et seq., entitled "Waste Water Management Districts." The authorizing state chapter shall be known and cited as the "Rhode Island Septic System Maintenance Act of 1987." 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-141. - Findings. 
(a)  The legislative findings set forth in RIGL 1956, § 45-24.5-2 are incorporated in this article by reference. 
(b)  The town council finds that, without proper operation and maintenance, individual sewage disposal systems (ISDS) or septic systems are prone to failure. Failure poses a risk to public health and a potential contamination source to the town surface waters and groundwaters. 
(c)  Two groundwater aquifer systems underlie the town. In 1988, the Hunt Annaquatucket Pettaquamscutt (HAP) Aquifer received federal designation as a Sole Source Aquifer (SSA) under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act. The Chipuxet Aquifer is a part of the Wood-Pawcatuck Sole Source Aquifer and underlies the southwestern portion of town. The town is entirely dependent on these groundwater resources for its water supply needs. In addition, the town is a coastal community with 31 miles of coastal and estuarine waters including enclosed bays and coves. 
(d)  When properly designed, installed, used and maintained, individual sewage disposal systems provide a viable and cost-effective alternative to municipal sewers. Furthermore, within groundwater recharge areas, individual sewage disposal systems help maintain the hydrological balance by reducing the transport of water out of the recharge area. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-142. - Purpose. 
    The declaration of purpose set forth in RIGL 1956, § 45-24.5-3 is incorporated in this article by reference. The purpose of this article is to establish the North Kingstown Wastewater Management District (NKWWMD) to ensure that individual sewage disposal systems are properly operated, regularly inspected and routinely maintained to prevent malfunctioning systems. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-143. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable to every owner of premises that have an individual sewage disposal system within the North Kingstown Wastewater Management District. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-144. - Boundaries. 
    The North Kingstown Wastewater Management District will encompass the town. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-145. - Individual sewage disposal system inspections and pumping of systems. 
    Every individual sewage disposal system owner within the North Kingstown Wastewater Management District shall be required to have a first maintenance inspection of such individual's septic tank/cesspool which shall be conducted as defined in the Rhode Island Handbook for Inspection of Operating Septic Systems. Such inspection shall be performed within three years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives by a town-approved wastewater professional, and proof of the inspection shall be submitted to the town within 30 days of the inspection. Town-authorized forms shall be provided by the North Kingstown Wastewater Management District. All costs of inspection, maintenance and pumping shall be the responsibility of the individual sewage disposal system owner. The town, through this article, maintains the right of entry onto private property if noncompliance occurs. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-146. - Inspection frequency. 
    After the first maintenance inspection as provided in section 8-145, routine maintenance inspections as described in table 1.1 of the Rhode Island Handbook for Inspection of Operating Septic Systems shall be conducted once every three years. More frequent or less frequent inspections may be required if deemed appropriate by the North Kingstown Wastewater Management District. All individual sewage disposal system owners shall be notified of inspection schedules. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-147. - Inspection records. 
    The North Kingstown Wastewater Management District shall maintain a record of each septic tank/cesspool initially inspected including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Owner's name. 
(2)  Street address or utility pole number. 
(3)  Plat and lot numbers. 
(4)  Telephone number. 
(5)  Septic tank/cesspool location, and sketch if possible. 
(6)  Dates and description of previous maintenance. 
(7)  Notes on the individual sewage disposal system condition. 
(8)  Site features such as water bodies, wetlands or location within groundwater areas. 
(9)  Other information about system maintenance, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-148. - Inspection reports. 
    A maintenance inspection report form detailing the results of the inspection shall be kept on file with the North Kingstown Wastewater Management District. Town-authorized forms shall be provided by the wastewater management district. If the inspection reveals that pumping is necessary, the owner shall be required to have the system pumped and shall submit proof of such pumping to the town within 30 days. A receipt from the pumper shall constitute adequate proof. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-149. - Septic tank additives and improper discharges to individual sewage disposal systems. 
(a)  The use of any septic tank additives, which contain acids and/or organic chemicals, in an individual sewage disposal system is prohibited. To date, there is no scientific information available that indicates that such individual sewage disposal system additives are beneficial. The disposal of any hazardous materials, which include corrosive, explosive or flammable materials, or materials that contain toxic chemicals into an individual sewage disposal system is prohibited. 
(b)  The discharge of rainspouts, basement sumps or any other drains to an individual sewage disposal system, with the exception of household washing machines, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-150. - Miscellaneous considerations. 
(a)  Garbage disposal. Garbage disposals produce excess solids which can reduce the efficient functioning of a septic system. Garbage disposal discharges to an individual sewage disposal system shall be discouraged. 
(b)  Trees and shrubs. Trees and shrubs shall not be planted over the leaching area. The owner shall keep trees and shrubs at a minimum of ten feet from the leaching area to keep roots from clogging or disturbing the individual sewage disposal system. 
(c)  Water saving devices. Water saving devices, including but not limited to low-flow toilets or toilet dams, faucet aerators and low-flow shower heads, shall be required on appropriate fixtures for new construction or renovations. 
(d)  Impervious surfaces. The location of swimming pools, patios, driveways or other impervious surfaces over leaching areas is prohibited without the approval of the department of environmental management. 
(e)  Outlet effluent filters. The use or retrofitting of outlet effluent filters with access manholes for individual sewage disposal systems shall be encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-151. - Administration. 
    This article shall be administered by the town director of water supply or a designated representative, and the director of water supply shall be the administrative officer of the North Kingstown Wastewater Management District. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 8-152. - Public education. 
    A public education program shall be established and overseen by the North Kingstown Wastewater Management District, with technical assistance from the conservation commission, the groundwater committee, the University of Rhode Island On-site Wastewater Training Program, and other appropriate sources, to inform people about the benefits and goals of the town's wastewater management program. The educational program shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Proper operation and maintenance of septic systems. 
(2)  Proper disposal of hazardous waste, including household hazardous waste. 
(3)  Water conservation and the development of water conservation programs. 
(4)  Protection of the town's natural resources. 
(5)  Use of environmentally sensitive products. 
(6)  How garbage disposals and other household equipment and products may affect individual sewage disposal systems. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-153. - Financing. 
    The town council shall have the authority to raise funds for the administration, operation, contractual obligations and services required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-154. - Grant/loan program. 
    The town, under the authority of the state legislature, shall have the authority to issue bonds or notes, to receive grants or assess property owners for the purpose of establishing a revolving fund, to make low-interest loans or grants available to qualified property owners for the improvement, correction or replacement of a failed individual sewage disposal system. The town shall establish specific criteria to define eligibility for grants or loans. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-155. - Enforcement responsibility. 
    The building official or designated official of the North Kingstown Wastewater Management District shall be responsible for enforcing this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-156. - Notice of violation. 
    Any owner of an individual sewage disposal system determined to be in violation of this article will be issued a written notice explaining the nature of the violation, required actions, a 30-day timeframe for compliance and the possible consequences for noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-157. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any party aggrieved by a decision of the administrative officer made pursuant to this article shall have the right to appeal that decision to the building code board of appeals by the following procedure: 
(1)  The appeal must be taken within 20 days of the day the decision is recorded in the office of the town clerk. 
(2)  The appeal shall be in writing, on a form provided by the department of water supply, and shall state clearly and unambiguously the factual and legal issue or decision that is being appealed, the reason for the appeal and the relief sought. 
(3)  The appeal shall either be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or shall be hand delivered to the office of the town clerk. 
(4)  Upon receipt of an appeal, the building code board of appeals shall require the administrative officer to transmit forthwith to the building code board of appeals all papers, documents and plans, or a certified copy thereof, constituting the record of the action which is being appealed. 
(b)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-158. - Building code board of appeals standards of review. 
(a)  The building code board of appeals shall render a decision of the appeal made pursuant to this article in the manner provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The building code board of appeals shall not substitute its judgment for that of the administrative officer, but shall consider the issue upon the findings and the record of the administrative officer. The building code board of appeals shall not reverse a decision of the administrative officer except on a finding of prejudicial procedural error, clear error or lack of support by the weight of the evidence in the record. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4. 
Sec. 8-159. - Appeals to district court. 
    Appeals of decisions of the building code board of appeals made pursuant to this article shall be made as follows: 
(1)  An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the building code board of appeals to the district court by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of appeal within 30 days after the decision has been recorded in the town clerk's office. 
(2)  Within 30 days after being served with a copy of the complaint, the building code board of appeals shall file certified copies of the building code documents acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed from, together with such other materials as may be pertinent, with the clerk of the court. 
(3)  The court shall review the matter in accordance with the provisions of RIGL 1956, § 42-35-15. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-160. - Penalties. 
    Any person neglecting or refusing to comply with a written notice of violation issued under this article shall be fined not more than $500.00 per violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 8-161. - Definitions. 
    The definition of terms used in this article shall be consistent with those defined in the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Department of Environmental Management Rules Establishing Minimum Standards Relating to Location, Design, Construction, and Maintenance of Individual Sewage Disposal Systems, as amended. Terms not defined in the state regulations are underlined. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alteration refers to any modernization, modification or change in the size or type of an existing individual sewage disposal system, including but not limited to any and all work performed in relation to a building renovation and/or change of use, or work performed to accommodate any increase in sewage flow to the system. 
    Effluent means sewage, water or other liquid, partially or completely treated or in its natural state, flowing out of any component of an individual sewage disposal system flowing over the ground's surface or beneath the ground in groundwater. 
    Failed system means any sewage disposal system that does not adequately treat and dispose of sewage so as to create a public or private nuisance or threat to public health and/or environmental quality, as evidence by but not limited to one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Failure to accept sanitary sewage into the building sewer. 
(2)  Discharge of sanitary sewage to a basement, subsurface drain, surface drain or surface water unless expressly permitted by the department. 
(3)  Sanitary sewage rising to the surface of the ground over or near any part of an individual sewage disposal system or seeping down the gradient from the absorption area at any change in grade, bank or road cut. 
(4)  Any deterioration or damage to an individual sewage disposal system that would preclude adequate treatment and disposal of wastewater. (For example, contact between the bottom of the individual sewage disposal system and the water table.) 
    Groundwater protection areas means those areas defined in chapter 21 of this Code entitled "Zoning." 
    Hazardous waste means wastes that include but are not limited to those which are toxic, corrosive, flammable or reactive, or wastes such as are defined under section 3.25 of the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management Rules and Regulations for Hazardous Waste Generation, Transportation, Treatment, Storage and Disposal. 
    Individual sewage disposal system (ISDS) means any system of piping, tanks, disposal areas, alternative toilets or other facilities designed to function as a unit to convey, store, treat and/or dispose of sanitary sewage by means other than discharge into a public sewer system. 
    Leach field means a group of one or more disposal chambers, trenches or beds designed for the final disposal of a septic tank or equivalent effluent in the underlying soil. The leach field shall be the horizontal and vertical lines circumscribing the outermost edges including the area between the chambers or trenches and the depth to the bottom of stone. 
    Maintenance means the regular inspection or cleaning of any leaching chamber, cesspool, septic tank, building sewer, distribution lines or any other component of an individual sewage disposal system for the purpose of removing any accumulated liquid, scum and/or sludge. The term "maintenance" shall also be held to include any regularly required servicing or replacement of any related mechanical, electrical or other equipment. Innovative and alternative individual sewage disposal systems or other systems will require a maintenance plan approved by the North Kingstown Wastewater Management District. 
    Owner means any person who alone or jointly or severally with others (i) has a legal title to any real property, or (ii) has possession of or control of any real property through any agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, lessee or guardian of the estate of a holder of a legal title or who has possession or control through any lease or purchase and sales agreement. Each such person is bound to comply with this article. 
    Package treatment plant means a modular treatment facility of the extended aeration type, which design shall be consistent with criteria set forth for the activated sludge process in "Guides for the Design of Wastewater Treatment Works" (NEIWPCC, TR-16, latest edition), or other acceptable design standards. The effluent shall normally be disposed of into the soil through a surface sand filter. 
    Person includes any individual; group of individuals; firm; corporation; association; partnership; or any federal, state or municipal governmental entity. 
    Repair means work performed on an individual sewage disposal system in order to mend or remedy a specific defect or deficiency after the failure, injury, deterioration or partial destruction of a previously existing individual sewage disposal system or component thereof. A repair shall not include any work performed on an existing individual sewage disposal system, which increases the flow capacity of the system. 
    Sanitary sewage means any human or animal excremental liquid or substance, any putrescible animal or vegetable matter, and/or any garbage and filth, including but not limited to any gray water or black water discharged from toilets, laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks and dishwashers as well as the contents of septic tanks, cesspools or privies. 
    Septage means solid or liquid materials which are pumped from an individual sewage disposal system. Any human and/or animal excremental liquid or substance, any putrescible animal or vegetable matter, and any garbage and filth, including the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks, dishwashers and the contents of septic tanks, cesspools and privies. 
    Septic system means an individual sewage disposal system. 
    Septic tank means a watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of sewage from a building sewer and is designed and constructed to permit the deposition of settled solids, the digestion of the matter deposited and the discharge of the liquid portion into a leaching system. 
    Violation means failure to comply with and adhere to the rules and regulations set forth in this article or state regulations and/or the improper discharge of sanitary sewage from a failed individual sewage disposal system. 
    Wastewater. See Sanitary sewage. 
    Wastewater management district constitutes all areas within the town, which utilize individual sewage disposal systems as a means of treating sanitary sewage. The proper operation and maintenance of individual sewage disposal systems will be required townwide. 
    Wellhead protection area means the critical portion of a three-dimensional zone surrounding a public well or well field, through which water will move toward and reach such well or well field as adopted by the town or the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (21-186). 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 8-162-8-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 8-201. - Purpose. 
    Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff is a major cause of impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater; contamination of drinking water supplies; alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding. Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm drain system is necessary for the protection of the town's water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the environment. 
    This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system in order to comply with requirements of the EPA's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater regulations. 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent (or reduce to the maximum extent practicable) pollutants entering North Kingstown's municipally owned separate storm sewer system; 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the MS4; except those exempted by this article; 
(3)  To require the removal of all such illicit connections and discharges; 
(4)  To comply with state law and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater discharges; and 
(5)  To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all inspection, monitoring and enforcement activities necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-202. - Authority. 
    This article is promulgated pursuant to the state department of environmental management's ("DEM") General Permit Rhode Island Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Discharge from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems and from Industrial Activity at Eligible Facilities Operated by Regulated Small MS4s and in accordance with the Administrative Procedures Act, RIGL § 42-35-1, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-203. - Compatibility and severability. 
    This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
    If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-204. - Definitions. 
    Allowable nonstormwater discharges: Discharges not comprised of stormwater are allowed under the MS4 general permit but are limited to the following, provided these are not significant contributors of pollutants to the MS4: discharges which result from the washdown of vehicles at retail dealers selling new and used automobiles where no detergents are used and individual residential car washing; external building washdown where no detergents are used; the use of water to control dust; fire fighting activities; fire hydrant flushings; natural springs; uncontaminated groundwater; dechlorinated pool discharges; air conditioning condensate; lawn watering; potable water sources including waterline flushings; irrigation drainage; pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled materials have been removed) and where detergents are not used; discharges from foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as solvents, oil and fuel, or contaminated by contact with soils where spills or leaks of toxic of hazardous materials have occurred; uncontaminated utility vault dewatering; dechlorinated water line testing water; hydrostatic test water that does not contain any treatment chemicals and is not contaminated with process chemicals. 
    Authorized enforcement agency: Employees or designees of the municipal agency designated to enforce this article; recognized in the town as the code enforcement official (C.E.O.). 
    Best management practices (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    C.E.O.: Code enforcement officer. (authorized enforcement agency in North Kingstown). 
    Clean water act (CWA): The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity: Activities subject to RIPDES construction permits. As of March 2003, RIPDES Stormwater Phase II Permits are required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Discharger: Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
    DPW: Department of public works. 
    EPA: Environmental protection agency. 
    Hazardous material: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit connection: An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Illicit discharge: Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a RIPDES permit (other than the RIPDES permit for discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer) and discharges defined as "allowable nonstormwater discharges" by this article. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4): EPA's term for a separate storm drain system, being a conveyance or system of conveyances (including but not limited to roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains and other drainage structures): 
a.  Owned or maintained by the town, designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
b.  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
c.  Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in Rule 3 of the RIPDES regulations. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit: A permit issued by EPA Region 1 authorizing discharge to waters of the United States. 
    Nonstormwater discharge: Any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Operator: The party or parties that either individually or taken together have the day-to-day operational control over stormwater facility activities and the ability to make modifications to such activities. 
    Owner: The party or parties that either individually or taken together has legal title to any premise. 
    Person: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutants: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    RIPDES: Rhode Island Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Program. 
    Stormwater: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP): EPA's term for the stormwater management plan required for all facilities and/or construction activities for which NPDES stormwater discharge permits are required. The plan describes the BMPs and activities to be implemented to prevent contamination of receiving waters from stormwater runoff. 
    Unauthorized discharge: A discharge of stormwater not authorized by a RIPDES per permit, or an allowable stormwater discharge found to be a significant contributor of pollutants to the MS4. 
    Watercourse: A natural or man-made surface drainage channel or body of water (including a lake or pond) through which a water flow occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state: Surface and ground waters within the boundaries of the state and subject to its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-205. - Discharge prohibitions. 
Prohibition of unauthorized discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any stormwater system (municipal or private) watercourses any pollutant or nonstormwater discharge. The allowable nonstormwater discharges (described below) are permitted if deemed not to be a significant contributor of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Allowable nonstormwater discharges: 
(1)  Discharges which result from residential car washing, or from the washdown of vehicles at retail dealers selling new and used automobiles where no detergents are used and individual residential car washing; 
(2)  External building washdown where no detergents are used; 
(3)  The use of water to control dust; 
(4)  Fire fighting activities; 
(5)  Fire hydrant flushings; 
(6)  Natural springs; 
(7)  Uncontaminated groundwater; rising groundwater; 
(8)  Air conditioning condensate; 
(9)  Lawn watering; potable water sources including waterline flushing; 
(10)  Irrigation drainage; 
(11)  Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled materials have been removed) and where detergents are not used; 
(12)  Discharges from foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as solvents, or contaminated by contact with soils where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have occurred; 
(13)  Uncontaminated utility vault dewatering; dechlorinated water line testing water; 
(14)  Hydrostatic test water that does not contain any treatment chemicals and is not contaminated with process chemicals; and 
(15)  Dechlorinated residential pool discharges. 
    The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
    A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue and must provide corrective action. 
    Any drain that has not been documented on plans or approved by a DPW permit, which may be connected to a storm drain system shall be located in the field by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation by the C.E.O. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain is to be completed and identified as to its use. Results of this investigation are to be documented by a professional engineer or surveyor and filed with the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-206. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
    The C.E.O. shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-207. - Suspension of MS4 access due to illicit discharge. 
    Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for reconsideration and a hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-208. - Industrial and construction activity discharge. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity RIPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-209. - Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants. 
    In an attempt to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the storm sewer system or waters of the state shall implement best management practices (BMPs), as described in the town's SWPPP, to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses. Facilities and methods necessary to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-210. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner or lessee shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
    Nothing in this section shall preclude any owner/lessee from compliance with relevant provisions of the Rhode Island Freshwater Wetlands Act, RIGL § 2-1-18 et seq. or other applicable laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-211. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in an illicit discharge, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material, said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within two business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Nothing in this section shall preclude any owner/lessee from compliance with relevant provisions of the Rhode Island Clean Water Act, RIGL § 46-12-1 et seq. or other applicable laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-212. - Enforcement. 
    Notice of violation: Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that any person has violated a prohibition, failed to meet a requirement of this article, or has not shown a willingness to work with the C.E.O. and the department of public works or fails to meet deadlines established by these town agencies in the elimination and remediation associated with an illicit discharge, in compliance with this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitations: 
(1)  Address, including town plat and lot, and owner of property of alleged violation; 
(2)  Statement specifying nature of the violation, including monitoring and reporting requirements of this article; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; and illicit connections eliminated; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Fines and other costs needed to cover administration and remediation associated with alleged illicit discharge; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
    If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-213. - Penalties for violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or other party to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If an individual or other party violates any provision of this article, such person or other party may be fined in accordance with the provisions of section 1-4 of the North Kingstown Revised Ordinances and the town may also require removal of any waste within ten calendar days at the violator's expense. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-214. - Injunctive relief. 
    If a person or other party has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition the superior court for a temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person or other party from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person or other party to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, 2-13-2006) 
Secs. 8-215-8-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 

Sec. 8-221. - Purpose. 
    Excessive quantities of soil often erode from areas that are undergoing development for non-agricultural uses such as housing developments, industrial areas, recreational facilities, and roads. This erosion results in costly repairs to roads and embankments. The resulting sediment clogs storm drains and road ditches, muddies streams, leaves deposits of silt in ponds and reservoirs, and is considered a major water pollutant. 
    The purpose of this division is to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from occurring as a result of non-agricultural development within the town by requiring proper provisions for water disposal, and the protection of soil surfaces during and after construction, in order to promote the safety, public health, and general welfare of the town. 
(Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-222. - Applicability. 
    This division is applicable to any situation involving any disturbance to the terrain, topsoil or vegetative ground cover upon any property within the town after determination of applicability by the building official (see section 8-229(m) for definition of designated authority) based upon criteria outlined in section 8-223 hereof. Compliance with the requirements as described in this division shall not be construed to relieve the owner/applicant of any obligations to obtain necessary state or federal permits. 
(Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-223. - Determination of applicability. 
(a)  (1)  It is unlawful for any person to disturb existing vegetation or alter the contours of land in a manner which creates soil erosion and sedimentation, without first applying for a determination of applicability from the building official. Upon determination of applicability, the owner/applicant shall submit a soil erosion and sediment control plan for approval by the building official, as provided in section 8-224 hereof. The application for determination of applicability shall describe the location, nature, character, and time schedule of the proposed land disturbing activity in sufficient detail to allow the building official to determine the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from the proposed project. In determining the applicability of the soil erosion and sediment control ordinance to a particular land disturbing activity, the building official shall consider site topography, drainage patterns, soils, proximity to watercourses, and other information deemed appropriate by the building official. A particular land disturbing activity shall not be subject to the requirements of this division if the building official finds that erosion resulting from the land disturbing activity is insignificant and represents no threat to adjacent properties or to the quality of any coastal feature or watercourse, as defined in section 8-229 hereof. The current "Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, RI Department of Environmental Management, and RI State Conservation Committee shall be consulted in making this determination. 
(2)  This division shall not apply to existing quarrying operations actively engaged in excavating rock but shall apply to sand and gravel extraction operations. 
(b)  No determination of applicability is required for the following: 
(1)  Construction, alteration, or use of any additions to existing single family or duplex homes or related structures; provided, that the grounds coverage of addition is less than 1,000 square feet, and construction, alteration and use does not occur within 100 feet of any watercourse or coastal feature, and the slopes at the site of land disturbance do not exceed ten percent. 
(2)  Use of a home garden in association with onsite residential use. 
(3)  Accepted agricultural management practices such as seasonal tilling and harvest activities associated with property utilized for private and/or commercial agricultural or silvicultural purposes. 
(4)  Excavations for improvements other than those described in subsection (b)(1) of this section which exhibit all of the following characteristics: 
a.  Does not result in a total displacement of more than 50 cubic yards of material; 
b.  Has no slopes steeper than ten feet vertical in 100 feet horizontal or approximately ten percent; and 
c.  Has all disturbed surface areas promptly and effectively protected to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation. 
(5)  Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping purposes on existing developed land parcels or lots; provided that all bare surfaces are immediately seeded, sodded or otherwise protected from erosive actions, and all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The aggregate area of activity does not exceed 2,000 square feet; 
b.  The change of elevation does not exceed two feet at any point; and 
c.  The grading does not involve a quantity of fill greater than 18 cubic yards; except where fill is excavated from another portion of the same parcel and the quantity does not exceed 50 cubic yards. 
(6)  Grading, filling, removal, or excavation activities and operations undertaken by the town under the direction and supervision of the director of public works for work on streets, roads, or rights-of-ways dedicated to public use; provided, that adequate and acceptable erosion and sediment controls are incorporated in engineering plans and specifications, and employed. Appropriate controls apply during construction as well as after the completion of these activities. All work shall be undertaken in accordance with the performance principles provided for in section 8-225, subsection (c) and the standards and definitions that may be adopted to implement the performance principles. 
(Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-224. - Provisions of plan-Procedures. 
(a)  Plan. 
(1)  To obtain approval for a land disturbing activity as found applicable by the building official under section 8-223 hereof, an applicant shall first file an erosion and sediment control plan signed by the owner of the property, or authorized agent, on which the work subject to approval is to be performed. The plan or drawings, as described in section 8-225 hereof, shall include proposed erosion and sediment control measures to be employed by the applicant or the applicant's agent. 
(2)  RI freshwater wetlands permit: Where any portion of a proposed development requires approval under any provision of the general laws approved by the general assembly or where the approval contains provisions for soil erosion and sediment controls, that approved plan shall be a component of the overall soil erosion and sediment control plan required under this division for the development. 
(b)  Administrative fees. The town shall be empowered to collect fees from permit applicants, which are commensurate with the cost of administering this division and identified in section 9-4, table III. 
(c)  Plan review. 
(1)  Within five working days of the receipt of a completed plan, the building official shall send a copy of the plan to the review authorities, which may include the public works department, the planning department, and conservation commission for the purpose of review and comment. The building official may also, within five working days, submit copies of the plan to other local departments or agencies, including the conservation district that services the county, in order to better achieve the purposes of this chapter. Failure of these review authorities to respond within 21 days of their receipt of the plan shall be deemed as no objection to the plan as submitted. 
(2)  The time allowed for plan review shall be commensurate with the proposed development project, and shall be done simultaneously with other reviews. 
(d)  Plan approval. 
(1)  The building official shall take action in writing, either approving or disapproving the plan, with reasons stated within ten days after the building official has received the written opinion of the review authorities. 
(2)  In approving a plan, the building official may attach conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the review authorities to further the purposes of this division. The conditions pertaining to erosion and sediment control measures and/or devices, may include, but are not limited to, the erection of walls, drains, dams, and structures, planting vegetation, trees and shrubs, furnishings, necessary easements, and specifying a method of performing various kinds of work, and the sequence or timing of the work. The applicant/owner shall notify the building official in advance of his or her intent to begin clearing and construction work described in the erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall have the erosion and sediment control plan on the site during grading and construction. 
(e)  Appeals. 
(1)  Administrative procedures: 
a.  If the ruling made by the building official is unsatisfactory to the applicant/owner, the applicant/owner may file a written appeal. The appeal of plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be to the zoning board of review. 
b.  Appeal procedures shall follow current requirements for appeal to the zoning board of review from a decision of the building official. 
c.  During the period in which the request for appeal is filed, and until the time that a final decision is rendered on the appeal, the decision of the building official remains in effect. 
(2)  Expert opinion: The building official or the zoning board of review may seek technical assistance on any soil erosion and sediment control plan. The expert opinion must be made available in the office of the building official, as a public record prior to the appeals hearing. 
(Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-225. - Soil erosion and sediment control plan. 
(a)  Plan preparation. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer, or landscape architect, or a soil and water conservation society certified erosion and sediment control specialist, or others as allowed by the building official, and copies of the plan shall be submitted to the building official. 
(b)  Plan contents. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include sufficient information about the proposed activities and land parcels to form a clear basis for discussion and review and to assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter. The plan shall be consistent with the data collection, data analysis, and plan preparation guidelines in the current "Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, RI Department of Environmental Management, RI State Conservation Committee, and at a minimum, shall contain: 
(1)  A narrative describing the proposed land disturbing activity and the soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management measures to be installed to control erosion that could result from the proposed activity. Supporting documentation, such as a drainage area, existing site, and soil maps may be provided as required by the building official. 
(2)  Construction drawings illustrating in detail existing and proposed contours, drainage features, and vegetation; limits of clearing and grading, the location of soil erosion and sediment control and stormwater management measures; detail drawings of measures, stock piles and borrow areas; sequence and staging of land disturbing activities; and other information needed for construction. 
(3)  Other information or construction plans and details as deemed necessary by the building official for a thorough review of the plan prior to action being taken as prescribed in this chapter. Withholding or delay in providing information may be reasons for the building official to judge the application as incomplete and provide grounds for disapproval of the application. 
(c)  Performance principles. The contents of the erosion and sediment control plan shall clearly demonstrate how the principles outlined in this subsection have been met in the design and are to be accomplished by the proposed development project. 
(1)  The site selected shall show due regard for natural drainage characteristics and topography. 
(2)  To the extent possible, steep slopes shall be avoided. 
(3)  The grade of created slopes shall be minimized. 
(4)  Post development runoff rates should not exceed predevelopment rates, consistent with other stormwater requirements that may be in effect. Any increase in storm runoff shall be retained and recharged as close as feasible to its place of origin by means of detention ponds or basins, seepage areas, subsurface drains, porous paving, or similar technique. 
(5)  Original boundaries, alignment, and slope of watercourses within the project locus shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible. 
(6)  In general, drainage shall be directed away from structures intended for human occupancy, municipal or utility use, or similar structures. 
(7)  All drainage provisions shall be of a design and capacity so as to adequately handle stormwater runoff, including runoff from tributary upstream areas, which may be outside the locus of the project. 
(8)  Drainage facilities shall be installed as early as feasible during construction, prior to site clearance, if possible. 
(9)  Fill located adjacent to watercourses shall be suitably protected from erosion by means of riprap, gabions, retaining walls, vegetative stabilization, or similar measures. 
(10)  Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect bare areas and stockpiles from erosion during construction; the smallest areas feasible shall be exposed at any one time; disturbed areas shall be protected during the nongrowing months, November through March. 
(11)  Permanent vegetation shall be placed immediately following fine grading. 
(12)  Trees and other existing vegetation shall be retained whenever feasible; the area within the dripline shall be fenced or roped off to protect trees from construction equipment. 
(13)  All areas damaged during construction shall be resodded, reseeded, or otherwise restored. Monitoring and maintenance schedules, where required, shall be predetermined. 
(d)  Existing uses and facilities. 
(1)  The building official shall accept plans for existing uses and facilities which by their nature may cause erosion and sedimentation, such as excavation and quarrying operations; provided, that this section shall not apply to subsection (a)(1) of section 8-223. Plans or satisfactory evidence to demonstrate that the existing operations accomplish the objectives of the section shall be submitted to the building official within 120 days from the date of the determination of applicability. Implementation of the plan shall be initiated upon approval of the plan. 
(2)  When the preexisting use is a gravel extraction operation, the property owner shall conduct the operation in a manner so as not to devalue abutting properties; to protect abutting property from wind erosion and soil erosion due to increased runoff, sedimentation of reservoirs, and drainage systems; and to limit the depth of extraction so as not to interfere with the existing nearby water table. 
(Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-226. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Performance bond. 
(1)  Before approving an erosion sediment control plan, the building official or his or her designee may require the applicant/owner to file a surety company performance bond, deposit of money, negotiable securities, or other method of surety, as specified by the building official. When any land disturbing activity is to take place within 100 feet of any watercourse or coastal feature or within an identified flood hazard district, or on slopes in excess of ten percent, the filing of a performance bond shall be required. The amount of the bond, as determined by the public works department, or in its absence, the building official, shall be sufficient to cover the cost of implementing all erosion and sediment control measures as shown on the plan. 
(2)  The bond or negotiable security filed by the applicant shall be subject to approval of the form, content, amount, and manner of execution by the public works director and the town solicitor. 
(3)  A performance bond for an erosion sediment control plan for a subdivision may be included in the performance bond of the subdivision. The posting of the bond as part of the subdivision performance bond does not, however, relieve the owner of any requirements of this division. 
a.  Whenever the building official finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any terms or conditions of the bond or in the implementation of measures secured by the bond, written notice shall be made to the applicant and to the surety of the bond by the town solicitor. The notice shall state the nature of default, work to be done, the estimated cost, and the period of time deemed by the building official to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work. 
b.  Failure of the applicant to acknowledge and comply with the provisions and deadlines outlined in the notice of default means the institution, by the town solicitor, without further notice of proceedings whatsoever, of appropriate measures to utilize the performance bond, to cause the required work to be completed by the town, by contract or by other appropriate means as determined by the town solicitor. 
If cash or negotiable securities deposit has been posted by the applicant, notice and procedure are the same as provided for in subsection (b) of this section. 
The performance-bonding requirement shall remain in full force and effect for up to 12 months following completion of the project, or longer if deemed necessary by the building official. 
(b)  Approval; expiration; renewal. 
(1)  Every approval granted in this division shall expire at the end of the time period established in the conditions. The developer shall fully perform and complete all of the work required within the specified time period. 
(2)  If the developer is unable to complete the work within the designated time period, he or she shall, at least 30 days prior to the expiration date, submit a written request for an extension of time to the building official, stating the underlying reasons for the requested time extension. If the extension is warranted, the building official may grant an extension of time up to a maximum of one year from the date of the original deadline. Subsequent extensions under the same conditions may be granted at the discretion of the building official. 
(c)  Maintenance of measures. Maintenance of all erosion sediment control devices under this division shall be the responsibility of the owner. The erosion sediment control devices shall be maintained in good condition and working order on a continuing basis. Watercourses originating and located completely on private property shall be the responsibility of the owner to their point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within the property. 
(d)  Liability of applicant. Neither approval of an erosion and sediment control plan nor compliance with any condition of this division shall relieve the owner/applicant from any responsibility for damage to persons or property, nor impose any liability upon the town for damages to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-227. - Inspections. 
    The provisions of this division shall be administered and enforced by the building official. All work shall be subject to periodic inspections by the building official. All work shall be performed in accordance with an inspection and construction control schedule approved by the building official, who shall maintain a permanent file on all of his or her inspections. Upon completion of the work, the developer or owner shall notify the building official that all grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control measures and devices, and vegetation and ground cover planting has been completed in conformance with the approval, all attached plans, specifications, conditions, and other applicable provisions of this division. 
(1)  Upon notification of the completion by the owner, the building official shall make a final inspection of the site in question, and shall prepare a final summary inspection report of its findings which shall be retained in the department of inspections, and in the department of public works' permanent inspections file. 
(2)  The applicant/owner may request the release of his or her performance bond from the building official after the final site inspection has been completed and approved and all erosion and sedimentation control measures completed in conformance with applicant's plan approval and conditions. In the instance where the performance bond has been posted with the recording of a final subdivision, the bond shall be released after the building official or his or her designee has been notified by the town planning director of successful completion of all plat improvements by the applicant/owner. 
(Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-228. - Notification. 
(a)  Noncompliance. If, at any stage, the work in progress and/or completed under the terms of an approved erosion and sediment control plan does not conform to the plan, a written notice from the building official to comply shall be transmitted by certified mail to the owner. The notice shall state the nature of the temporary and permanent corrections required, and the time limit within which corrections shall be completed. Failure to comply with the required corrections within the specified time limit is considered a violation of this division, in which case the performance bond or cash or negotiable securities deposit is subject to notice of default, in accordance with subsection (a) of section 8-226 hereof. 
(b)  Penalties. The approval of an erosion and sediment control plan under this division may be revoked or suspended by the building official and all work on the project halted for an indefinite time period by the building official after written notification is transmitted by the building official to the developer for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any condition of the approved plan, or specifications pertaining to it; 
(2)  Violation of any provision of this division or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation related to the work or site of work; and 
(3)  The existence of any condition or the performance of any act constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangerment to human life or the property of others, or contrary to the spirit or intent of this division. 
In addition, whenever there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this division, the town has the right to notify the applicant/owner that he or she has five days from the receipt of notice to temporarily correct the violations and 30 days from receipt of notice to permanently correct the violations. Should the applicant owner fail to take the temporary corrective measures within the five-day period and the permanent corrective measures within the 30-day period, the town then has the right to take whatever actions it deems necessary to correct the violations and to assert a lien on the subject property in an amount equal to the costs of remedial actions. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement of common law liens on personal property. The lien shall be recorded with the records of land evidence of the town, and the lien does incur legal interest from the date of recording. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this division, including revocation of the performance bond or assessment of a lien on the property by the town. 
In addition to any other penalties provided in this division, a property owner or applicant may be fined up to $250.00 for failure to submit plans on or before the date on which the plan must be submitted, as stated in the determination of applicability. 
(Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-229. - Definition of selected terms. 
    Applicant: Any persons, corporation, or public or private organization proposing a development that would involve disturbance to the natural terrain as defined in this division. 
    Building official : The Town of North Kingstown Building Official or his or her designee. 
    Coastal feature: Coastal beaches and dunes, barrier beaches, coastal wetlands, coastal cliffs, bluffs, and banks, rocky shores, and manmade shorelines as defined in "The State of Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Program" as amended June 28, 1983. 
    Cut: An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also, the material removed in excavation. 
    Development project: Any construction, reconstruction, demolition, or removal of structures, roadways, parking, or other paved areas, utilities, or other similar facilities, including any action requiring a building permit by the town. 
    Erosion: The removal of mineral and/or organic matter by the action of wind, water, and/or gravity. 
    Excavate: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, or any other similar material is dug into, cut, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed, and includes the resulting conditions. 
    Fill: Any act by which earth, sand, or other material is placed or moved to a new location above ground. The fill is also the difference in elevation between a point of existing undisturbed ground and a designated point of higher elevation of the final grade. 
    Land disturbing activity: Any physical land development activity which includes such actions as clearance of vegetation, moving or filling of land, removal or excavation of soil or mineral resources, or similar activities. 
    Runoff: The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after a fall of rain or snow, and including seepage flows that do not enter the soil but run off the surface of the land. Also, that portion of water not absorbed by the soil, but runs off the land surface. 
    Sediment: Solid material, both mineral and/or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site or origin by wind, water, and/or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Soil erosion and sediment control plan: The approved document required before any person may cause a disturbance to the natural terrain within the town as regulated by this division. 
    Watercourse: The term watercourse means any tidewater or coastal wetland at its mean high water level, and any freshwater wetland at its seasonal high water level, including, but not limited to, any river, stream, brook, pond, lake, swamp, marsh bog, fen, wet meadow, or any other standing or flowing body of water. The edge of the watercourse shall be used for delineation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Secs. 8-230-8-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CONTROL 

Sec. 8-236. - Purpose. 
    Unmitigated stormwater from areas altered by development may pose public health and safety threats. Potential contaminants in stormwater runoff may include suspended solids, nitrogen, phosphorus, hydrocarbons, heavy metals, pathogenic organisms (bacteria and viruses), and road salts. 
    This division establishes the administrative mechanisms necessary for the town to ensure proper stormwater management. This division is written to work in conjunction with current state regulations. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-237. - Applicability. 
    This division shall apply to any major or minor subdivision, land development project, or other development occurring within the town involving a parcel of one acre or more or a combination of parcels which equal one acre or more. No person shall engage in such development activities without receiving approval of a stormwater management plan for the development. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-238. - Technical standards. 
    All applicants required to obtain approval of a stormwater management plan must develop and submit a proposed stormwater management plan, which must address stormwater management for the development that meets all the requirements of this division. All such stormwater management shall be consistent with the Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual and the Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. 
(1)  Performance standards. Stormwater management plans shall incorporate best management practices for water quality control, which in combination are demonstrated to reduce the average annual total suspended solids in post-development runoff by 80 percent. Development in groundwater overlay districts or watersheds where impaired waters as defined by the state's 303(d) list exist may be held to higher standards. 
(2)  Disallowed stormwater best management practices. The placement of detention basins and other stormwater structures within a floodplain shall be avoided. If there is no alternative, the applicant must show what effects, if any, the tailwaters created by the floodplain will have on the outflow and effective storage capacity of the detention facility. 
(3)  Facilitation of maintenance. Facilities that require maintenance shall be designed to minimize the need for regular maintenance, facilitate required maintenance, and ensure accessibility of components that require maintenance. At a minimum, all stormwater management plans must incorporate best management practices with appropriate maintenance design in accordance with the Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, as amended; or the Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-239. - Maintenance requirements for best management practices. 
(a)  Routine maintenance and repair procedures. Preventative maintenance procedures are required to maintain the intended operation and safe condition of the stormwater management facility by greatly reducing the occurrence of problems and malfunctions. To be effective, preventative maintenance shall be performed on a regular basis and include such routine procedures as training of staff, periodic inspections, grass cutting elimination of mosquito breeding habitats, and pond maintenance. Disposal of sediment and debris must occur on a regular basis (unless otherwise specified within an approved plan), at suitable disposal sites or recycling sites and comply with applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
Corrective maintenance procedures are required to correct a problem or malfunction at a stormwater management facility and to restore the facility's intended operation and safe condition. Based upon the severity of the problem, corrective maintenance must be performed on an as-needed or emergency basis and include such procedures as structural repairs, removal of debris, sediment and trash removal which threaten discharge capacity, erosion repair, snow and ice removal, fence repair, mosquito extermination, and restoration of vegetated and non-vegetated linings. 
(b)  General maintenance standards for stormwater best management practices. Maintenance design and maintenance procedures for all stormwater best management practices shall be in accordance Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, as amended, or the Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. Stormwater management plans shall demonstrate appropriate maintenance design and procedures for each proposed best management practice. 
A maintenance schedule for each type of BMP must be included in the stormwater management plan. These schedules shall list the frequency and type of maintenance operations necessary along with the legally responsible party's name, address, and telephone number. If the stormwater drainage system is to be deeded to another party, the applicant must obtain a letter from said party acknowledging maintenance responsibility and intent of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-240. - Stormwater management plans. 
(a)  Calculations. Stormwater management plans must be in compliance with current subdivision and land development regulations and must include the following, where applicable: 
(1)  The area of each subbasin as identified on final site plans. 
(2)  The area of impervious surfaces (including all roads, driveways, rooftops, sidewalks, etc.) for each subbasin as identified in the Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, as amended. 
(3)  Weighted curve numbers, (CN) as determined by the SCS TR-55 method, for each subbasin as identified in the Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, as amended. 
(4)  Invert elevations for all applicable BMPs. In addition, the elevations for permanent and/or flood pool stages, including peak discharge rates for each stage, within all basins are required. 
(5)  The total volume capacity for water quality BMPs (e.g., infiltration basin, detention basins, wet ponds, etc.). Volumes must be segregated into permanent and flood pool stage volumes where applicable. Furthermore, the volumes of all sediment storage (basins, forebays, etc.) areas must also be shown. 
(6)  The water quality volume must also be calculated for each sub-watershed. All relevant variables such as curve numbers and time of concentration, along with the supporting computations and worksheets must be included. 
(b)  Narrative description. As part of the stormwater management plan, the applicant shall include a discussion of the protection of environmental resource functions and values. The following outline is provided as guidance for preparing a narrative description for the stormwater management plan. Depending on the size and scope of the proposed project, the amount of information required by the permitting agency may vary; therefore, it is advised to consult the appropriate permitting agency for specific requirements. 
(1)  Site description - general topography, soil types, current vegetative composition and relative abundance, existing infrastructure, and/or adjacent properties, identification of major resources (e.g., wetlands, groundwater, surface waters, etc.), name of receiving water(s), potential water quality and/or hydrologic impacts on resources. 
(2)  Site input data - watershed characteristics, area of all impervious surfaces, total area of site, annual mean rainfall, runoff coefficients, curve numbers for various land uses, peak discharge rates. 
(3)  Land use planning and stormwater source control plan. 
(4)  Best management practices-Identify the type of BMP(s) employed both during and post construction and justification for selection, including any deviation from the Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, as amended, and the potential effect on pollutant removal efficiency. 
(5)  Technical feasibility of BMPs including sizing, location, hydraulic and environmental impacts. Alternatives, which were considered but determined not to be feasible, should also be discussed. 
(6)  Maintenance schedule of BMPs to be used, both during and post construction including frequency of inspection and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-241. - Maintenance agreements. 
    Maintenance agreements shall provide written, contractual documentation, which demonstrates compliance with this division and legal arrangements for the upkeep of stormwater facilities to assure their functionality and safety in accordance with this division. 
    Maintenance agreements, which describe all maintenance schedules and requirements, must be developed for each stormwater management facility unless the facility is dedicated to and accepted by the town. 
(1)  Recognition of municipal inspection requirements. Maintenance agreements shall allow the town to regularly conduct on-site inspection of the functionality and safety of stormwater management facilities. Inspection schedules shall be based on the complexity and frequency of maintenance needs and shall be determined by the town. 
(2)  Record keeping for maintenance activities. Maintenance agreements shall include provisions for maintenance record keeping. All activities conducted in accordance with a maintenance agreement must be recorded in a work order and inspection log. Timely updates of the log shall be the responsibility of the stormwater management facility owner or other responsible party pursuant to this division. Review of the maintenance and inspection log shall be completed by the town to determine the effectiveness of operation, maintenance and safety activities. Reviews shall occur as part of each on-site inspection. Additional reviews may be made as deemed appropriate by the town. 
(3)  Responsibility for maintenance to assure functionality and safety. Appropriate maintenance to assure functionality and safety of stormwater management facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner or may be assumed by another party via a written contractual arrangement in accordance with this division. 
(4)  Alterations to maintenance agreements. Any alterations in maintenance responsibility or alterations to maintenance agreements must be reviewed and approved by the building official and the department of public works. If portions of the land serviced by a stormwater management facility are to be sold, written contractual arrangements shall be made to pass all responsibility of the maintenance agreement to the purchaser and shall be subject to review and approval of the building official. All alterations to maintenance agreements shall be recorded in accordance with this division. 
(5)  Recordation of maintenance agreements. All maintenance agreements and alterations to maintenance agreements shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the town. Copies of all maintenance agreements and alterations to maintenance agreements shall be included in stormwater management plans. Recordation of maintenance agreements in accordance with this division shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-242. - Administrative fees. 
    The town shall be empowered to collect fees from permit applicants, which are commensurate with the cost of administering this division and identified in section 9-4, table III. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-243. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The building official (code enforcement officer) and the department of public works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the building official or the department of public works may be delegated in writing by the director of these departments to persons or entities acting in the interest of or in the employ of the town. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 8-244. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this division, the town shall have the right to notify the applicant/owner that he or she has five calendar days from the receipt of the notice to temporarily correct the violations and 30 calendar days from receipt of notice to permanently correct the violations. 
In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, or in need of maintenance or has not been maintained in accordance with the maintenance agreement, the town shall so notify the responsible person in writing by certified mail. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 14 calendar days to complete maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipality. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality may immediately proceed to do so and enforce penalties and/or liens as described herein. 
(b)  Enforcement of penalties and liens. Should the applicant/owner fail to take the corrective actions, the town shall then have the right to take the available appropriate remedies it deems necessary to correct the violations including fining the owner pursuant to section 1-4 of the town Code of Ordinances and to assert a lien on the subject property in an amount equal to the costs of remedial actions. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement of common law liens on personal property. The lien shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the town, and shall incur legal interest from the date of recording. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this division, including assessment of a lien on the property. 
Whenever a stormwater management facility is not implemented, operated, and/or maintained in accordance with the stormwater management plan that has been approved in accordance with this division, any penalty invoked shall be in accordance with section 1-4 of the town Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Secs. 8-244-8-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE 

Sec. 8-250. - Inspection of buildings and procedure when hazards are found. 
    It shall be the duty of the fire marshal and the building inspector to make an inspection of any building and/or property which is the subject of a citizen complaint which, either for lack of repair, neglect accumulation of materials or for any cause whatsoever constitutes a fire hazard, is deemed a menace to the health of any person or endangers other property or the occupants thereof or any other person. Any one of said officers shall notify the owner of the property in writing of their findings, issue a municipal court citation and also the time and place the owner may appear to show cause why said court should not order immediate removal of said cause of fire hazard, menace to health and danger. 
(Ord. No. 08-33, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 8-251. - Vacant structures and land. 
    All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 08-33, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 8-252. - Sanitation. 
    All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 08-33, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 8-253. - Weeds. 
(a)  All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten (10) inches). All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs, provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. Overgrown shrubs shall be maintained so as not to cause obstructions to the traveling public. 
(b)  Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with this article. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. 
(Ord. No. 08-33, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 8-254. - Rodent harborage. 
    All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
(Ord. No. 08-33, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 8-255. - Findings of municipal court. 
(a)  After the municipal court hearing, the court may determine whether said building and/or property constitutes a fire hazard, a menace to the health of any person or endangers other property, the occupants thereof or any other person. If the court shall so find, it may order said owner to immediately remove the cause of the fire hazard, menace to health or danger and may fix the time in which the removal shall be completed. A copy of its order shall be filed in the office of the town clerk, who shall record the same in a book to be kept for that purpose and upon filing thereof, a lien in the amount of any costs or expenses which may be incurred by said court or the town which shall attach to the lot of land where the violation is located. Said lien shall remain until discharged by law upon compliance with the court's order. 
(b)  In the event said owner does not comply with the court's order, the building inspector shall cause the court order to be complied with and such costs and expenses incurred by the building inspector acting in this capacity shall constitute a second lien upon said property. 
(Ord. No. 08-33, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 8-256. - Assessment of costs against property owner and recovery thereof by the town. 
    All costs and expenses incurred under the authority of this article by town personnel shall be certified by them to the town's finance director who shall assess the same against the owner of said real estate. Said finance director may recover costs and expenses in a suit at law against said owner. After judgment in said suit, said real estate may be sold under the aforesaid lien in the same manner as in the case of attachment of real estate and all costs and expenses incurred, including all costs and fees for the prosecution of said suit shall be deducted from the proceeds of said sale and the balance paid over to the rightful owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 08-33, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 8-257. - Service of notice. 
(a)  Whenever notice is required to be given and service to be made upon the owner of said property, it shall be given in the following manner: 
(1)  By leaving said notice or order in the hands or possession of said owner; or 
(2)  By mailing said notice or order certified mail to the last known address of the owner and the time shall be computed from the time the order is so mailed; or 
(3)  By posting said order or notice on said building in a conspicuous place. 
(Ord. No. 08-33, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 8-258. - Judicial review; authority of the court. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipal court may present to the district court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the town clerk. Upon presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the town, which shall be not less than ten (10) days and may be extended by the court. Allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed but the court may upon application, upon notice to the town and on due cause shown grant a restraining order. 
(b)  The town shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it but it may return certified or sworn copies of such portions thereof that may be called for by such writ. The return shall set forth such facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. 
(Ord. No. 08-33, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
Secs. 8-259-8-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ACCESS BY MINORS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS 

Sec. 8-271. - Statement of public policy. 
    It is the declared policy of this town that it is in the public interest to prohibit self-service sales, self-service displays, self-service racks, self-service shelves, or any physical access by minors of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia or emerging tobacco products within a licensed mercantile establishment, except in those premises to which access by minors is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 8-272. - Purpose, title and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to control the access by minors to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia or emerging tobacco products offered for sale within a licensed mercantile establishment. 
(b)  This article may be cited as the "Access by Minors to Tobacco Products Ordinance of the Town of North Kingstown." 
(c)  This article shall apply to the control of all tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia or emerging tobacco products sold within the town limits, excepting those establishments who do not admit minors at any time. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 8-273. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold. 
    Emerging tobacco products means any tobacco-like products other than cigarettes or cigars containing nicotine or tobacco. This includes but not limited to smokeless tobacco, dissolvable which include pellets, sticks, film strips and single-use lozenges, pouches, pills, capsules, and cigarette-like cigars. Products that are nicotine delivery products approved for tobacco cessation through Food and Drug Administration (FDA) are exempt from this definition. 
    Exempt business means any business except tobacco specialty stores that does not allow anyone under 18 years of age to enter unless accompanied by an adult. These establishments will be exempt from the ordinance as written. 
    Licensed retail mercantile establishment means a tobacco retailer licensed to sell tobacco by the State of Rhode Island. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
    Self-service display means the open display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia or emerging tobacco products in a manner that is accessible to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer. 
    Self-service merchandising means open display of tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or emerging tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco products that the public has access to without the intervention of an employee. 
    Tobacco paraphernalia means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products. 
    Tobacco product means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco. 
    Tobacco retailer means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or emerging tobacco products. 
    Tobacco retailing means the selling, offering for sale, or offering to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia or emerging tobacco products. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or emerging tobacco products sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
    Tobacco specialty store shall mean a tobacco retailer whose business exclusively or primarily involves the sale of tobacco products and related goods. 
    Vending machine means a machine, appliance, or other mechanical device operated by currency, token, debit card, or credit card that is designed or used for vending purposes, including, but not limited to, machines or devices that use remote control locking mechanisms. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 8-274. - Access by minors to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia prohibited. 
    No person, business, or licensed retail mercantile establishment, except a tobacco specialty store, shall permit self-service merchandising or self-service display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia or emerging tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 8-275. - Powers and duties of police department for enforcement. 
(a)  The access by minors to tobacco control program established by this article shall be implemented, administered and enforced by the town police department. 
(b)  To implement and enforce this article, the police department shall have the additional power to: 
(1)  Conduct research, monitoring and other studies related to access by minors to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia or emerging tobacco products. 
(2)  Enter and inspect, upon presentation of proper credentials, any licensed retail mercantile establishment to determine compliance with this ordinance. 
(3)  Issue violations and municipal court summons, when appropriate, to those in violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 8-276. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  The first offense shall be punished by a fine of $50.00. 
(2)  The second offense shall be punished by a fine of $100.00. 
(3)  The third offense and all subsequent offenses shall be punished by a fine of $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 8-277. - Effective date and non-conforming users. 
(a)  The effective date of this ordinance shall be 30 days from the date of its enactment. 
(b)  Self-service displays that were in place at the time this ordinance was enacted may remain in place for no more than 30 days after the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 4-25-2011) 
Chapter 9 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Licenses, art. XI. 
Cross reference- Commercial haulers for garbage, trash and refuse, § 6-25; license for trash haulers, § 6-27; taxation, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 20; neighborhood business district, § 21-87; waterfront business district, § 21-88; general business district, § 21-89; heavy business district, § 21-90; planned business district, § 21-91; industrial/office district, § 21-92; light industrial district, § 21-111; general industrial district, § 21-112; waterfront industrial district, § 21-113; home occupations, § 21-320. 
State Law reference- Businesses and professions, RIGL 1956, tit. 5; bowling alleys, RIGL 1956, § 5-2-1 et seq.; power of town council to regulate and license shows and performances, RIGL 1956, §§ 5-22-1, 5-22-5; local license for performances required, RIGL 1956, § 5-22-4; license fees, RIGL 1956, § 5-22-12; Sunday businesses, RIGL 1956, § 5-23-1 et seq.; closing out sales, RIGL 1956, § 6-14-1 et seq.; Sunday laws, RIGL 1956, § 11-40-1 et seq.; holidays, RIGL 1956, § 25-1-1 et seq.; work permits on Sunday, RIGL 1956, § 25-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Nonissuance of licenses or permits to persons in arrears in taxes, water liens and assessments. 
(a)  No license or permit required for the operation of a business, as defined in this chapter, shall be issued or renewed to any person who is in arrears for the payment of any taxes, water liens or other assessments applicable to the operation of such business. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for new construction and/or the renovation or alteration of an existing structure if the property owner is in arrears for the payment of any real property tax, water lien or other town assessment on real property. This subsection shall apply only to that real property which is the subject of the building permit application. This subsection shall not apply to a tenant seeking a building permit for improvements for the tenant's leased premises, notwithstanding the landlord being in arrears as set forth in this subsection. This subsection shall not apply to construction which serves to abate a pending notice of violation issued by the town building official. This subsection shall not apply to a landlord seeking a building permit if the arrears, as set forth in this subsection, are the responsibility of the tenant as a matter of state and/or local ordinance. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-1-2; Ord. No. 91-7, § 1, 3-11-1991; Ord. No. 96-16, § 1, 10-7-1996) 
Charter reference- Licenses, § 1101 et seq. 
Sec. 9-2. - Verification of payment of taxes, water liens and assessments prerequisite to issuance of license or permit. 
    The applicant seeking any license or permit must submit with the application verification from the proper town tax or assessment collection agency that all town taxes, water liens and assessments are paid to date. Such verification shall be submitted with the application to the town council. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-1-3) 
Sec. 9-3. - Fee schedule generally. 
(a)  The town council shall create a fee schedule setting out all fees to be charged by the town clerk or by any town agency or department for licenses and permits granted by the town as authorized by applicable state law or by town ordinance or for services performed by the town as authorized by ordinance or state law. 
(b)  The schedule of fees, a function of which is to charge fees for services or licenses, shall be posted in all town offices. The schedule shall be subject to amendment at any time by ordinance of the town council. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed so as to give the town council authority to amend or change any fee set by state or federal law, except where provided in such law. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-1-1) 
Charter reference- License fee payments, § 1105. 
Sec. 9-4. - Fee schedule enumerated. 
    The schedule of fees for services or licenses shall be as follows: 
TABLE I. TOWN CLERK 
Description of License, Permit or Record State Law Reference Town Fee Abandonment of highways or portions of, per street or portion of $ 150.00 Alcoholic beverage licenses: Processing fee for all applications (new, renewals and transfers 60.00 Class A (over 10,000 population) RIGL 1956, § 3-7-3 1,000.00 Class B RIGL 1956, § 3-7-7 2,000.00 Class B limited (beer and wine) RIGL 1956, § 3-7-7 400.00 Class BL alcoholic beverage license 500.00 Class C retail (consume on premises) RIGL 1956, § 3-7-8 800.00 Class D full RIGL 1956, § 3-7-7 500.00 Class D limited (beer and wine) RIGL 1956, § 3-7-11 400.00 Class E (drugstore; one-quart limit) RIGL 1956, § 3-7-13 200.00 Class F (19 hours; beer and wine) RIGL 1956, § 3-7-14 15.00 Class F-1 (19 hours; all beverages) RIGL 1956, § 3-7-14.1 35.00 Class J RIGL 1956, § 3-7-16 1,000.00 Automobile junkyard RIGL 1956, § 5-21-1 100.00 Billiard. See Pool table Birth certificate removal (birth out of wedlock) 5.00 Bonfires; fireworks RIGL 1956, § 11-13-1 5.00 Yard sale permits: Individual 5.00 Group 10.00 Certified copies of vital records RIGL 1956, § 23-3-25 Search of two consecutive calendar years under one name 20.00 Each duplicate copy issued at the same time 15.00 Each additional calendar year search 0.50 Expedited service 5.00 Change of street names, per street 150.00 Clergy license 1.00 Closing out sale (exempt from fee if business has been operated at least one full year) RIGL 1956, § 6-14-6 100.00 Codified ordinance book 250.00 Supplements, per side of a page 1.00 Comprehensive plan change application 2,500.00 Dance and dance schools RIGL 1956, § 5-22-4 50.00 Dances (special, per night) RIGL 1956, § 5-22-4 2.00 Death certificate search RIGL 1956, § 23-3-25 5.00 Detective license RIGL 1956, § 5-5-1 150.00 Dog license 
 ($7.00 town - $1.00 spayed/neuter) RIGL 1956, §§ 4-13-4, 
4-13.1-9(d)(1) 8.00 Duplicate dog license 1.00 Drive-in theater, per month RIGL 1956, § 5-22-12 100.00 Dry cleaning, self-service 10.00 Entertainment license daily license Application filing fee 50.00 License fee, per day/event 15.00 Entertainment license annual license Application filing fee 50.00 License fee, per day/event 150.00 Annual entertainment licenses issued between July 1 and November 30, 2008 shall be prorated Exhibition, per day 25.00 Exhibition license with vendors, per number of vendors: 1-10 150.00 11-20 300.00 21-30 450.00 31-40 600.00 41-50 750.00 51-60 900.00 61 or more 1,050.00 Farmer's Market Application filing fee 10.00 Permit fee per season 100.00 Fishing licenses: Resident ($17.00 to state/$1.00 to town) RIGL 1956, § 20-2-15 18.00 Nonresident ($34.00 to state/$1.00 to town) RIGL 1956, § 20-2-15 35.00 Tourist ($15.00 to state/$1.00 to town) RIGL 1956, § 20-2-15 16.00 Flea market, per number of vendors: 1-10 150.00 11-20 300.00 21-30 450.00 31-40 600.00 41-50 750.00 51-60 900.00 61 or more 1,050.00 Foundryperson RIGL 1956, § 5-21-1 5.00 Holiday license 50.00 Holiday sales RIGL 1956, § 5-23-2 Any single holiday or period less than a year RIGL 1956, § 5-23-2 5.00 Hunting licenses: Resident ($17.00 to state/$1.00 to town) RIGL 1956, § 20-2-16 18.00 Nonresident ($44.00 to state/$1.00 to town) RIGL 1956, § 20-2-16 45.00 Nonresident three-day license ($15.00 to state/$1.00 to town) RIGL 1956, § 20-2-16 16.00 Combination ($32.00 to state/$1.00 to town) RIGL 1956, § 20-2-16 33.00 Itinerant vendor (over 15,000 population) RIGL 1956, § 5-15-5 350.00 Jukebox RIGL 1956, § 5-21-1 50.00 Junk gatherer badge RIGL 1956, § 5-21-1 3.00 Junk gatherer RIGL 1956, § 5-21-1 5.00 Kennel license RIGL 1956, § 4-13-10 25.00 Laundry license RIGL 1956, § 5-16-2 10.00 License transfers (except liquor) 50.00 Marriage certificate search RIGL 1956, § 23-3-25 10.00 Marriage license ($8.00 to town/$16.00 to state) RIGL 1956, § 15-2-9 24.00 Mechanical amusement devices: (per machine 1-10) Public Laws of 1961, ch. 174 50.00 (per machine over 10) 25.00 Mobile and manufactured home parks, per year Public Laws of 1988, ch. 120 1,000.00 Peddler's license application RIGL 1956, § 5-11-18 25.00 Peddler's license, per vehicle 200.00 Peddler's license (veteran) RIGL 1956, § 5-11-18 0.00 Peddler's license (certain items) RIGL 1956, § 5-11-18 50.00 Peddler's badge RIGL 1956, § 5-11-18 5.00 Peddler's special daily license: Application filing fee 30.00 License fee, per day/vehicle 75.00 Peddler's special event license: Application filing fee 30.00 License fee, per event/vehicle 100.00 License fee (resident), per event/vehicle 75.00 Pool and billiard tables: One table RIGL 1956, § 5-2-11 50.00 Each additional table 25.00 Recorded plat map 2.00 Recording fees: Accounting under mechanics lien law RIGL 1956, § 34-13-8 10.00 Assignment of mortgage RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 45.00 Bill of sale RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 45.00 Business certificate RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 45.00 Certification of instruments RIGL 1956, § 34-13-9 3.00 Copies of instruments; photostatic, per page RIGL 1956, § 34-13-9 1.50 Deed of executor, administrator, trustees, conservator, receiver or commissioner RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 80.00 Discharge of attachment or execution RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 45.00 Discharge of federal tax lien RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 7.25 Discharge of mortgage RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 45.00 Foreclosure deed under power of sale with affidavit RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 80.00 Federal tax lien RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 7.25 Filing of business name RIGL 1956, § 6-1-2 10.00 General assignment RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 45.00 Lease RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 60.00 Lis pendens RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 80.00 Maps, plats, surveys, drawings (not attached to or a part of another recordable instrument) RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 45.00 Mechanic's lien RIGL 1956, § 34-13-8 10.00 Mortgage RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 60.00 Partial release of mortgage RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 45.00 Power of attorney RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 45.00 Quitclaim deed RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 80.00 Tax certificate RIGL 1956, § 44-7-11 8.00 Uniform commercial code (one or two pages) RIGL 6A-9-525 16.00 Uniform commercial code (three or more pages) RIGL 6A-9-525 32.00 UCC termination (one or two pages) RIGL 6A-9-525 16.00 UCC termination (three or more pages) RIGL 6A-9-525 32.00 Warranty deed RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 80.00 Writ of attachment or execution RIGL 1956, § 34-13-8 10.00 Abandonment of highways or portions of, per street or portion of 150.00 Writ of attachment or lien affecting title to mobile and manufactured homes RIGL 1956, § 34-13-8 2.00 RI Historical Records Trust RIGL 42-8.1-20 3.00 Any other instrument not otherwise expressly provided for RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 45.00 Additional pages per instrument, per page RIGL 1956, § 34-13-7 1.00 Prepaid return postage Actual cost Refuse and waste collector, per truck 35.00 Registered mail cost Actual cost Secondhand and antique dealer RIGL 1956, § 5-21-1 50.00 Solicitation 5.00 Street maps 1.35 Subdivision rules and regulations 25.00 Swine permit RIGL 1956, § 4-30-4 0.00 Tent license 5.00 Theatrical performances, shows and exhibitions including art, beer, folk, street or other type of festival; carnival; circus; public dance or ball; exhibition of inanimate objects; roller skating; rope, wire, belly or other form of dancing; street show; theatrical performance; wrestling, boxing or sparring match, per day RIGL 1956, § 5-22-12 25.00 Victualling house: License 75.00 Extended hours 100.00 Voting list RIGL 1956, § 34-13-9 25.00 Voting list/results on CD 5.00 Xerox copies/public records, per page RIGL 1956, § 38-2-4 0.15 Zone change application or zoning regulation amendment 2,000.00 Zoning ordinance book 45.00  
TABLE II. PROBATE COURT FEES 
RIGL 1956, § 33-22-11 gives probate courts authority to collect a fee for advertising in addition to the prescribed filing or recording fee. The fee collected being the actual cost for advertising. 
Description of License, Permit or Record State Law Reference Town Fee All petitions for probate of and recording a will, administration, receiver, custodian, guardian or conservator; petition of a foreign administrator, executor or guardian to transfer or sell real or personal property RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21 1% of personal estate estimate, with a minimum of $30.00 and a maximum of $1,500.00 Affidavit of completed administration RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21 $30.00 Filing of claim out of time RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21  30.00 Removal of executor, administrator, guardian, conservator, trustee or other fiduciary RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21  30.00 Appointment of trustee  30.00 Termination of trust  30.00 Petition for tax minimization  30.00 Petition for estate planning  30.00 Change of name RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21  30.00 Adoption RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21  30.00 Will for safekeeping RIGL 1956, § 33-7-1  10.00 Will for registry RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21  30.00 Successor guardian RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21  30.00 Certified copies of documents RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21   3.00 plus 
  1.50 per page Additional pages RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21   1.50 Uncertified copies, per page   1.50 Certificate of appointment RIGL 1956, § 33-22-21   5.00 Petition for voluntary informal administration  30.00 Petition for voluntary informal executor  30.00 Attested copy: petition for voluntary informal administration   5.00 Attested copy: petition for voluntary informal executor   5.00 RI Historical Records Trust RIGL 42-8.1-20   3.00  
TABLE III. BUILDING PERMIT FEES 
Schedule of permit fees. Building permit fees are based on the valuation of the construction cost as follows: 
Valuation Fee $1.00-500.00 $25.00 501.00-1,000.00 35.00 1,0001.00-2,000.00 45.00 2,001.00-3,000.00 55.00 3,001.00-4,000.00 65.00 4,001.00-5,000.00 75.00 5,001.00-6,000.00 85.00 6,001.00-7,000.00 95.00 7,001.00-8,000.00 105.00 8,001.00-9,000.00 115.00 9,001.00-10,000.00 125.00 10,001.00-11,000.00 132.00 11,001.00-12,000.00 139.00 12,001.00-13,000.00 146.00 13,001.00-14,000.00 153.00 14,001.00-15,000.00 160.00 15,001.00-16,000.00 167.00 16,001.00-17,000.00 174.00 17,001.00-18,000.00 181.00 18,001.00-19,000.00 188.00 19,001.00-20,000.00 195.00 20,001.00-21,000.00 202.00 21,001.00-22,000.00 209.00 22,001.00-23,000.00 216.00 23,001.00-24,000.00 223.00 24,001.00-25,000.00 230.00 25,001.00-26,000.00 237.00 26,001.00-27,000.00 244.00 27,001.00-28,000.00 251.00 28,001.00-29,000.00 258.00 29,001.00-30,000.00 265.00 30,001.00-31,000.00 272.00 31,001.00-32,000.00 279.00 32,001.00-33,000.00 286.00 33,001.00-34,000.00 293.00 34,001.00-35,000.00 300.00 35,001.00-36,000.00 307.00 36,001.00-37,000.00 314.00 37,001.00-38,000.00 321.00 38,001.00-39,000.00 328.00 39,001.00-40,000.00 335.00 40,001.00-41,000.00 342.00 41,001.00-42,000.00 349.00 42,001.00-43,000.00 356.00 43,001.00-44,000.00 363.00 44,001.00-45,000.00 370.00 45,001.00-46,000.00 377.00 46,001.00-47,000.00 384.00 47,001.00-48,000.00 391.00 48,001.00-49,000.00 398.00 49,001.00-50,000.00 405.00 50,001.00 to 100,000.00 405.00  Plus $7.00 for each $1,000.00 over $50,000.00 and not over $100,000.00 100,001.00 to $500,000.00 755.00  Plus 6.00 for each $1,000.00 over $100,000.00 and not over $500,000.00 500,001.00 to no limit 3,155.00  Plus $5.00 for each $1,000.00 over $500,000.00  
Electrical/Plumbing/Mechanical Fee Schedule 
    Schedule of permit fees are based on the valuation of the construction cost as follows: 
Valuation Fee 1-200 30.00 201-300 32.00 301-400 34.00 401-500 36.00 501-600 38.00 601-700 40.00 701-800 42.00 801-900 44.00 901-1,000 46.00 1,001-2,000 52.00 2,001-3,000 58.00 3,001-4,000 64.00 4,001-5,000 70.00 5,001-6,000 75.00 6,001-7,000 80.00 7,001-8,000 85.00 8,001-9,000 90.00 9,001-10,000 95.00 10,001-11,000 100.00 11,001-12,000 105.00 12,001-13,000 110.00 13,001-14,000 115.00 14,001-15,000 120.00 15,001-16,000 125.00 16,001-17,000 130.00 17,001-18,000 135.00 18,001-19,000 140.00 19,001-20,000 145.00 20,001-21,000 150.00 21,001-22,000 155.00 22,001-23,000 160.00 23,001-24,000 165.00 24,001-25,000 170.00 25,001 to no limit 175.00  Plus 12.00 for each 1,000.00 over 25,001  
Description Fee Certificate of use and occupancy fee: Single-family residence, per inspection 50.00 Commercial, private schools, day care, nursery school facilities and other, per inspection 150.00 Building code board of appeals fee: One- and two-family residence 50.00 Commercial and other 100.00 Annual roominghouse, hotel, motel permit: Ten or less rooms 150.00 Plus, per room over ten 15.00 Annual bed and breakfast permit 75.00 Soil removal license 200.00  
Permit fees for gasoline stations. The fees for the erection of gasoline station buildings shall be the amount specified in the "Schedule of Permit Fees" and in addition there shall be a fee of $80.00 for each gas pump and a fee of $60.00 for each tank for petroleum products. 
Permit fees for moving buildings or other structures. The fees for moving of buildings or other structures shall be as follows: 
(1)  If relocated so as not to involve the use of public highways in the process of moving ..... $ 50.00 
(2)  If not more than 21/2 stories in height and involving use of public highways ..... 100.00 
(3)  If more than 21/2 stories in height and involving the use of public highways ..... 150.00 
Permit fees for demolition. The fees for demolition of buildings or other structures will be in accordance with the following table: 
Volume in Cubic Feet 
From To and including Fee 0     5,000 $ 35.00 5,001    25,000 65.00 25,001   100,000 95.00 100,001   500,000 125.00 500,001 1,000,000 175.00 1,000,001 No limit 215.00 Removal of underground petroleum storage tanks 150.00  
Late filing fee. A fee of an additional $150.00 or 50 percent of the required permit fee, whichever is greater, may be assessed when any work is performed without a permit or whenever the terms of any permit are exceeded. This fee shall be paid prior to any issuance of any permits or any inspections by the building official's office. 
Reinspection fee. There may be a fee of $50.00 assessed for each reinspection of any work for which a permit has been issued, where the need for reinspection is caused by failure of the permittee to comply with provisions of the building code or the permit issued by the building official. The reinspection fee shall be paid prior to any reinspection being conducted by the building official's office. 
Temporary portable storage containers $25.00 Soil erosion and sediment control plan review 25.00 Stormwater management plan review 25.00  
TABLE IV. PLANNING DEPARTMENT FEES 
Application Type Fee Development plan review (1) $1,400.00 plus $10.00/1,000 square feet of building area Zoning board review  Variance single- or two-family residential structure 300.00  Variance all other applications 600.00  Special use permit single- or two-family residential structure 300.00  Special use permit all other applications 600.00 Zoning certificate 65.00 Zoning board of appeals  Appeal of building official notice of violation 700.00  Appeal of historic district commission 300.00  Appeal of planning commission decision 900.00 Administrative subdivision 800.00 Minor subdivision or minor land development project (2)  Preapplication review 1,000.00 plus $10.00 per residential unit or 1,000 square feet of commercial building  With street extension preliminary 2,200.00 plus $10.00 per residential unit or 1,000 square feet of commercial building  With street extension final 900.00 plus 10.00 per residential unit or 1,000 square feet of commercial building  Without street extension preliminary 1,200.00 plus $10.00 per residential unit or 1,000 square feet of commercial building  Without street extension final 800.00 plus $10.00 per residential unit or 1,000 square feet of commercial building Major subdivision or major land development project (3)  Preapplication review 1,500.00 plus $10.00 per residential unit or 1,000 square feet of commercial building  Master plan review 2,500.00 plus $10.00 per residential unit or 1,000 square feet of commercial building  Preliminary review 3,500.00 plus $10.00 per residential unit or 1,000 square feet of commercial building  Final review 2,000.00 plus $10.00 per residential unit or 1,000 square feet of commercial building Comprehensive community plan 100.00 Engineering inspection fee 2% of estimated cost of public improvements Bond/surety reductions 400.00 for each request after the third request Fee structure for all applications pending before the historic district commission:  Conceptual conference with the historic district commission 50.00 per meeting  All applications pending before the HDC shall pay an application fee according to the following table based upon the cost/value of the construction/improvements proposed:   $1.00-499.99 25.00   $500.00-2,999.99 50.00   $3,000.00-9,999.99 100.00   $10,000.00-14,999.99 150.00   $15,000.00-19,999.99 175.00   $20,000.00 or above 250.00  Any work that is started prior to approval by the HDC, the applicant will be assessed an additional fee of:   
100.00 Minor modification to development plan (4) Half the amount of the development plan review fee Minor modification to minor subdivision or minor land development project (4) Half the amount of the minor subdivision or minor land development project review fee Minor modification to major subdivision or major land development project (4) Half the amount of the major subdivision or major land development project review fee  
    Costs incurred by the town for stenographic services, water system modeling and evaluation, drinking water quality impact evaluations and other professional services shall be paid by the applicant. 
    Where a development plan review application, a land development project, or a subdivision application requires a variance or special use permit from the zoning board of review, a zone change, or a comprehensive plan amendment, all fees shall apply. 
    For commercial or industrial development plan review developments, a preapplication conference/meeting is not required, but if requested by the applicant, the above noted fee for minor subdivision and minor land development projects shall apply. 
    Advertisement fees shall be paid for by the applicant at the time of application except for comprehensive plan and/or zoning ordinance amendments where the fees are paid directly to the newspaper by the applicant. 
    Residential compound subdivisions shall be assessed fees based upon minor subdivisions even if they are major subdivisions due to the less complex nature of the development. 
    Reinstatement/extensions - Applicants for an extension of approvals that are still valid under the subdivisions and land development regulations or zoning ordinance shall pay an extension fee equal to one-quarter of the administrative filing fee for the review stage that is being extended. Fees shall be based upon the fees in place at the time of the request of the extension. Applications for a reinstatement of an expired approval pursuant to the subdivisions and land development regulations or zoning ordinance shall pay an extension fee equal to one-half of the administrative filing fee for the review stage that is being reinstated. 
    Fees shall be based upon the fees in place at the time of the request for reinstatement. If the application has substantially changed since the prior approval expired, the applicant shall be required to restart the application process. See article 8.3 of the subdivisions and land development regulations. 
    Stenographer fees for applications placed on the agenda for any board or commission shall apply for a matter which is continued for the original scheduled date and for the date(s) of the continuance. 
    Fees for transfer of development rights applications to determine the sending area yield for applications located within the sending area for transfer of development rights shall be assessed at 25 percent of the cost of the corresponding fee for that stage of development from the table above. 
Notes. 
(1)  Development plan review is a commercial or industrial development in which the total floor area is < 50,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minor land development project is a commercial or industrial development in which the total floor area is at least 50,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet and mixed use developments in which the total floor area is at least 100,000 square feet. Minor subdivision is five lots or less with no waivers from regulations. 
(3)  Major land development project is a commercial or industrial development in which the total floor area is at least 100,000 square feet, mixed use developments in which the total floor area is at least 200,000 square feet, or projects proposing density bonuses through the transfer of development rights or inclusionary zoning. 
(4)  The fee for a major modification is the same as the regular application fee for development plan review, minor subdivision or minor land development projects, and major subdivision or major land development projects. 
Project review fees 
(a)  Applicability. In addition to an administrative fee for all subdivisions and land development projects, including conservation developments, but specifically excluding those types of subdivisions specified in article 13.2 of the subdivision and land development regulations, the planning commission shall impose a project review fee on those applications which require, in the judgment of the planning commission, review by outside consultants due to the size, scale or complexity of a proposed project, the project's potential impacts, or because the town lacks the necessary expertise to perform the review work related to the permit or approval. The fee shall ultimately equal the actual cost to the town for such consultant. In hiring outside consultants, the town may engage engineers, planners, lawyers, landscape architects, architects, or other appropriate professionals able to assist the commission and to ensure compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances, and regulations. Such assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, analyzing an application, design review of applications to determine consistency with the comprehensive plan; determining consistency with the purposes and design standards for conservation developments; assessing the economic, archaeological, traffic or environmental impact of a development proposal, review of unique site features including trees; or for monitoring a project or site for compliance with the commission's decisions or regulations. Project review fees are separate from, and in addition to, fees imposed by the town for inspecting a project during construction or implementation as provided in article 11.5 of the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(b)  Submittal. Initial project review fees shall be submitted at the time of the submittal of the master plan application (for major subdivisions or land development projects) and at the time of the submittal of the preliminary application (for minor subdivisions or land development projects). These fees shall be held in custody by the finance director (escrow account). 
(c)  Schedule of initial project review fees. The following schedule applies to the types of applications to the planning commission set forth below. This schedule supersedes all previous schedules as they may have appeared in the subdivision and land development regulations and any checklists which may have been compiled from time to time for the benefit of applicants. Where more than one type of application has been submitted for planning commission action, only the largest of the applicable initial project review fees shall be collected to be held in the escrow account, and not the sum of those fees. 
$500.00 for each lot or dwelling unit for the first five lots or dwelling units, (whichever is greater) including existing dwellings, if present; 
Plus $250.00 for each lot or dwelling unit thereafter. 
(d)  Replenishment. When the balance in an applicant's escrow account falls below 25 percent of the initial project review fee, as imposed above, the planning commission may consider whether to require a supplemental project review fee to cover the cost of the remaining project review. 
(e)  Inspection phase. As a condition of final plan approval, the planning commission shall require inspection fees in accordance with article 11.5 of the subdivision and land development regulations for the purpose of ensuring the availability of funds during the inspection phase of the review process. 
(f)  Handling of project review fees. The project review fee is to be held in an escrow account as established by the finance director. No interest shall accrue on any funds held in this escrow account. 
(1)  Outside consultants retained by the town to assist in the review of an application shall be paid from this account. 
(2)  Project review fees may be used by the town for the purposes stated in article 11.4.5.a of the subdivision and land development regulations at any time during the review process. 
(3)  Project review fees shall be turned over to the finance director by the administrative officer to be held in an escrow account. 
(4)  The finance director shall prepare a report for the administrative officer on activity in the escrow account upon request. 
(5)  An accounting of an applicant's funds held in the escrow account may be requested by the applicant at any time. The finance director shall respond to the request in a timely fashion. 
(6)  An applicant may request the administrative officer to provide an estimate of bills pending from consultants for work completed, or in progress, but not yet invoiced. 
(7)  Excess fees in the escrow account shall be returned to the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest. For the purpose of this section, any person or entity claiming to be an applicant's successor in interest shall provide the commission with documentation establishing such succession in interest. Excess fees shall be returned at the conclusion of the review process which is defined as either: 
a.  With the disapproval of a subdivision or land development plan; or, 
b.  With the release of the performance bond or other financial guarantees at the end of construction of an approved final plan; or, 
c.  With the final inspection after approval on all other types of applications under the zoning ordinance or subdivision and land development regulations. 
(g)  Disqualification. The choice of a consultant hired by the town for the review of an application may be appealed as provided in article 12.0 of the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(1)  Three circumstances may disqualify the selected consultant. These conditions constitute the only grounds for an appeal. 
a.  Conflict of interest. A consultant shall not have a financial interest in the project under review, or be in a position to financially benefit in some way from the outcome of the pending review process. 
b.  Lack of appropriate qualifications. A consultant shall possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist of either an educational degree in, or related to, the field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. 
c.  Business relationship. The consultant has conducted business with an applicant within the past 18 months. 
(2)  The required time limits for action upon an application by the planning commission shall be extended by duration of the appeal. 
TABLE V. POLICE DEPARTMENT FEES 
Description State Law Reference Town Fee Administrative fee for private details, per hour $ 5.50 Attorneys/lawyer offices (does not apply to prosecutorial matters - "Discovery"), per incident 5.00 Audio recordings (cassette or disc) 5.00 Bingo licenses and game wheels RIGL 1956, § 11-19-30 5.00 Court costs RIGL 1956, § 12-20-6 3.50 Explosive permits RIGL 1956, § 23-28.28-10 2.00 Fingerprinting service for child care providers N/C Fingerprinting services for school employees RIGL 16-2-18.1 30.00 Fingerprinting service requiring national and/or state criminal records review RIGL 16-2-18.1 
RIGL 23-20.8-3 36.00 Fingerprinting services for all other purposes excluding child care providers 6.00 Handgun qualifications RIGL 1956, § 11-47-16 10.00 Insurance company reports (includes copying, materials and costs associated with postage), per incident 5.00 License or permit to carry a concealed pistol or revolver RIGL 11-47-12 40.00 Pistol permits RIGL 1956, § 11-47-12 10.00 Photographic service, per disk 10.00 *Police reports and/or matters of public record, (general public copies) per page RIGL § 38-2-4 0.15   Per hour-No charge for first hour (research) RIGL § 38-2-4 15.00 Police vehicle fee for details, per hour with a four-hour minimum 50.00 Retail weapons permit RIGL 1956, § 11-47-39 5.00 Sound trucks or noise permits (nonprofit organizations exempt from fee) 5.00 Vehicle identification number verification RIGL 1956, § 31-23.2-10 10.00 Usage fee for use of patrol boat on private details   Memorial Day to Columbus Day, per hour 50.00   Columbus Day to Memorial Day, per hour 75.00 Staffing fee for use of patrol boat on private details Police private detail rate Training services provided by police officers certified in specialized areas of instruction 100.00 to 1,000.00 per course  
*It will remain the practice of the police department to offer copies of reports free to any individual or agency in the following circumstances: 
1.  Directly involved/named in the report. (Excludes individuals involved in criminal proceedings - "Discovery"). 
2.  Reports/copies requested in a prosecutorial matter involving individuals arrested by the North Kingstown Police. 
3.  Reports/copies requested from other city, town, state or federal agencies in the course of business. 
TABLE VI. RECREATION DEPARTMENT FEES 
Description of License, Permit or Fee State Law 
Reference Town Fee North Kingstown Harbor Fees (excluding Allen Harbor) Dock rental (temporary), per day per foot $0.25 Dock rental permit at Town Wharf at Wickford:  Small commercial boat dock space up to and including 25 feet in length:   Resident, per year 305.00   Nonresident, per year 350.00  Large commercial boat dock space greater than 25 feet in length:   Resident 32.00/ft   Nonresident 37.00/ft Transient boat berthing space after 2 hrs 10.00/hr 
max. $120.00 in 24 hours Large pleasure boat dock space over 20 feet 7.50/ft Bulkhead 6.00/ft Town mooring permits Public Laws 1985 Ch. 234  Resident 150.00/yr  Nonresident 250.00/yr  Business use (resident/nonresident) 250.00/yr Commercial passenger vessel permit application fee 20.00 Wait list fee  Private mooring (initial fee) 15.00  Commercial dock (initial fee) 15.00  Wait list maintenance fee 10.00/yr Allen Harbor Fees Slip rentals May 1-Oct. 31  Resident 88.00/ft  Nonresident 99.00/ft A South Dock (electricity)  Resident 98.00/ft  Nonresident 109.00/ft Monthly temporary slip rate  Resident 22.00/ft  Nonresident 25.00/ft Slip rentals Nov. 1-April 15 (winter season) 15.00/ft Transient dock 3.00/ft per night Mooring fees  Resident 46.00/ft 
$1,000 minimum  Nonresident 51.00/ft 
$1,100 minimum Temporary mooring  Resident 450.00/month  Nonresident 500.00/month Transient mooring fee 35.00 per day Dinghy fee (up to 12 ft) 300.00/season 
(no charge for 
moored tenants) Allen Harbor wait list 10.00/yr Pump out fee 5.00/per use 
(tenants no charge) Pavilion rental 50.00/side Late fee (for slip and mooring final payments) 100.00 Yearly mooring and slip rentals require a nonrefundable deposit of $250.00 to reserve space for the season. 
Boat measurement entails the overall length of the boat including but not limited to any bow or stern extensions. 
Late fee pertains to the final payment in full for slips and moorings if payment is not received by the due date. Golf Course Fees  Outing greens fees:   Weekdays (Monday through Thursday) 33.00   Weekends (Friday through Sunday) 41.00  Weekdays (Monday through Friday) daily greens fees (April 1 through October 31):    18 holes 34.00    9 hole league 26.00    9 holes 26.00  Weekends and holidays (18 holes):    Until 2:00 p.m. 42.00    2:00-4:00 p.m. 29.00    After 4:00 p.m. 26.00  Weekends and holidays early start back 9 (9 holes) 26.00  Winter daily greens fees:   November through February:    Monday through Friday before 1:00 p.m. 24.00    Monday through Friday after 1:00 p.m. 18.00    Saturday, Sunday and Holidays 28.00   Month of March any day after 2:30 p.m. 18.00  Residents greens fee discount:    18 holes 7.00    9 hole 4.00    9 or 18 holes after 2:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday 4.00  Resident special discount fees (no other discounts apply):   Monday through Thursday during 9 hole-play (approx. 1:00 p.m.-3:00 p.m.) (please check daily schedule in clubhouse) 19.00   Monday through Friday after league 19.00   Weekends and holidays after 4:00 p.m. 26.00  Senior discount greens fee (62 years or older) for 18 holes, Monday through Thursday before 3:00 p.m. (can be combined with resident discount) 3.00  Junior greens fee: every day after 6:00 p.m. (must be 16 years of age and accompanied by an adult) 7.00  Active military greens fee discount for 18 holes, Monday through Thursday (can be combined with resident discount) 5.00  Spring/fall weekday special:  Foursome special when playing 18 holes and taking a cart for 18 holes. Valid Monday through Thursday non-holidays except during the months of June, July, and August. No other discounts may be applied to this special. 43.00/player  Riding carts (including tax):   18 holes 20.00/player   9 holes 11.00/player  Pull carts (including tax):   18 holes 5.00/player   9 holes 4.00/player  Professional promotion rate 25.00  Range balls (35 balls/token) (including tax):   1 token 7.00   2 tokens 12.00   10 tokens 55.00  Season passes resident rates:   Full 1,800.00   Discounted rate if paid before March 1 1,710.00   Weekday 1,275.00   Weekday discounted rate if paid before March 1 1,210.00  Season passes nonresident rates:   Full 2,000.00   Discounted rate if paid before March 1 1,900.00   Weekday 1,475.00   Weekday discounted rate if paid before March 1 1,400.00  Junior rates (17 years of age and under):  (Restricted to weekdays after 12:30 p.m. and weekends after 4:00 p.m.)   Residents 250.00   Nonresidents 300.00  Under 40 years of age rates:  (No restrictions same privileges as full membership)   Residents 1,000.00   Nonresidents 1,200.00  Super saver:   Residents 425.00   Nonresidents 475.00   (Seven day-Weekends and holidays after 1:00 p.m.; mandatory fee per round not included; cannot be used for leagues and outing play) 21.00  College rates (25 years of age or under and in college):  (Full privileges starting after 11:00 a.m. on weekends and all day on weekdays. Not valid for league or outing play.)   Residents 500.00   Nonresidents 600.00  Miscellaneous fees:   Bag storage 50.00   Club rental:    18 holes 14.00    9 holes 10.00   Handicaps:    Pass holders (full/weekday pass) No charge    General public 50.00   No show for guaranteed tee time 10.00/player Beach parking permits  Resident (as defined in section 13-32 of the Code)   Senior-55 years of age or older Free   Other resident 10.00 Use of town parks by church leagues, private schools, and private camps, excluding YMCA camps, and by adult softball and adult soccer leagues, per hour 12.00  
Recreation fees: Refer to the seasonal fee schedule at the recreation department (fees determined yearly based upon third party price fluctuations). 
Recreation buildings use fees: Town organization:  Room rental No charge  Kitchen No charge  Band shell with or without electricity No charge Town resident user:  Large room, per each 1/2 of room 30.00/hour   Entire room 60.00/hour   Entire room and use of band shell 80.00/hour  Small room 20.00/hour  Small room and use of band shell 40.00/hour  Whole building 100.00/hour  Whole building and use of band shell 120.00/hour  Kitchen, in addition to room fee 40.00  Band shell without electricity 15.00/hour  Band shell with electricity 25.00/hour Youth groups (town):  Large room per each 1/2 of room 15.00/hour  Entire room 30.00/hour  Entire room and use of band shell 40.00/hour  Small room 10.00/hour  Small room and use of band shell 20.00/hour  Entire building 50.00/hour  Entire building and use of band shell 60.00/hour  Kitchen, in addition to room fee 20.00  Band shell without electricity 10.00/hour  Band shell with electricity 15.00/hour Nonresident user:  Large room per each 1/2 of room 50.00/hour  Entire room 100.00/hour  Entire room and use of band shell 125.00/per hour  Small room 40.00/hour  Small room with use of band shell 65.00/hour  Whole building 200.00/hour  Whole building with use of band shell 225.00/hour  Kitchen in addition to room fee 80.00  Band shell without electricity 25.00/hour  Band shell with electricity 40.00/hour Non-profit/not-for-profit  Entire building 125.00 1/2 day 
250.00 all day  Entire building with use of band shell without electricity 150.00 1/2 day  Entire building with use of band shell with electricity 275.00 all day  Band shell without electricity 15.00/hour  Band shell with electricity 25.00/hour Commercial organizations/businesses  Entire building 500.00 per event  Entire building and use of band shell without electricity 525.00 per event  Entire building and use of band shell with electricity 550.00 per event  Band shell without electricity 50.00/hour  Band shell with electricity 75.00/hour Other Fees  Key deposit - refunded when key is returned 
(town organizations are exempt) 25.00  Damage deposit - users will be refunded all or a portion of the damage deposit based upon the condition of the facility after use. 
(town organizations are exempt) 100.00  
Non-profit and not-for-profit organizations are required to provide a copy of their federal certification in order to obtain the event fee charge. 
Town organizations are defined as any town committee, board or town-affiliated group such as the chamber of commerce. 
Resident as defined in section 31-32(d) of this Code. 
Activities scheduled during non-business hours may be subject to an hourly building supervisor fee of $11.00 per hour at the discretion of the recreation director. 
TABLE VII. DOMESTIC ANIMAL WARDEN 
Description State Law Reference Town Fee Impoundment fees: Initial receiving fee $ 20.00 Pound expenses, per day or part of day 20.00 Vicious dog citation: Confiscation and destruction ($125.00 to state/$125.00 to town) RIGL 1956, § 4-13.1-9(a) 250.00 If vicious dog shall kill, wound or assist in killing or wounding any animal: RIGL 1956, § 4-13.1-9(b) First offense ($125.00 to state/$125.00 to town) 250.00 Second offense ($250.00 to state/$250.00 to town) 500.00 If vicious dog shall attack, assault, wound, bite or otherwise injure or kill a person: RIGL 1956, § 4-13.1-9(c) First offense ($250.00 to state/$250.00 to town) 500.00 Subsequent offense ($500.00 to state/$500.00 to town) 1,000.00 Adoption 5.00 Adoption, age 60 or over N.C.  
TABLE VIII. PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT FEES 
Description Town Fee Inspection services, not to exceed $500.00 for each permit, per hour $ 50.00 Bucket truck, per hour (three-hour minimum) 50.00 Operator/lineman, per hour (three-hour minimum) 15.00 Plat map book 250.00 Plat maps, each 4.00 Aerial photographs: Full sheet 5.00 Half sheet 2.50 Plat size 2.00 Transfer station fees. All residential trash (nonrecyclable items) shall be placed in plastic bags and be no heavier than 35 pounds. The recommended plastic bag size is to be no larger than 34 gallons in size, and must have one town tag adhered to the neck of the bag. Tags will be sold by the sheet with five stickers per sheet at a cost of $10.00 per sheet. 10.00/ 
sheet Household waste: Residential, per bag 2.00 Commercial (with town license), per bag 2.00 Per ton 200.00 Metal, brush, wood waste, demolition material, appliances (excluding appliances with refrigerants) and bulky items (items that will not fit in a 34-gallon plastic bag), $0.10 per pound, $10.00 minimum charge per load Appliances with refrigerants (i.e., freezers, refrigerators, air conditioners, de-humidifiers), per unit 12.50 Leaves and grass clippings: Residential n/c Commercial, $10.00 minimum, $10.00 per cubic yard 10.00/c.y. Tire disposal 7.00 Propane tank disposal 5.00 Miscellaneous scale use 5.00 Non-recyclable mattresses or box springs, per unit 70.00 Bottles, cans, recyclable plastics, motor oil, batteries, cardboard, newspaper, magazines and recyclable mixed paper, used clothing and shoes, Christmas trees (seasonal) n/c 96-gallon recycle cart 75.00  
TABLE IX. FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
Description State Law Reference Town Fee Tax certificate RIGL 1956, § 44-7-11 $25.00  
Geographical information systems (GIS) is defined as a computer software system with which geographical spatial information (e.g. maps) can be captured, stored, analyzed, displayed and retrieved. 
Geographical information systems data available: 
Assessor data: This data set contains, but is not limited to, plat/lot number, assessor summary code, zoning code and description, lot size, total assessed value, alternate 911 numbers, current and future owner and address, co-owner, deed book and page for current and future owners and outbuilding code and description. 
B&W Ortho 1999: These are black and white orthophotographs of the town from 1999 on a 1 inch = 50 feet scale. 
Color Ortho 2003: These are color orthophotographs of the town from 2003 on a one inch = 12,000 feet scale from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
Parcel base map: This layer will include the parcel outlines on the map. 
Centerlines: This linear data will show the center of the road. 
Dimensions: This refers to lot sizes. 
Easements: An easement is a portion of your property that has a right to be used by others or restricts your ordinary rights of ownership. An example would be public utility easement or drainage easement. 
Hydro annotation: This element contains the name of the body of water. 
911 numbers: This layer contains the emergency 911 numbers as related to street addresses. 
Zoning: This element contains the town's zoning codes. 
Street names: This layer will add street names to the map. 
Groundwater class: This map will show the town's groundwater protected areas. 
Recharge zones: This is the area that allows water to replenish an aquifer and can be highlighted on a map. 
Wells: This will show the town's well locations. 
Reservoirs: The reservoirs located in the town will be highlighted on this map layer. 
Well head protection: This is the protected area surrounding the wells in the town. 
Wetlands: The town's wetlands will be highlighted on this map over parcel boundaries. 
    Note: Any combination of the above layers can be requested. All above layers can be accompanied by tabular data when a file is requested on CD, zip disk, emailed or via the FTP site. 
Description Town Fee Data: Custom map/analysis/design time: Hourly rate (plus map and/or media cost) $42.36  
    This service provides custom design and analysis of available town geographical information systems data. This fee will be added to hardcopy map cost, media cost, and/or data transfer cost depending on the purchaser's choice of format. 
Description Town Fee Hardcopy map cost per copy (plus hourly rate above): Tabloid = 11? × 17? 20.00 ANIS D = 22? × 34? 25.00 ARCH E = 36? × 48? 30.00 Custom = 42? × 60? 35.00  
    This service provides town geographical information systems data to the purchaser in hardcopy format. These hardcopy maps are only available in the specified sizes. 
Description Town Fee Media Costs (plus hourly rate above): CD 2.00 Zip disk 10.00  
    This service allows for town geographical information systems data to be provided in CD or zip disk format to the purchaser. A pickup of the media must be scheduled, as for data will not be shipped. 
Description Town Fee Data transfer (email, FTP) of existing layers (plus hourly rate above): 21.18  
    This service allows for transfer of town geographical information systems data files over the internet. 
TABLE X. FIRE DEPARTMENT FEES 
Description State Law Reference Town Fee Smoke detector inspection $20.00 Plan review fees: One-family dwelling RIGL 23-28.1-2 75.00 Two-family dwelling RIGL 23-28.1-2 125.00 Three-family dwelling RIGL 23-28.1-2 175.00 Other - based on cost of construction as follows: Up to $5,000 50.00 $5,001 to $10,000 100.00 $10,001 to $15,000 150.00 $15,001 to $20,000 200.00 $20,001 to $25,000 250.00 $25,001 to $50,000 300.00 $50,001 to $100,000 350.00 $100,001 to $500,000 400.00 $500,001 to $1,000,000 500.00 $1,000,001 and over, plus $10.00 per each increment of $25,000 in excess of $1,000,001 500.00 Residential device inspection: Residential resale early warning device inspection RIGL 23-28.1-2 30.00 Reinspection RIGL 23-28.1-2 30.00  
TABLE XI. WATER DEPARTMENT FEES 
Service Connections 
Size of Pipe in Inches Minimum Charge 
for Installation 1 Actual cost 11/2 Actual cost 2 Actual cost 4 Actual cost 6 Actual cost 8 Actual cost 10 Actual cost 12 Actual cost  
Applicants are responsible for actual cost incurred by the town for service installation including material, equipment and labor. 
Private Fire Protection 
Cost Per Quarter Size of Connection 
in Inches June 04 June 05 June 06 June 07 June 08 2 $  10.29 $  10.47 $  10.65 $  10.84 $  11.02 4 32.17 32.72 33.39 33.87 34.46 6 70.77 72.00 73.24 74.51 75.81 8 128.68 130.91 133.17 135.48 137.83 10 193.02 196.39 199.75 203.22 206.74 12 263.80 268.36 273.01 277.73 282.56  
Unmetered Public Fire Protection
Cost Per Year (billed in January) 
June 04 June 05 June 06 June 07 June 08 $17.38 $17.68 $17.99 $18.30 $18.62  
Service Charges 
Scheduled service call Monday-Friday, 7:00 a.m.-3:00 p.m. $25.00 Unscheduled or weekend/holiday service call 50.00 Service calls requiring call out overtime Actual cost Final reading and closing statements 25.00 Service installation (materials and labor) Actual cost Service equipment tapping up to two-inch lines and earth boring machine costs per hour 75.00 Vehicle and equipment cost/hour/DPW fee       As scheduled  
Rate Schedule 
Base (flat) charge 
Meter Size Quarterly Charge 5/8 ? and 3/4? $ 14.26 1? $ 19.89 1.5? $ 31.55 2? $ 38.42 3? $ 42.41 4? $ 87.45 6? $126.86  
Consumption rate/1000 gallons 
Block Single-Family Residential Meters Charge per 1,000 gallons December 2010 December 2011 1 Block 1 - 0-20,000 gallons $3.12 $3.28 2 Block 2 - 20,001-40,000 gallons  3.90  4.09 3 Block 3 - 40,001-75,000 gallons  4.68  4.91 4 Block 4 - Over 75,000 gallons 10.00 10.00  
Block All Other Meters (Size 5/8 ? and 3/4?) Charge per 1,000 gallons December 2010 December 2011 1 Block 1 - 0-20,000 gallons $3.12 $3.28 2 Block 2 - 20,001-40,000 gallons  3.90  4.09 3 Block 3 - Over 40,000 gallons  4.68  4.91  
Block Other Meters (Size 1? and >1?) Charge per 1,000 gallons December 2010 December 2011 1 Block 1 - 0-200,000 gallons $3.12 $3.28 2 Block 2 - Over 200,000 gallons  3.90  4.09  
Irrigation Meters Charge per 1,000 Gallons December 2010 December 2011 All usage $4.68 $4.91  
Sept. 2002 Minimum unmetered water charge $60.00 Temporary commercial service from hydrant, per day 25.00 Minimum estimated quarterly billing for single-family dwelling 60.00 Infrastructure replacement fee, per 1,000 gallons 0.241 Water service application fee 500.00 Backflow inspection and testing fee 35.00 Economic Development Corporation sewage treatment plant fees: Operation and maintenance, per quarter 27.95 Sewer capital replacement fee, per 1,000 gallons 0.44  
All charges, rates and fees, except actual metered usage, shall be applicable on a nonprorated basis and payable on a quarterly basis or any part thereof. 
Bulk water sale for the purpose of cleaning and flushing newly installed water mains by other than the town shall be charged at the prevailing rate for five times the volume of the main to be flushed. 
A late penalty of 12 percent per year, charged at one percent per month, shall be assessed to all delinquent accounts on the total unpaid balance from any previous billing period. 
TABLE XII. MUNICIPAL COURT FEES 
Description of Fee Town Fee Execution $100.00 Personal service 40.00 Certificate of judgment 15.00 Certified mail 7.00 Subpoena per person 25.00 Summons (additional request per occurrence) 15.00 Returned checks - Bank fee 8.00 Returned checks - Insufficient funds Per RIGL 8-18-4(i) Warrant fee 125.00 Appeal preparation 30.00 Document certification 10.00 Tape duplication 15.00 Notice to DMV - Suspension of license 5.00 Notice to DMV - Reinstatement of license 5.00 Notice to DMV - Reinstatement of license - Duplicate 5.00 Administrative Fee for Court Costs Per RIGL 8-18-4(h)  
TABLE XIII. SEWER FUND, RATES AND ASSESSMENTS 
(TBD: to be determined) 
Purpose Fee Drainlaying Permit application and annual fee $50.00 Insurance requirements:  Property damage and bodily injury liability 1,000,000.00 for each occurrence naming town as additionally insured 
2,000,000.00 aggregate  Drainlayer's bond 25,000.00 Connection to town sewer system Domestic users:  Permit application fee 25.00 per unit  Connection costs To be paid by owner Commercial users:  Permit application fee 25.00 per unit  Connection costs To be paid by owner Commercial food and medical facilities:  Pre-treatment sewer connection application 100.00  Biennial pre-treatment inspection fee 100.00 Privately-owned pump stations:  Permit application fee TBD  Connection costs TBD site specific, based on construction costs Sewer extension:  Permit application fee 4.00 per linear foot or a minimum of 180.00 Repairs to service connections:  Permit application fee 100.00 Annual use charges Domestic, commercial and industrial users: Sewer user fees:  Fixed (flat fee) 88.97 per EDU (equivalent dwelling unit). 
(19.33 town meter chamber infrastructure and 69.64 QDC capacity buy-in.) 
(Fee consists of two charges. The first is $19.33/EDU for the town metering chamber infrastructure project. The second is $69.64/EDU and funds our QDC capacity buy-in charge required by the town/QDC intergovernmental agreement.)  Cost per gallon 13.48 per 1,000 gallons (4.09 town operational costs and 9.39 QDC treatment and infrastructure improvements.) 
(Fee consists of two charges. The first is $4.09 per 1,000 gallons to fund North Kingstown sewer system operation and maintenance. The second is $9.39 per 1,000 gallons to fund town's share of QDC's sewer treatment and infrastructure improvements.) Dye tests 50.00 (reimbursable if testing determines property is not connected to the sewer system) Charge for copies Costs for copies of documents deemed public records shall be as set forth by RIGL 38-2-4, as may be amended Checks written/insufficient funds 25.00 (RIGL 6-42-3) and any other fees assessed by the town's financial institution Post Road Sewer District assessments:  Residential assessment 18,500.00  Commercial assessment 0.87 per buildable square foot  General assessments:   Additional sewer lateral 18,500.00   Additional building 18,500.00 Wickford Village Center Sewer District:   Single family residential (one unit), (including public buildings) 18,500.00   Two unit residential (< or equal to 345 GPD (gallons per day)) 
($18,500.00 + ? $18,500.00 = $24,667.00) 24,667.00   Two unit residential (> 345 GPD) 30,833.00*   Two unit mixed use (owner occupied residential with non-retail/professional use), (< or equal to 345 GPD) 
($18,500.00 + ? $18,500.00 = $24,667.00) 24,667.00   Two unit mixed use (owner occupied residential with non-retail/professional use), (> 345 GPD) 30,833.00*   Commercial/residential with three or more units (< or = to 345 GPD) 56,600.00   Commercial/residential with three or more units (345-690 GPD) 75,466.00**   Commercial/residential with three or more units (691-1,035 GPD) 94,332.00**   Commercial/residential with three or more units (>1,035 GPD) 113,200.00**  
*Increased assessments on "two unit mixed use" properties that exceed an average daily domestic water consumption of 345 GPD (gallons per day). Water consumption is based on previous two-year water department billing (time of sewer connection) or based on average water consumption for one year following sewer system connection, whichever is more. ($18,500.00 + ? $18,500.00 = $30,833.00) 
** Increased assessments on "commercial/residential with three or more unit" properties that exceed an average daily domestic water consumption of 345 GPD. Water consumption is based on previous two-year water department billing (time of sewer connection) or based on average water consumption for one year following sewer system connection. Incremental assessments determined as follows: 
345-690 GPD: $56,600.00 + ? $56,600.00 = $75,466.00 
691-1,035 GPD: $56,600.00 + ? $56,600.00 = $94,332.00 
>1,035 GPD: $56,600.00 (2) = $113,200.00 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-1-4; Ord. No. 83-2, 2-14-1983; Ord. No. 83-5, 3-14-1983; Ord. No. 83-7, 6-27-1983; Ord. No. 83-13, 8-29-1983; Ord. No. 84-1, 1-23-1984; Ord. No. 84-4, 3-12-1984; Ord. No. 84-6, 3-12-1984; Ord. No. 85-4, 2-11-1985; Ord. No. 85-6, 3-11-1985; Ord. No. 85-7, 4-22-1985; Ord. No. 85-13, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 86-1, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 86-3, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 86-15, 8-25-1986; Ord. No. 86-16, 8-25-1986; Ord. No. 86-17, 8-25-1986; Ord. No. 86-25, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 87-4, 2-9-1987; Ord. No. 87-8, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 87-9, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 87-10, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 87-17, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. 87-19, 9-14-1987; Ord. No. 87-21, 9-28-1987; Ord. No. 88-2, 1-11-1988; Ord. No. 88-3, 1-11-1988; Ord. No. 88-4, 1-11-1988; Ord. No. 88-9, 5-9-1988; Ord. No. 88-11, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 88-13, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 88-15, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 88-20, § 1, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 1-24-1989; Ord. No. 89-5, § 1, 2-13-1989; Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 89-14, § 1, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 89-19, §§ 1, 2, 8-14-1989; Ord. No. 89-25, § 1, 10-17-1989; Ord. No. 90-2, §§ 1, 2, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 5-29-1990; Ord. No. 90-12, § 1, 6-18-1990; Ord. No. 91-3, §§ 1, 2, 2-11-1991; Ord. No. 91-4, § 1, 2-11-1991; Ord. No. 91-6, §§ 1-3, 4-11-1991; Ord. No. 91-9, § 1, 6-3-1991; Ord. No. 91-17, § 1, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 92-5, § 1, 3-9-1992; Ord. No. 92-6, 3-9-1992; Ord. No. 92-9, § 1, 5-11-1992; Ord. No. 92-11, 6-8-1992; Ord. No. 92-14, § 1, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 10-26-1992; Ord. No. 93-11, § 1, 6-14-1993; Ord. No. 93-15, § 1, 9-13-1993; Ord. No. 94-7, § 1, 4-11-1994; Ord. No. 94-10, § 1, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 94-11, § 1, 6-6-1994; Ord. No. 94-15, §§ 1, 2, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 94-20, § 1, 11-14-1994; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 11-14-1994; Ord. No. 95-5, § 1, 6-5-1995; Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 95-12, § 1, 11-13-1995; Ord. No. 95-15, §§ 1, 2, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 96-2, § 2, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 96-7, § 5, 5-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 96-10, § 1, 6-10-1996; Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 7-8-1996; Ord. No. 96-18, §§ 1-3, 9-18-1996; Ord. No. 97-2, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 97-8, § 1, 5-12-1997; Ord. No. 97-10, § 1, 6-9-1997; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 98-2, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 98-6, §§ 1-4, 4-13-1998; Ord. No. 98-9, § 1, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 99-2, §§ 1-3, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 99-6, § 4, 5-10-1999; Ord. No. 99-7, § 5, 5-10-1999; Ord. No. 99-9, §§ 1-3, 6-7-1999; Ord. No. 00-4, §§ 1, 2, 1-10-2000; Ord. No. 00-8, § 1, 3-13-2000; Ord. No. 00-19, § 1, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 01-2, § 1, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-3, § 1, 2-26-2001; Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 6-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-19, § 1, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 01-21, § 1, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 02-5, § 1, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 02-17, § 1, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 02-18, §§ 1, 2, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 02-19, § 1, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-18, § 1, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 03-19, § 1, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 03-21, § 1, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 5-10-2004; Ord. No. 04-05, § 2, 5-10-2004; Ord. No. 04-06, § 2, 5-10-04; Ord. No. 04-08, § 1, 6-7-2004; Ord. No. 04-10, § 1, 6-7-2004; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 04-15, § 1, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 04-21, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 04-24, § 1, 11-8-2004; Ord. No. 04-25, § 1, 11-8-2004; Ord. No. 05-05, §§ 1, 2, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 05-06, § 1, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 05-07, § 1, 5-9-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 5-9-2005; Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 5-9-2005; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1, 5-9-2005; Ord. No. 05-12, §§ 1, 2, 6-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 6-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-18, § 1, 12-12-2005; Ord. No. 05-19, § 2, 12-12-2005; Ord. No. 06-07, § 1, 5-8-2006; Ord. No. 06-14, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 07-13, § 1, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-14, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 07-20, §§ 1-8, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 07-24, § 1, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 07-25, § 1, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 08-12, § 4, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 08-13, § 1, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 08-14, § 2, 6-23-2008; Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 11-25-2008; Ord. 08-27, § 2, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 08-30, § 1, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 08-32, §§ 1, 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 09-08, § 1, 10-5-2009; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-11, §§ 1-3, 6-28-2010; Ord. No. 10-12, § 1, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 10-21, § 1, 11-22-2010; Ord. No. 11-04, § 2, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 11-05, § 2, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 11-13, § 1, 5-23-2011; Ord. No. 11-14, § 1, 5-23-2011; Ord. No. 11-19, § 1, 9-19-2011; Ord. No. 11-23, § 1, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 12-01, § 1, 1-9-2012; Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 11-26-2012; Ord. No. 12-17, § 1, 12-17-2012; Ord. No. 13-04, § 1, 6-10-2013; Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 8-26-2013; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-16-2014; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 1-16-2014; Ord. No. 14-09, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 14-12, § 1, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 14-17, § 1, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 14-18, § 1, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 14-19, § 2, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 1-12-2015; Ord. No. 15-08, § 1, 6-22-2015; Ord. No. 16-01, § 1, 1-11-2016; Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 6-27-2016; Ord. No. 16-10, § 1, 7-18-2016; Ord. No. 16-12, § 1, 10-24-2016; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 17-19, § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 17-20, § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 18-12, § 1, 7-16-2018; Ord. No. 18-13, § 1, 7-16-2018; Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 7-30-2018; Ord. No. 18-21, § 1, 10-15-2018; Ord. No. 18-26, § 1, 11-19-2018) 
Secs. 9-5-9-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 9-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Yard sale means the sale of new or used articles of any nature or description to the public at large in any residential district, which sale is commonly referred to as an "attic," "lawn" or "garage" sale. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-5-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-22. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall engage in the yard sale of new or used articles of any nature or description without first obtaining a permit for such purpose from the town clerk. 
(b)  Application generally. Every applicant for any such permit shall set forth on an application to be provided by the town clerk the applicant's name, address, general description of property to be sold and the date of such sale. 
(c)  Group or association application. Every application from a neighborhood association or neighborhood group shall be on a form to be provided by the town clerk and shall include the name and address of each individual selling goods pursuant to such permit, a general description of the property to be sold, each location at which property is to be sold and the date of such sale. 
(d)  Terms and conditions. Yard sale permits may be granted for a period of up to two consecutive days with the hours of sales limited to between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Individual permits may be issued to residents of the town; however, no more than two such individual permits may be issued in one calendar year to any one resident or for any one location. Group permits may be issued to neighborhood associations or neighborhood groups, provided no more than one such permit may be issued in one calendar year to any such neighborhood association or neighborhood group, individual member of such a neighborhood group or neighborhood association or for any location. 
(e)  Fee. The yard sale permit fee shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table I. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 9-5-2-9-5-4) 
Sec. 9-23. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 9-5-5) 
Sec. 9-24. - Exemption from fees. 
    No fee for the permit required under this article shall be charged to any person or business that qualifies as a nonprofit organization with tax-exempt status. 
(Ord. No. 89-27, § 1, 12-18-1989) 
Secs. 9-25-9-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLEA MARKETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Flea market, state permit required, RIGL 1956, §§ 44-18-15.1-44-19-15.2. 

Sec. 9-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Flea market means any indoor or outdoor operation, activity or facility at which three or more persons, for such persons' own account, buy, sell or exchange any tangible personal property from or to the general public on either a casual or regular basis at one or more locations within the town. 
    Operator means any person who owns, controls or leases the premises, site or grounds at which the activity defined as a "flea market" is conducted. 
    Vendor means any person who, at a flea market, engages in or conducts the activity of buying, selling or exchanging, for such person's own account, on a casual or regular basis, any tangible, personal property, whether new or used, either alone or in concert with others. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-6-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-42. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall be the operator of a flea market without first obtaining from the town council a license authorizing such person to conduct such an activity at a particular location. 
(b)  Public hearing. The town council, before granting a new license under this article, shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be posted by the town clerk at least seven days but no more than 14 days prior thereto, in at least two places within the town, and published in a newspaper of general local circulation. Before posting and publishing the notice, the town clerk shall collect from the applicant the cost thereof, together with the license fee set forth in section 9-4, table I. Notice of the hearing shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the location of the premises sought to be licensed, the time and place of the hearing and shall advise the public of the right to remonstrate against the granting of the license. 
(c)  Application; expiration. Application for a flea market license shall be on a form provided by the town clerk. Each such license issued by the town council shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(d)  Fee. The license fee to operate a flea market shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table I. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-6-3) 
Sec. 9-43. - Hours of operation. 
    No flea market shall open before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or remain open after the hour of 9:00 p.m. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-6-4) 
Sec. 9-44. - Sunday sales permit required. 
    In addition to the license required by section 9-42, any vendor who wishes to operate on a Sunday shall obtain a Sunday sales permit as required by state law and article X of this chapter. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-6-5) 
State Law reference- Sunday activities, RIGL 1956, §§ 5-22-7-5-22-9; Sunday performances in North Kingstown, RIGL 1956, § 5-22-11. 
Sec. 9-45. - Records. 
(a)  Business name; employees. Every vendor, prior to conducting any business in a flea market, shall provide the operator with the true name of the person who will conduct the business, any alias or fictitious name under which the business is to be conducted and the names of all employees, whether paid or not. 
(b)  Inventory of vendors. Every vendor, prior to conducting any business, shall provide the operator with a record of current inventory of all tangible personal property to be offered for sale or exchange at the flea market. Such inventory shall be legibly written in the English language, either in ink or typewritten, and shall include a description of such articles that can be specifically described by serial number, model number, brand name, personalized initials or inscription, and a general description of all other articles of tangible personal property. If any such articles on the inventory have been acquired by the vendor within a period of 60 days prior to the date of proposed sale, the vendor shall also include thereon the name and address of the person from whom such articles were acquired and the date thereof. 
(c)  Forms. Forms required by this section shall be provided to the operator by the police department. 
(d)  Inspection. The records required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be kept current by the operator and shall be made available to the police department upon demand. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 9-6-6-9-6-8) 
Sec. 9-46. - Duties of operators. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every flea market operator to advise all vendors of the reporting and licensing requirements of this article. The operator shall not allow any vendor to sell or exchange any article unless it first appears on the inventory which the vendor has furnished to such operator. 
(b)  Failure to perform the duties set forth in this section shall, in addition to any other grounds available as a matter of law, constitute cause for license suspension or revocation. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-6-9) 
Sec. 9-47. - Receipt of tangible personal property from minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is an operator or a vendor at a flea market or for any employee, servant or agent of the operator or vendor to receive any article of tangible personal property by purchase or otherwise from any minor with the intent to sell or exchange any such article at a flea market. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-6-10) 
Sec. 9-48. - Exceptions. 
    A religious, benevolent, charitable or civic organization operating a nonprofit flea market and vendors donating their tangible personal property or their time thereto shall be exempt from this article as long as all articles of tangible personal property presented for sale have been donated to the organization. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-6-11) 
Sec. 9-49. - Violations. 
    Anyone convicted of a violation of any of the terms or sections of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-6-12) 
Secs. 9-50-9-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNK AND SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license secondhand dealers, RIGL 1956, § 5-21-1 et seq.; gold and silver products, RIGL 1956, § 6-11-1 et seq.; purchase and sale of precious metals, etc., RIGL 1956, § 6-11.1-1 et seq.; comparison price advertising for precious metals and stones, RIGL 1956, § 6-13.2-1 et seq.; pawnbrokers, RIGL 1956, § 19-26-1 et seq.; junkyard control act, RIGL 1956, § 24-14-1 et seq.; automobile wrecking and salvage yards, RIGL 1956, § 42-14.2-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile junkyard means any establishment or place where one or more unserviceable, discarded, wornout or junked automobiles or bodies, engines, tires, parts or accessories are gathered together. 
    Interstate system means that portion of the national system of interstate and defense highways located within this state as officially designated or as may be so designated by the director of public works and approved by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to the provisions of 23 USC regarding highways. 
    Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste; or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof; iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. 
    Junkyard means an establishment or place of business that is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile junkyard. 
    Primary system means that portion of connected main highways as officially designated or as may be so designated by the director of public works and approved by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to 23 USC regarding highways. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-67. - Consent required to conduct business in dwelling. 
    No license shall be granted under this article to any applicant conducting such business in any building on premises of which any part is used as a dwelling house, except with the written consent of the chief of police and except in compliance with any applicable sections of the zoning chapter and provisions of the state building code. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-8) 
State Law reference- State building code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-100.0 et seq. 
Sec. 9-68. - Books required. 
    Every person licensed under this article, except licensed gatherers, shall keep in a book obtained from or under the direction of the chief of police a contemporaneous record in ink and in the English language of the business done by such licensee as follows: 
(1)  A description of every article purchased or sold by the licensee, written at the time of such purchase or sale. 
(2)  The name and residence of the person from whom the article was purchased or to whom the article was sold and the day and hour of such purchase or sale. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-9) 
Sec. 9-69. - Inspection of books and places of business. 
    Books of record and every shop, storehouse, bag, wagon, motor vehicle or foundry or place of business of any person licensed under this article shall be subject to the inspection and examination of the chief of police, deputy chief of police, any captain of police, any lieutenant of police, any police inspector or any person authorized by any of them. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-10) 
Sec. 9-70. - Time period for keeping property after purchase or receipt. 
    Every person licensed under this article shall keep any property purchased or received by such licensee for a period of ten days from and after the report required to be made to the chief of police. During such period, the property shall be kept separate and distinct and shall not be disfigured or treated in any way by which its identity may be destroyed or affected. However, any person licensed as a gatherer may at any time sell any such property to a keeper of a shop or storehouse or a foundryperson or other person licensed as provided in this article, and any keeper of a shop or storehouse or any foundryperson or other person licensed as provided in this article may sell or melt within such period of ten days upon permission in writing from the chief of police or from such person as the chief shall designate to act for the chief. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-11) 
State Law reference- Holding period of precious metals seven days, etc., RIGL 1956, § 6-11.1-5. 
Sec. 9-71. - Hours of business. 
    No keeper of any junkyard or storehouse shall perform any business therein between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-12) 
Sec. 9-72. - Business with unlicensed minors prohibited. 
    No person licensed under this article shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive in barter or exchange any junk, old metals or secondhand articles from any minor unless such minor shall be licensed in accordance with this article. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-14) 
Sec. 9-73. - Purchase or receipt of bar or pig iron. 
    No person licensed under this article shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive in barter or exchange or sell any bar or pig iron. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-15) 
Sec. 9-74. - Display of weapons. 
    No dealer in secondhand articles shall display in such dealer's place of business pistols or firearms of any description, blackjacks, slingshots, billies, brass knuckles or other weapons of like kind and description. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-16) 
State Law reference- Display of firearms, RIGL 1956, §§ 11-47-40, 11-47-47, 11-47-58. 
Sec. 9-75. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or barter of books, pamphlets or periodicals. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-17) 
Sec. 9-76. - Applicability of certain provisions. 
    Subsections 9-89(b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3)a and (b)(3)b shall not apply to any automobile junkyard lawfully in existence and having a valid license issued pursuant to RIGL 1956, §§ 5-21-1 and 31-5-28 on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-19) 
Sec. 9-77. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the sections of this article shall, upon conviction for the first offense, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-18) 
Secs. 9-78-9-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Licenses, § 1101 et seq. 

Sec. 9-86. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of purchasing, selling, bartering or dealing in junk, old metals and any other secondhand articles and no person shall establish, operate or maintain a junkyard or an automobile junkyard, whether as keeper of a shop or storehouse for the reception of such articles or as foundryperson or other person receiving such articles for the purpose of melting the articles or of converting the articles into casting, unless such person shall be duly licensed by the town council by a license duly issued by the town clerk. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 9-87. - Application. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license as required by section 9-86 shall set forth with full particulars, upon a form to be furnished by the town clerk, answers to the following: 
(1)  Name, address of the residence and of the business and age of the applicant; if the applicant is other than an individual, the names and addresses and ages of the parties, officers and principal stockholders. 
(2)  Business or employment of the applicant during the five years preceding application; if the applicant is other than an individual, the business or employment of the partners, officers and principal stockholders during the five years preceding application. 
(b)  Such application shall be referred to the town manager and the chief of police for approval or disapproval before being acted upon by the town council. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-3) 
Sec. 9-88. - Hearing. 
(a)  The town council, before granting a license under this article for an applicant whose location is not lawfully occupied for such purpose at the time of the application for such license, shall hold a public hearing, notice of which shall be posted at least seven days but not more than 14 days prior to the hearing in not less than two public places in the town and in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. However, before the town council shall post or publish notice of a hearing, it shall collect from the applicant for such license a fee in accordance with section 9-4, table I, plus the cost of posting and publishing the notice. The notice shall set forth the name of the person applying for the license, the location of the premises sought to be licensed, the time and place set for the hearing and the right to remonstrate against the granting of the application. Applications for renewal of such licenses shall not be advertised. 
(b)  No license shall be granted under this article to any applicant in any location not lawfully occupied for such purpose at the time of the application for such license when the owners or occupants of the greater part of the land within 200 feet of such location shall file with the town council such owners' or occupants' objection to the granting of such license. However, this subsection shall not apply to any applicant who was licensed to do business at a lawfully occupied location and whose premises are being acquired under eminent domain proceedings and who is applying for licensing at another lawful location. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-4) 
State Law reference- Hearing and objection from neighboring landowners, RIGL 1956, § 5-21-2. 
Sec. 9-89. - Conditions prerequisite to issuance. 
(a)  No license shall be granted for a junkyard, any portion of which is within 1,000 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any interstate or primary highway, except the following: 
(1)  Those areas located within a zoning district in which a junkyard is a permitted use. 
(2)  Those which are not visible from the main-traveled way of such highway. 
(3)  Those which are screened by natural objects, planting, fences or other appropriate means so as not to be visible from the main-traveled way of such highway or otherwise removed from sight. If an application is made pursuant to this subsection, the applicant must furnish evidence in writing from the state director of public works that the premises meet the requirements of any rules and regulations promulgated under RIGL 1956, § 24-14-6. 
(b)  No license shall be granted for an automobile junkyard under this article unless: 
(1)  It is to be operated and maintained entirely within a building; 
(2)  It is to be operated and maintained exclusively for the purpose of salvaging the value as scrap of the material collected, as opposed to reselling parts to be used for the purpose for which such parts were originally manufactured, and it is to be located in a built-up commercial or industrial area or contiguous to a railroad siding or on or contiguous to docking facilities; or 
(3)  It is: 
a.  More than 600 feet from any state highway; 
b.  More than 300 feet from any park, bathing beach, playground, school, church or cemetery and is not within ordinary view therefrom; and 
c.  Screened from view either by natural objects or well-constructed and properly maintained fences at least six feet high acceptable to the town council and in accordance with any regulations promulgated under RIGL 1956, § 5-21-4 and as specified on the license. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-5) 
State Law reference- Conditions for issuance of automobile junkyard license, RIGL 1956, § 5-21-4; junkyard control act, RIGL 1956, § 24-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 9-90. - Display. 
    Every keeper of any shop, storehouse, junkyard or automobile junkyard licensed in accordance with this article shall display in a conspicuous place within such shop, storehouse, junkyard or automobile junkyard the license last granted to such keeper. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-6) 
Sec. 9-91. - Expiration. 
    All licenses granted under this article shall expire on May 1 next succeeding the date of such license, and no rebate shall be made from the license fee for such license for any licensed term of less than one year. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-1-7) 
Secs. 9-92-9-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate jukeboxes and mechanical amusement devices, Public Laws of 1988, ch. 55; pinball and game room licensing, RIGL 1956, § 5-2-10; registration of vending machines, RIGL 1956, § 45-6-10. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial establishment means an establishment which, for a profit, furnishes for use by its patrons more than ten coin-operated mechanical amusement devices as defined in this section. 
    Jukebox means any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement. 
    Mechanical amusement device means any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It includes such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated. 
    Person means any person who owns any machine covered by this article; the person in whose place of business any such machine is placed for use by the public; the person having control over such machine; provided, however, that the payment of any fee required by this chapter by any person enumerated in this definition shall be deemed a compliance with this article. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 10-1-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-102. - Gambling. 
(a)  Prohibited. Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit gambling devices that are in any way contrary to the law. 
(b)  Seizure and destruction of machine. If the chief of police shall have reason to believe any mechanical amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may be seized by the police and impounded. If, upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it to be used as a gambling device, such exhibitor shall be found guilty, such machine shall be destroyed by the police. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 10-1-9) 
Sec. 9-103. - Playing jukeboxes prohibited during certain hours. 
    No person holding a license under this article shall permit the playing of jukeboxes, as defined in section 9-101, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 10-1-10) 
Sec. 9-104. - Permitted hours of operation or maintenance of commercial establishments; restrictions on children. 
    A licensee who under this article operates or maintains a commercial establishment shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The town council, in the granting of the license provided for in this article, shall have the authority to specify the permitted hours of operation or maintenance of such commercial establishment. 
(2)  The permitted hours of operation or maintenance of such commercial establishments, unless otherwise provided by the town council in accordance with section 9-103, shall be as follows: 
a.  From 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday nights between Memorial Day and Labor Day. 
b.  From 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday nights between Labor Day and Memorial Day. 
c.  From 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on all Friday and Saturday nights and nights before holidays. 
d.  From 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m. on all Sunday nights. 
(3)  The licensee under this article shall not permit any person under the age of 12 years upon the premises of the commercial establishment unless such person is accompanied by an adult. 
(Ord. No. 83-12, § 1, 8-29-1983; Ord. No. 86-21, § 2, 10-27-1986) 
Secs. 9-105-9-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 9-111. - Required. 
    No person shall keep a jukebox or mechanical amusement device as defined in section 9-101 or any device of a similar character in any saloon, shop or place of business within the town or own or keep any such device for public use or profit within the town without first having obtained a license from the town council in accordance with this division. Application for such license shall be made to the town council upon a form to be supplied by the town clerk for that purpose. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 10-1-2) 
Sec. 9-112. - Penalty for failure to obtain. 
    Every person who shall keep a jukebox or mechanical amusement device as defined in section 9-101 or any device of a similar character in any shop, saloon or place of business within the town or who shall own or keep any such device for public use or profit within the town without having a license issued in accordance with this division shall be punished by a fine of $20.00 or shall be imprisoned not exceeding three months for each violation. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 10-1-3) 
Sec. 9-113. - Application contents. 
    The application for a license required by this division shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, age, telephone number and date and place of birth of the applicant; 
(2)  If a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the names, addresses and dates of birth of the principal and officers thereof; 
(3)  The name, address, date and place of birth and telephone number of each person having a financial interest in an establishment where machines or devices are to be displayed or operated; 
(4)  The address of the establishment where machines or devices are to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at that establishment, including square footage of the proposed operating area; 
(5)  The name, address, date and place of birth and telephone number of the business manager of the premises where a license is requested; 
(6)  Prior arrests and convictions of the applicant and business manager, if any, including full disclosure of the nature of such conviction and any penalty or disposition of such conviction; 
(7)  Certification under oath made by the applicant that the information contained in the application is complete, accurate and truthful to the best of the applicant's knowledge; and 
(8)  Such additional information as may be required by the town clerk. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 10-1-4) 
Sec. 9-114. - Filing application in duplicate; inspection, investigation and report on application. 
(a)  Application for a license required by this division shall be made out in duplicate, with one copy being referred to the director of public safety and one copy being referred to the building official. 
(b)  The director of public safety, through the chief of police, shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed that such machine will be operated and shall make a report and recommendation on the application to the town council after the consideration of the following: 
(1)  Citizen reaction to the application; impact on traffic; and parking; 
(2)  Proximity of the location to residential areas, commercial district, schools, churches and other establishments licensed for the displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical amusement device as defined by section 9-101; 
(3)  Impact on existing municipal services and the requirement, if any, for new municipal services; impact on the police department; 
(4)  Effect on community development and improvement; 
(5)  Effect on real estate values in the area; 
(6)  Whether the license is a necessity; 
(7)  Previous operation of the premises, if applicable; 
(8)  Whether the existence of such mechanical amusement devices will create a nuisance to surrounding property owners; 
(9)  Whether adequate precautions will be taken to prevent disorderly conduct as defined in section 12-6; and 
(10)  Such other facts as each individual application may present regarding the subject premises or the existence of the mechanical amusement devices. 
(c)  The building official shall inspect all wiring and connections to the mechanical amusement devices to determine if the devices comply with the state electrical code and, on the basis of such inspection, shall either approve or disapprove the application. However, the building inspector shall not approve any application for which the licensee has not provided at least 200 percent of the square footage of floor space, in an area open to the public and in the room in which the mechanical amusement device is to be located, that is necessary for the placement of each mechanical amusement device covered by the license; e.g., mechanical amusement devices that take up a total of 20 square feet shall necessitate 40 square feet for operation. No license shall be issued to any applicant where the building inspector has disapproved the application for noncompliance with the state electrical code or for noncompliance with the stated floor space requirement. 
(d)  No license shall be issued to any applicant whose premises are located within 1,000 feet of a school or within 500 feet of a church or whose premises are not in an area zoned for such purposes in accordance with article IV of chapter 21 of this Code. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 10-1-5; Ord. No. 86-21, § 1, 10-27-1986) 
State Law reference- State electrical code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-100.1.5. 
Sec. 9-115. - Display; term; maximum number of devices; transferability. 
(a)  The license provided for in this division shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. 
(b)  A license issued under this division shall continue in effect for the term stated therein. Such term shall not exceed one year and shall entitle the licensee to own, keep or use that number of mechanical amusement devices specified in the license at the location covered by the license. While any such license is in effect, the licensee may replace mechanical amusement devices with other mechanical amusement devices of the same type, provided that the licensee may not own, keep or use at the location covered by the license any mechanical amusement devices in addition to the total number specified in the license therefor from the town council in accordance with this division. 
(c)  If the licensee shall move the place of business to another location within the town, the license may be transferred to such new location upon application to the town council, giving the street and number of the new location. The new location shall be approved by the director of public safety and the building official in the same manner as provided in section 9-114. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 10-1-6) 
Sec. 9-116. - Revocation. 
    Every license issued under this division is subject to the right, which is expressly reserved, to revocation of the license if the licensee, directly or indirectly, permits the operation of any jukebox or mechanical amusement device contrary to this article, this Code, other town ordinances or state law. Such license may be revoked by the town council after written notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the provision, ordinance or law violation with which the licensee is charged, if after a hearing the licensee is found to be guilty of such violation. Ten days' notice of the hearing shall be given the licensee. At such hearing, the licensee and the licensee's attorney may present and submit evidence of witnesses in the licensee's defense. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 10-1-7) 
Secs. 9-117-9-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Authority to license and regulate peddlers, Public Laws of 1984, ch. 67; hawkers and peddlers, RIGL 1956, § 5-11-1 et seq.; itinerant vendors, RIGL 1956, § 5-15-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-126. - Continuous movement; solicitation of motor vehicles; stationary location; restriction of locations; impeding traffic. 
(a)  Peddlers, hawkers or other persons requiring a license under this article shall be moving at all times except to service customers and shall not remain in any location awaiting patrons. Stopping for servicing customers shall be in a manner not to impede the flow of traffic or to block traffic or in a manner to create a traffic hazard. 
(b)  There shall be no solicitation of a motor vehicle while a motor vehicle is stopped in traffic or stopped at a traffic light. All peddlers, hawkers or other persons requiring a license shall be prohibited from stopping and blocking any sidewalk. 
(c)  A licensee who obtains the written consent of the owner of real estate may locate the activity on such real estate and remain stationary at such location; provided, however, that a licensee shall only be allowed to remain stationary on real estate that is located in a zoning district that permits peddling and hawking. Such consent shall be nontransferable and personal to the licensee and effective for no longer than the duration of the license issued to such licensee under this article. 
(d)  The chief of police may, from time to time, submit to the town council locations, streets and public ways throughout the town which, in the chief's opinion, because of excess traffic and congestion, are rendered unsafe for the public welfare to allow the selling or offering for sale of merchandise by peddlers, hawkers or other persons requiring a license under this article. 
(e)  All peddlers and hawkers shall be prohibited from selling or displaying goods at the following locations: 
(1)  At the intersection of Route 1 and 1-A. 
(2)  At the intersection of Route 1 and 102. 
(3)  At the intersection of Phillips Street, Brown Street and Boston Neck Road. 
(4)  On Boston Neck Road from the intersection of Brown Street, south to the intersection of Fairway Drive. 
(5)  On Route 4 from the East Greenwich town line to its intersection with Tower Hill Road. 
(6)  Tower Hill Road from its intersection with Route 4, south to the South Kingstown town line. 
(7)  At the intersection of Brown Street, Main Street and West Main Street. 
(f)  At no time shall any peddler, hawker or other person requiring a license under this article impede the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and the chief of police shall have the authority to suspend the operation of such licensee at any time and for such period of time where conditions exist that the chief deems it in the interest of public safety to do so, without prior request to the town council. 
(g)  No licensee shall offer for sale at any town-owned park or recreational area any goods or services, except on behalf of any nonprofit organization or nonprofit corporation duly organized for the purposes set forth in RIGL 1956, § 7-6-4 where no part of the net income or profit of such sale will be distributed to such person or the members, directors or officers of such nonprofit organization or nonprofit corporation. In addition, every such nonprofit organization and nonprofit corporation shall obtain a written permit from the recreation office in advance of any sale of goods or services. 
(h)  No peddler or hawker shall stop to service customers or be allowed to remain in a stationary location if the location is within 100 feet of any establishment offering for sale similar goods or services. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-2-10; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-10), 8-29-1983; Ord. No. 90-8, § 1, 5-29-1990) 
Sec. 9-127. - Sales prohibited during certain hours. 
    No peddling, hawking or other activity regulated by this article shall be permitted anywhere in the town, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. in residential districts and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. in business districts and industrial districts. However, food, beverages or other products for immediate human consumption may be sold in industrial districts between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-2-8; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-8), 8-29-1983; Ord. No. 84-11, § 1, 10-22-1984) 
Sec. 9-128. - Excessive nuisance prohibited. 
    No peddler, hawker or other person requiring a license under this article shall attempt to sell or offer to sell wares by means of any loudspeaker or other noisemaking device intended to attract public attention, nor shall a peddler, hawker or other such person create a nuisance situation. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-2-9; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-9), 8-29-1983) 
Sec. 9-129. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-13), 8-29-1983) 
Secs. 9-130-9-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 9-141. - Required. 
    No person shall hawk or peddle or offer for sale, take orders for sale or sell wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, flowers, magazines, subscriptions, books or any other articles or substances from any vehicle, cart, pushcart, basket or hand-carried cart within the town without first obtaining a license from the town council. However, no license shall be required in order to sell flowers or vegetables that are grown and sold on a person's property. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-2-1; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-1), 8-29-1983; Ord. No. 90-8, § 2, 5-29-1990; Ord. No. 92-2, § 1, 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 9-142. - Application; issuance; approval by state agencies for certain licenses; information required on application. 
(a)  Every person offering for sale, taking orders for sale or selling any goods, wares, merchandise or any other articles or substances on any street or other public way within the town shall make application to the town council for a license. Such application shall be made even if the applicant holds a state peddler's license. Upon approval of such application by the town council, the town clerk shall issue a license to such person to sell the articles or substances mentioned in this section upon any street, highway, lane or alley in the town. However, no license to sell or offer to sell shall be issued for the sale of any meats, fruits, poultry, fish, vegetables or food products of a perishable nature unless all necessary state approvals have been obtained by the applicant. 
(b)  The application required in subsection (a) of this section shall specify the days and hours of such days during which the applicant wishes to operate; the goods and articles that will be sold; the year, make, model and registration number of any vehicle to be used; and the location at which the operations shall take place. 
(c)  The applicant shall, when making application for a license required by this division, provide two so-called passport size photographs of the individual authorized to act under the license. Upon approval of the application by the town council, the town clerk shall, in addition to the license specified in this section, issue an identification badge containing one of the photographs of the authorized individual along with the effective dates of the license and such other information as the town clerk shall deem appropriate. The town clerk shall maintain the other photograph with the application. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-2-2; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-2), 8-29-1983; Ord. No. 90-8, § 3, 5-29-1990) 
State Law reference- Regulations regarding door-to-door sales of items of $25.00 or more, RIGL 1956, § 6-28-1 et seq.; sanitation for food safety, RIGL 1956, § 21-27-1 et seq.; peddler's license for sale of gasoline, RIGL 1956, § 31-37-8; permit for litter, RIGL 1956, § 44-44-3.1. 
Sec. 9-143. - Fees. 
(a)  A filing fee shall be charged for the application for the license required under this division in accordance with section 9-4, table I, and this fee shall be retained by the town whether such license is granted or denied. 
(b)  For licenses issued pursuant to this division, the person receiving the license shall pay to the town a fee in accordance with section 9-4, table I. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-2-3; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-3), 8-29-1983) 
Sec. 9-144. - Exemptions from fees. 
    In addition to the exemption from fees set forth in RIGL 1956, §§ 5-11-1.1, 5-11-18, no fee for the license required under this division shall be charged to any person or business that qualifies as a nonprofit organization with tax exempt status; to any farmer's cooperative association of a wholesale market of fruit, vegetables and farm products; and to residents who raise produce on such residents' own property and sell it on property zoned for that use. 
(Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-4), 8-29-1983; Ord. No. 94-21, § 1, 10-24-1994) 
Sec. 9-145. - Transferability; possession; producing on request. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to this division may be transferred with the approval of the town council. No person other than the individual to whom it was issued and named therein shall be authorized to act under the license. However, a licensee may employ a driver, and such driver may operate on the license as long as the driver is registered with the town clerk as a driver for the licensee. A separate license shall be required for each vehicle, cart or wagon. Every licensee shall carry such license while engaged in peddling and shall produce the license when required by an inhabitant of the state or any person having a license under this article, and failure on the part of the licensee to produce the license within ten minutes shall be cause for revocation of such license. 
(b)  Every licensee shall wear, while engaged in any activity regulated by this article, the identification badge issued by the town clerk. The identification badge shall be worn so that it is clearly visible. Violation of this subsection shall be cause for the revocation of the license issued under this division. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-2-5; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-5), 8-29-1983; Ord. No. 90-8, § 4, 5-29-1990; Ord. No. 93-3, § 1, 2-8-1993) 
Sec. 9-146. - Failure to produce upon request to result in payment of costs on prosecution. 
    Any peddler, hawker or other person requiring a license under this division, while engaged in an activity regulated by this article, who shall neglect or refuse to wear the identification badge specified in this division or who shall neglect or refuse for a space of ten minutes, after demand by any inhabitant of the state or any person having a license under this article, to exhibit the license, issued pursuant to this article, and allow the license to be read shall, if sued or prosecuted under RIGL 1956, § 5-11-1 et seq., be adjudged to pay the costs of such suit or prosecution, although it shall appear on trial that the peddler, hawker or other person had a license duly issued and in force at the time of the alleged offense. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-2-6; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-6), 8-29-1983) 
Sec. 9-147. - Inspection of vehicles of food peddlers. 
    Every peddler, hawker or other person who sells food or beverages of any kind or any product for human consumption shall, before the license is issued, have the truck, wagon or other equipment inspected and approved by all necessary state agencies. No beverage of any kind shall be sold other than in a single-service, disposable-type container. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-2-7; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-7), 8-29-1983) 
State Law reference- Sanitation in food vending mobile establishments, inspections, RIGL 1956, § 21-27-1 et seq.; lights on vehicles vending food, RIGL 1956, § 31-24-53. 
Sec. 9-148. - Revocation or suspension. 
    Each license to peddle or hawk may be revoked or suspended at any time by the town council for violation of any of the sections of this article or for any other good cause. 
(Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-11), 8-29-1983) 
Sec. 9-149. - Categories. 
(a)  Enumerated. For the purpose of this article, the town shall have three categories of licenses as follows: 
(1)  Category 1. Those persons or businesses selling or offering to sell perishable foodstuffs and soft beverages. 
(2)  Category 2. Those persons selling or offering for sale articles or goods made by such persons' own hands. 
(3)  Category 3. Those persons or businesses selling or offering for sale other articles of general merchandise or manufacture, including flowers, magazines and subscriptions. 
(b)  Limitations. The maximum number of licenses in each category shall be as follows: a maximum of 25 licenses in category 1, a maximum of five licenses in category 2, and a maximum of three licenses in category 3. However, the reduction in the number of authorized licenses shall not be deemed to affect the right of any current license holder to continue to renew the license annually. Every licensee who has obtained a license prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection derives shall be entitled to annually renew the license, notwithstanding the limitations on the number of licenses authorized to be issued, so long as the licensee complies with all of the sections of this article and any applicable regulations. Any licensee who fails to renew the license prior to the expiration date shall not be entitled to renew the license unless and until there is a license available in the category for which the licensee applied. No new licenses in any of the categories shall be issued until the total number of licenses issued for a specific category is less than the maximum number set forth in this subsection. 
(c)  Vacancies. The town clerk shall maintain a list of persons interested in obtaining each category of license and, upon the occurrence of a vacancy in such category, shall notify the person whose name appears first on the waiting list of such category of the availability of a license. If the person so notified fails to make application for such license within ten days after notification, the town clerk shall remove that person's name from the list and shall notify the person whose name appears next on the list until an application is received. If the town council does not approve the application, the town clerk shall repeat the notification process until an application is approved. 
(Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-12), 8-29-1983; Ord. No. 85-1, § 1, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 90-8, § 5, 5-29-1990; Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 5-11-2009; Ord. No. 12-12, § 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 9-150. - Special licenses. 
(a)  ln addition to the other licenses referred to in this division, the town clerk shall have the authority to issue daily licenses to town residents or other persons having a permanent establishment located within the town. Such license shall authorize the holder to engage in activities similar to those regulated by this article and shall subject the holder of the license to all of the sections of this article with respect to such activities. 
(b)  A filing fee shall be charged for all applications for special daily licenses in accordance with the town's fee schedule, and the filing fee shall be retained by the town whether the license is granted or denied. 
(c)  The fee for licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table I. 
(d)  A special event shall include any parade, concert, carnival, festival, farmer's market or other event as may be designated by the town council and shall also include, for the purpose of selling Christmas trees and wreaths, the period between Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 83-14, § 1 (9-2-12.1), 8-29-1983; Ord. No. 85-2, § 1, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 85-8, § 1, 5-29-1985; Ord. No. 90-8, § 6, 5-29-1990; Ord. No. 94-21, § 2, 10-24-1994) 
Sec. 9-151. - Special event licenses. 
(a)  In addition to the other licenses referred to in this division, the town clerk shall have the authority to issue special event licenses to other persons who do not qualify under section 9-150. Such license shall authorize the holder to engage in activities similar to those regulated by this article and shall subject the holder of the license to all of the sections of this article with respect to such activities. 
(b)  A filing fee shall be charged for all applications for special event licenses in accordance with section 9-4, table I, and the filing fee shall be retained by the town whether the license is granted or denied. 
(c)  The fee for licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table I. 
(Ord. No. 85-3, § 1, 1-28-1985; Ord. No. 85-9, § 1, 5-29-1985) 
Secs. 9-152-9-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SELF-SERVICE DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Restrictions on location of combustible dry cleaning equipment, RIGL 1956, § 23-28.16-8. 

Sec. 9-166. - Licensing. 
(a)  Any person intending to operate a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment within the town shall, prior to the installation of any machinery, first make application to the town council for a license for such business. Each such application shall be accompanied by a complete floor plan and building plan showing the location of the premises, the building outline and the location of all equipment. Upon receipt of such application, the town council shall refer the matter to the building inspector, who shall conduct an inspection of the proposed location and determine compliance with all requirements set forth in the state building code. The building official shall make a report of the results of the investigation to the town council within ten days after receipt of such application, and the town council shall take whatever action it deems advisable on such application, giving due regard to the report and recommendations of the building official. 
(b)  In view of possible night problems in automatic establishments, the closing hour may be specified when the license application is acted upon, and any change to such closing hour shall be at the discretion of the council. 
(c)  The license shall be renewable on December 1 of each year, and the license fee shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table I. The town council may suspend a license at any time when it is deemed to be in the public interest. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-8-1) 
State Law reference- State building code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-100.0 et seq. 
Sec. 9-167. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate this article or who shall fail to comply with this article or with any of the requirements of this article or who shall install machinery and equipment in violation of any detailed statements or plans submitted and approved under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-8-2) 
Sec. 9-168. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce this article. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-8-3) 
Secs. 9-169-9-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SOLICITATIONS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Charitable solicitation, RIGL 1956, § 5-53-1 et seq.; home solicitation sales, RIGL 1956, § 6-28-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable means and includes benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, social service and civic or fraternal. 
    Contributions means and includes the receipt of anything of value, including the loan of money. 
    Educational and education have the meaning commonly accepted therefor. 
    Person includes any individual, firm or partnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or agent or similar representative thereof. 
    Religious and religion have the meaning commonly accepted therefor. 
    Solicit and solicitation mean the request, either directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value or any plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for charitable or religious or commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 4-9-1984) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-182. - Hours restricted. 
    No solicitation shall be permitted anywhere in the town except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 4-9-1984) 
Sec. 9-183. - Effect of no solicitation signs. 
    Any person residing in the town may affix to the entrance of such person's residence a sign approximately four inches square containing the legend "no solicitations." Any person required to have a permit pursuant to this article who shall make or attempt to make any solicitation or sale at a residence so marked shall be deemed to have violated this section. 
(Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 4-9-1984) 
Sec. 9-184. - Violations. 
    Any person who violates this article or who files or causes to be filed an application for a permit made pursuant to this article containing false or fraudulent statements or who utilizes or employs fraudulent means in connection with any solicitation shall be deemed to have violated this article. Such violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, such person shall be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 4-9-1984) 
Secs. 9-185-9-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 9-196. - Required. 
    No person, group of persons or representatives of any charitable organizations, including any benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, social service, civic or fraternal or religious organizations or persons representing organizations of any kind, nature or purpose whatsoever, shall solicit donations, contributions, subscriptions or memberships or in any other manner solicit within the town without having first received a permit from the town manager pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 4-9-1984) 
Sec. 9-197. - Application. 
    An application for a permit required under this division shall be made to the town manager on a form provided by the town manager. Such application shall be sworn to in duplicate and filed with the town manager at least 14 days prior to the time when the permit applied for shall become effective. Applications for permits required under section 9-196 shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and date of birth of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names, addresses and dates of birth of the applicant's principal officers or directors. 
(3)  The name and address of the person in charge of conducting the solicitation and the names and addresses of any persons who will conduct such solicitation, together with a statement as to whether or not any such person has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, and if so, the nature of such offense, the date of such conviction and the sentence imposed, if any. 
(4)  If motor vehicles are to be used in conducting the solicitation, the description and registration number of all such vehicles. 
(5)  The dates and hours of the solicitation and a brief outline as to the methods to be used in conducting the solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 4-9-1984) 
Sec. 9-198. - Issuance; term. 
    Upon compliance with section 9-197, the town manager shall issue a permit to the applicant for the period requested, which period shall not exceed one year. 
(Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 4-9-1984) 
Sec. 9-199. - Transferability. 
    Any permit issued under this division shall be nontransferable and shall be returned to the town manager within three days of its expiration, together with all facsimile copies thereof. 
(Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 4-9-1984) 
Sec. 9-200. - Fee. 
    The fee for any permit issued pursuant to this division shall be as prescribed in section 9-4, table I. No fee shall be charged for solicitations conducted on behalf of any nonprofit, educational, charitable or religious organization. 
(Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 4-9-1984) 
Secs. 9-201-9-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SOUND TRUCK LICENSE 

Sec. 9-211. - Required. 
    No person shall operate in the town any motor vehicle, commonly called a sound truck, while broadcasting therefrom by loudspeakers or otherwise any advertising matter, music, noise or any other spoken works of any nature, without having first obtained a license from the chief of police upon approval of the director of public safety. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-3-1) 
Sec. 9-212. - Period of operation; display; revocation. 
    The license required by section 9-211 shall specify the days and times upon which the licensed sound truck may operate and shall be carried by the operator of such sound truck at all times. However, no license shall permit the operation of the sound truck between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. The license may at any time be revoked without notice by the chief of police, by order of the director of public safety or by order of the town council. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-3-2) 
Sec. 9-213. - Fee. 
    The fee for a license required by section 9-211 shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table V. However, such fee may be waived when such sound truck is used in connection with charitable, nonprofit and nonpolitical activities. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-3-3) 
Secs. 9-214-9-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HOLIDAY SALES AND ACTIVITIES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to permit holiday sales, § 1102. 
State Law reference- Sunday performances in North Kingstown, RIGL 1956, § 5-22-11; Holiday businesses, RIGL 1956, § 5-23-1 et seq.; work or recreation on Sunday, RIGL 1956, § 11-40-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-226. - Applicability of article. 
    This article shall not apply to licensed victualling houses and taverns. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-4-8) 
Sec. 9-227. - Penalties. 
    Penalties for violation of any section of this article shall be in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 5-23-6. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-4-7) 
Secs. 9-228-9-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- License and regulations, RIGL 1956, §§ 5-53-2-5-53-5. 

Sec. 9-236. - Required for retail sales on holidays; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer for sale at retail on any premises or from any vehicle articles on legal holidays without first obtaining a license for such purpose from the town council. 
(b)  A license shall not be required for the sale of gasoline, oil, grease, automotive parts, automotive servicing or automotive accessories or for the conducting on any day stated in this section by any farmer's cooperative association of a wholesale auction market of fruit, vegetables and farm products, all of which are declared to be works of necessity, on any of the following nine legal holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Victory Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day (but only in such years as the governor shall by public proclamation designate such day as a legal holiday), and Christmas Day. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-4-1; Ord. No. 18-05, § 2, 3-5-2018) 
State Law reference- Licenses, RIGL 1956, § 5-23-2. 
Sec. 9-237. - Issuance; hours of operation and term. 
    All licenses required under section 9-236 shall be issued by the town council and shall specify the hours of such day during which the licensee may operate, provided that such hours so specified shall comply with RIGL 1956, § 5-23-2. Licenses may be issued for a term of one year or less. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-4-2) 
Sec. 9-238. - Application; fee. 
(a)  Every person making application for a license required by section 9-236 shall specify therein the names and addresses of all persons having an interest in the business to be licensed; the location of the business; the type of business conducted; the proposed hours of operation; the average hours of employment per day in the aggregate for a period of three months prior to the date of application; the average and aggregate hours of employment to be maintained during the period of the license; and for peddlers of ice, milk or newspapers, the make, year and registration number of each vehicle to be licensed. Each such application shall be accompanied by the fee as specified in section 9-4, table I. 
(b)  All such applications shall be investigated by the police department and shall be recommended either for approval or disapproval by the town manager. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 9-4-3, 9-4-4) 
Sec. 9-239. - Inspection of premises; suspension and revocation; display. 
    All premises or vehicles licensed pursuant to this article may be inspected at all times by police officers, health officers and other town officials. Any such license may be revoked or suspended at the pleasure of the town council. Every license so granted shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle so licensed. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-4-5) 
Sec. 9-240. - Expiration. 
    All annual licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire on June 30 next after issuance. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 9-4-6) 
Secs. 9-241-9-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TAVERNS, VICTUALLING HOUSES, COOKHOUSES, AND OYSTER HOUSES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference- Alcoholic beverage licenses, § 1107. 
State Law reference- Licensing and regulation of taverns, cook shops and oyster houses, RIGL 1956, § 5-24-1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-256. - Hours when business prohibited. 
    Every person owning, leasing, occupying or keeping a tavern, victualling house, cookhouse, oyster house or oyster cellar, licensed under the provisions of RIGL 1956, §§ 5-24-1-5-24-5, shall close and keep closed such establishment between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and shall not sell or serve food or beverages of any kind therein between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-20) 
Sec. 9-257. - Permit to keep open during prohibited hours. 
    The town council may issue a special permit in writing to any person owning, leasing, occupying or keeping a tavern, victualling house, cookhouse, oyster house or oyster cellar to keep open such tavern, victualling house, cookhouse, oyster house or oyster cellar at a later or earlier hour than set forth in section 9-256 upon application in writing by such person stating the reasons therefor and the hours during which such person wishes to keep open such tavern, victualling house, cookhouse, oyster house or oyster cellar. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-21) 
Sec. 9-258. - Notice and hearing for special permit. 
    No special permit shall be granted pursuant to section 9-257 to any person making application therefor until after a public hearing has been held upon the question of the granting of the permit before the town council. The council shall first give notice of such public hearing, specifying the time and place of the hearing, by publication in a newspaper printed in the county at least once each week for three successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing. The cost of advertising such notice shall be paid by the person making application for the permit. At the hearing, opportunity shall be given all persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the permit. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-22) 
Sec. 9-259. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or to consume alcoholic beverages from any type of container while on or within the premises of a tavern, victualling house, cookhouse, or oyster house that has not been issued a valid liquor license by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 1, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 9-260. - Violations of section 9-259. 
(a)  First offense-Fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or a two-day suspension of the victualling license. 
(b)  Second offense-Fine not to exceed $750.00 and no less than a three-day and not more than a five-day suspension of the victualling license. 
(c)  Third offense-Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and not less than a five-day suspension of the victualling license. 
(d)  On a subsequent offense, the license holder shall appear before the town council sitting as the board of licenses to show cause why the license should not be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 1, 3-26-2018) 
Secs. 9-261-9-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - THEATRICAL PERFORMANCES, SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Shows and exhibitions, RIGL 1956, § 5-22-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-271. - Applicability of article. 
    This article shall not apply to those performances, shows, exhibitions or activities that are otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-1993) 
Sec. 9-272. - Violations. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any of the terms or sections of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-1993) 
State Law reference- Penalty, RIGL 1956, § 5-22-18. 
Secs. 9-273-9-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 9-281. - Required. 
    No person or organization shall publicly or for pay or for any profit or advantage exhibit or promote any theatrical performance; show; moving picture; rope, wire, belly or any other form of dancing; carnival, circus, festival, bazaar, or exhibition; or conduct bungy-cord jumping or engage in or promote any wrestling, boxing or sparring match or exhibition, nor shall any person or organization, for any pecuniary profit or advantage, promote any public roller skating in rinks or halls or give any public dance or ball without first obtaining a license from the town council. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-1993; Ord. No. 08-12, § 2, 6-9-2008) 
Sec. 9-282. - Application; term; fees. 
(a)  Application for a license required under this division shall be on a form provided by the town clerk. Any such license issued by the town council may be valid for one day or for any period of time not exceeding one year. Licenses issued on an annual basis shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(b)  The license fees charged to operate any activity regulated under this article shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table I. However, such fees shall not apply to any activity that is sponsored by or given for the benefit of any religious, educational, charitable, social, civic, fraternal or nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-1993) 
Sec. 9-283. - Issuance; denial or revocation. 
(a)  The town council may grant a license required pursuant to this division, under such restrictions and regulations as it shall deem proper, to the owner or lessee of any structure, house, room, hall or rink for the purpose of permitting exhibitions therein. The license shall be revocable at the pleasure of the town council. 
(b)  The town council may deny, revoke or refuse to renew a license to the applicant, owner, lessee or operator of any place at which a performance, exhibition, carnival, circus, festival, show, public roller skating, public dance or ball or other activity provided for under this article is sought to be presented or conducted if the place presents a danger to the public health, safety or welfare or if the activity or any part thereof is deemed to be obscene. 
(c)  No license shall be issued to a person who is not of good moral character nor to a corporation or organization that is not represented by a person of good moral character. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-1993) 
Sec. 9-284. - Restrictions. 
    The town council in granting or renewing a license pursuant to this division may do the following: 
(1)  Limit the hours of operation of the licensed activity or conduct. 
(2)  Require the hiring of off-duty police officers or firefighters. 
(3)  Set other reasonable conditions or restrictions upon the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-1993) 
Sec. 9-285. - Building inspection. 
(a)  A license shall not be issued under this division until the building to be used for the activity for which the license is desired, together with any apparatus used in the building, has been inspected by the town building official and the building official has filed with the town council a certificate in writing showing that the building or apparatus meets, in all respects, the requirements of the state building code as set forth in state law and is otherwise safe to use for the purpose for which the license is desired and until the building has also been inspected by the chief of the respective fire department or the chief's assistants who shall also file with the town council a certificate in writing showing that the building or apparatus meets in all respects the requirements of state laws for the protection of life and property against the menace of fire. If the building or apparatus does not meet those requirements or is otherwise unsafe, no such license shall be issued, and if any license is so issued that license shall be void. 
(b)  Whenever a license is granted for a period of more than 30 days, the town council shall cause that building or apparatus for which the license is issued to be inspected and reported upon at least once each month during the period covered by the license. 
(c)  Fees for inspections made pursuant to this section shall be fixed by the town council in accordance with section 9-4, table III. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-1993) 
State Law reference- State building code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-100.0 et seq. 
Sec. 9-286. - Sunday sales permit. 
    If any activity licensed under this division is to be conducted on Sundays and if the activity involves the buying, selling or otherwise the exchange of tangible personal property or goods, the licensee shall be required to obtain a Sunday sales permit as required by state law and article X of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-1993) 
Sec. 9-287. - Records. 
(a)  Every person issued a license under this division shall provide the town council with the true name of the person or organization who will conduct the licensed activity, any alias or fictitious name under which the activity is conducted and the names of all employees, whether paid or not. 
(b)  Every licensee shall provide the town clerk with the name and address of each vendor and any such additional information as may be required by the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-1993) 
Sec. 9-288. - Duty of licensees. 
    If the activity sought to be licensed under this division involves the engaging of independent vendors or contractors, it shall be the duty of the person or organization seeking a license to inform each independent vendor or contractor of the licensing requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-1993) 
Secs. 9-289-2-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Adult entertainment ordinances, RIGL 1956, § 5-72-1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-300. - Findings. 
    The town council finds that employing or permitting persons to perform or exhibit in the nude or seminude to other persons as an inducement to such persons to purchase alcoholic beverages can lead to criminal activity, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community. In addition, such exploitation of such nude and seminude acts is adverse to the public's interest in the quality of life, tone of commerce and total community environment in the town. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, § 1, 2-9-1998) 
Sec. 9-301. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment located within the town at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises to: 
(1)  Suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of the establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola. 
(2)  Suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of the establishment, to employ any device or covering that is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the human female breast as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of the establishment, to expose to public view such person's genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft. 
(4)  Suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of the commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering that is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of an establishment located within the town at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola or to employ any device or covering that is intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breast as described in this subsection. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of an establishment located within the town at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view such person's genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, § 1, 2-9-1998) 
Sec. 9-302. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any section of this article shall be guilty of an offense against the town punishable, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, § 1, 2-9-1998) 
Sec. 9-303. - Liquor license revocation. 
    If the owner, operator, licensee, lessor, lessee, manager, employee or any other person participating in the operation of the establishment located within the town at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises shall violate or be in violation of section 9-302, the town council shall revoke the liquor license for the establishment after giving reasonable notice thereof to the holder of the license and affording the holder an opportunity to be heard as to why the license should not be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, § 1, 2-9-1998) 
Secs. 9-304-9-319. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, adopted June 9, 2008, amended the Code by renumbering former art. XIV, §§ 9-320 and 9-321, as a new §§ 12-17 and 12-18. § 3 of said ordinance added a new art. XIV, §§ 9-320-9-323. 

Sec. 9-320. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare through the regulation of public entertainment. As used in this chapter, the term "public entertainment" shall mean any gathering at which music or entertainment is provided by live performances or prerecorded means or a show or exhibition which is held indoors or out of doors to which members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge, or free of charge, by any person or organization doing business in the town. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, § 3, 6-9-2008) 
Sec. 9-321. - License required. 
(a)  No person or organization shall conduct or operate indoor or outdoor public entertainment without first obtaining a public entertainment license from the town council. Whenever a public entertainment license is granted by the town council, it shall be the duty of the police chief and fire chief to determine whether or not the assignment of a detail police officer or detail firefighter is needed. 
(b)  If a public entertainment license is granted to the holder of a victualling license or alcoholic beverage license, the license granted hereunder shall not permit such entertainment to extend beyond the authorized serving time of such victualling license or alcoholic beverage license. Outside entertainment that involves amplification shall cease at eleven p.m., Sunday to Thursday, and at midnight on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays before holidays. 
(c)  In all other instances where a public entertainment license is issued, the hours of entertainment to be held shall be as determined by the town council, having due regard for the public convenience, welfare, health and safety. 
(d)  The town council, pursuant to RIGL title 5, chapter 22, may place reasonable conditions on the issuance of a public entertainment license having due regard for the public convenience, welfare and safety of its residents. Any application for a public entertainment license shall identify the specific types and nature of entertainment intended, as well as specifically delineating and defining through an attached plan, the location of the proposed entertainment. The approval of a public entertainment license shall allow for those specific types of entertainment for which an application has been completed, and no other. The council may specifically require the use of audio speakers with short throw symmetrical coverage unidirectional patterns and baffling to contain and mitigate the dispersion of amplified sound as a condition to the issuance or renewal of a public entertainment license. 
(e)  Any application for a public entertainment license shall identify the specific types and nature of entertainment intended. The approval of a public entertainment license shall allow for those specific types of entertainment for which an application has been completed, and no other. 
(f)  Once a license has been granted by the town council, the applicant must request issuance of the license from the town clerk within 30 days. If the applicant has not contacted the town clerk and secured the license in this time, the license shall be revoked. 
(g)  The license must be displayed by the applicant at the location where entertainment has been approved. The license must be easily observed by patrons and town officials. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, § 3, 6-9-2008) 
Sec. 9-322. - Enforcement and violations. 
    Upon complaint, the town manager shall designate a public safety official to investigate. If a formal complaint is brought by a public safety official, the town council shall hold a show-cause hearing to determine if a violation of the license or any conditions thereto has occurred. After hearing, the town council may, if it finds that a violation has occurred, take disciplinary action against the licenseholder, including, but not limited to, suspension and/or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, § 3, 6-9-2008) 
Sec. 9-323. - Application; term and fees. 
(a)  Application for a license required under this section shall be on a form provided by the town clerk. Any such license issued by the town council may be valid for one day or for any period of time not exceeding one year. Licenses issued on an annual basis shall expire on December 1 of each year. 
(b)  A filing fee shall be charged for the application for the license required under this section in accordance with section 9-4, table I, and this fee shall be retained by the town whether such license is granted or denied. 
(c)  The license fees charged to operate any activity regulated under this article shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table I. However, such fees shall not apply to any activity that is sponsored by or given for the benefit of any religious, educational, charitable, social, civic, fraternal or nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, § 3, 6-9-2008) 
Secs. 9-324-9-329. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - FARMERS' MARKET 

Sec. 9-330. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the town council to permit the operation of farmers' markets in the town for the benefit of local farmers. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, § 3, 6-9-2008) 
Sec. 9-331. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Farmers' market is an occasional or periodic market, with goods offered for sale to the general public by individual sellers from open-air or semi-enclosed facilities or temporary structures. The market is composed of three or more vendors with outdoor stalls, stands or spaces used for the purpose of display and sale of merchandise, which is limited to home produced or locally grown farm produce, food, and agricultural crafts. 
    Home produce or locally grown shall mean produce, plants, animal products and other products produced within the Northeast food shed, if not available from Rhode Island producers. Priority shall be given to producers and growers over sellers, and any products not from Rhode Island shall be labeled as such. 
    Market manager is the individual designated with full responsibility and authority to enforce all rules of the market. 
    Producer is a grower or producer or any person who is offering for sale articles for human consumption, such as fruits, vegetables, edible grains, nuts and berries, and apiary products, which have been grown or prepared by the grower or producer, and homemade baked goods, jams, jellies, fruit and herbal vinegars, and sauces, and/or non-edible items, such as herbal wreaths, potpourri, cut flowers, beeswax candles and scented oils. Sale of any type of meat, fish, poultry, or beverages shall be subject to state department of health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 9-332. - Permit required. 
    No person or organization shall conduct or operate a farmer's market without first obtaining a farmers' market permit from the town council. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 9-333. - Conditions. 
(a)  Farmers' markets shall be permitted only in those locations, pursuant to the provisions of zoning ordinances sections 21-22, 21-243, 21-325 and article III, retail business number 9. 
(b)  If a farmers' market permit is granted, the hours of the market shall be as determined by the town council having due regard for the public convenience, welfare, health and safety and the permit shall expire on April 30 of each year. 
(c)  The names of producers and the location of land used for production shall be provided to the town prior to the opening date of the market and shall be updated on a regular basis. 
(d)  The town council may place conditions on the issuance of a farmers' market permit, as required for the public's convenience, welfare, health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 9-334. - Application for permit. 
    Applications for permits issued under this article shall be made upon forms prepared and made available by the town clerk and shall state: 
(1)  The full name of the applicant; 
(2)  A specific description of the location of the market; 
(3)  The open and closing dates of the market and the hours of operation; 
(4)  Names of producers and the location of land used for production; 
(5)  A description of stall size, length of trucks, etc.; 
(6)  Designation of a market manager; 
(7)  A copy of the market rules; 
(8)  Receipt of a show promoter's permit from the state division of taxation. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 9-335. - Fee required. 
(a)  A filing fee shall be charged for the application for the permit required under this article in accordance with section 9-4, table I, and this fee shall be retained by the town whether such permit is granted or denied. 
(b)  The permit fees charged to operate any activity regulated under this article shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table I. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Secs. 9-336-9-339. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - PLASTIC BAG REGULATIONS 

Sec. 9-340. - Legislative findings and intent. 
(a)  The town council has the authority under Article 13 of the Rhode Island Constitution and the North Kingstown Town Charter to regulate issues of solid waste, litter and pollution as a local concern. 
(b)  The production, use and disposal of plastic checkout bags, which are commonly not recycled, has been shown to have significant detrimental impacts on the environment, including but not limited to contributing to pollution of the terrestrial and coastal environment, clogging storm water drainage systems, and contributing to the injury and death of terrestrial and marine life through ingestion and entanglement. 
(c)  The manufacture, transport and recycling of plastic checkout bags requires substantial energy consumption and contributes to greenhouse gases. 
(d)  Plastic checkout bags create a burden to solid waste collection and recycling facilities. 
(e)  Prohibiting the use of plastic checkout bags is necessary to protect the environment and the public health, safety, and welfare of all residents and visitors. 
(Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 9-341. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to improve the environment in and around the town and the health, safety, and welfare of its residents by reducing the distribution of single-use plastic bags, specifying the recycled content of paper bags, encouraging the use and sale of reusable checkout bags, and banning the use of plastic bags for retail checkout of goods. 
(Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 9-342. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business establishment is any commercial enterprise that provides carryout bags to its customers, including sole proprietorships, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, or any other legal entity and including all employees of the business and any independent contractors associated with the business. "Business establishment" does not include sales of goods at yard sales, tag sales, other sales by residents at their homes, and sales by nonprofit organizations. 
    Carryout bag is a bag provided by a business establishment to a customer, typically at the point of sale, for the purpose of transporting purchases. 
    Double opening plastic bag means any thin plastic bag with a double opening (top and bottom) to protect clothing or other items for transport. 
    Plastic barrier bag is any thin plastic bag with a single opening used to: 
(1)  Transport fruits, vegetables, nuts, grains, small hardware items, or other items selected by customers at the point of sale; 
(2)  Contain or wrap fresh or frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether prepackaged or not; 
(3)  Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods. 
    Plastic carryout bag means any plastic bag that is provided by a business establishment to a customer, typically at the point of sale, for the purpose of transporting purchases. "Plastic carryout bag" does not include plastic barrier bags or double opening plastic bags, as defined herein, or plastic bags measuring larger than 28 inches by 36 inches. 
    Recyclable paper bag means a paper bag that is fully recyclable overall and contains a minimum of 40 percent post-consumer recycled content and contains no old growth fiber. The bag should display the words "reusable" and "recyclable" on the outside of the bag. 
    Reusable bag means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and is made primarily of cloth, other nonwoven textile or durable plastic with a minimum thickness of four mils. Any straps or handles shall be stitched. If the bag does not have handles, it must be stitched at the point of carry. 
(Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 9-343. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No business establishment shall provide or make available any plastic carryout bag either complementary or for a fee for any sales transaction or other use to members of the public, that does not comply with the definition of a reusable bag under section 9-342 of this article. 
(b)  All business establishments that provide plastic barrier bags or double-opening bags shall offer a recycling opportunity on site for the recycling of any plastic bags or clean plastic bag film as defined by the Rhode Island Resource Recovery Corporation RESTORE Program. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall preclude business establishments from making reusable bags or recyclable paper bags, as defined under section 9-342 of this article, available to customers, by sale or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 9-344. - Exemptions. 
    This article does not apply to: 
(1)  Laundry dry cleaning bags, door-hanger bags, newspaper bags, or packages of multiple bags intended for use as garbage or pet waste; 
(2)  Bags provided by pharmacists or veterinarians to contain prescription drugs or other medical necessities, provided that the bags are recyclable within the state's recycling program; 
(3)  Plastic barrier bags or double-opening plastic bags used by a consumer inside a business establishment to: 
a.  Contain bulk items, such as produce, nuts, grains, candy, or small hardware items; 
b.  Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether or not prepackaged; 
c.  Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods; or 
d.  Bags used by nonprofit or other organizations to distribute food, grocery products, clothing, or other household items. 
(Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 9-345. - Enforcement, violations, penalties. 
    This article shall be enforced by any town department designated by the town manager. Any business establishment that violates any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  For a first offense, the business establishment charged with a violation of this article shall be served with a warning letter delivered to the business establishment personally, or by posting of a copy upon a conspicuous portion of the retail sales establishment and the sending of a copy of the same by certified mail to the business establishment to which the notice is directed. The warning letter shall inform the business establishment charged of the nature of the violation and that it must be corrected within 14 days of the date of the letter and shall include a copy of this article. 
(2)  For a second offense, more than 14 days after service of a warning letter, a fine of $100.00 shall be assessed and imposed. The business establishment charged shall be given the opportunity to pay the fine assessed by mail, which shall be indicated on the summons by the charging officer. Should the alleged violator elect not to pay the fine assessed by mail, the violation shall be heard and adjudicated by the municipal court. 
(3)  For a third or subsequent offense, a fine of $300.00 shall be assessed, and the violation shall be heard and adjudicated by the municipal court. 
(4)  Each occurrence of a violation more than 14 days after service of a warning letter, and each day that such violation continues, shall constitute a separate violation and be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 9-346. - Hardship variance. 
(a)  The town council may grant a variance from the requirements of this article only after determining that: 
(1)  Application of this article would cause undue hardship based upon unique circumstances; or 
(2)  Application of this article would deprive a person or business of a legally protected right. 
(b)  The requested variance shall be submitted on the town's prescribed forms. 
(c)  Any variance granted under this section must be the minimum variance necessary to address the hardship. 
(Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 9-347. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect upon passage, provided however, that enforcement shall be stayed until January 1, 2019. 
(Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 7-30-2018) 
Chapter 10 - MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Regulation of house trailers and mobile homes, § 109. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; garbage, trash and refuse, ch. 6; harbors, wharves and public waters, ch. 7; health and sanitation, ch. 8; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivisions, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 20; zoning, ch. 21; subdivision and land development regulations, app. A. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate trailer coach park, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 357; mobile and manufactured homes, RIGL 1956, § 31-44-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Permissible locations; drainage. 
(a)  Mobile dwelling unit parks shall be permitted within those districts of the town as allowed by chapter 21 pertaining to zoning. 
(b)  The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Basic standards. 
    The basic health and safety requirements and recognized standards applicable to the operation of parks for mobile dwelling units are found in the state building code. In addition, appropriate sections of the state fire code shall apply. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-2) 
State Law reference- State building code, RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-100.0 et seq.; state fire code, RIGL 1956, § 23-28.1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-3. - Rules and regulations prepared and enforced by operator. 
    Mobile dwelling unit parks shall be governed by a complete set of rules and regulations drawn up and enforced by the operator. Copies of these rules are to be posted conspicuously in all buildings of the mobile dwelling unit park. In the rules and regulations, the tenants must be informed that mobile dwelling unit parks are regulated by town ordinance. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-3) 
Sec. 10-4. - Pets and animals. 
(a)  If the rules of the mobile dwelling unit park allow tenants to maintain pets, no animal shall be allowed to run at large or be allowed to commit any nuisance within the limits of such park. 
(b)  No chickens, cows, goats, horses, ponies or other animals, except dogs and cats or other common domestic pets, shall be housed or maintained within the premises of such park. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-4) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 3. 
Sec. 10-5. - Maintenance. 
    The premises and buildings of every mobile dwelling unit park shall be maintained in a clean, safe, well-repaired condition. The park shall be kept free of any condition that will menace the health or safety of any occupant of the park or the public. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-5) 
Sec. 10-6. - Garbage and rubbish. 
    In a mobile dwelling unit park, garbage and rubbish shall be stored in an acceptable and sanitary manner and shall be removed from the premises as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that it does not give off offensive odors or become a menace to the health of the occupants of the park or the public. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-6) 
Cross reference- Garbage, trash and refuse, ch. 6. 
Sec. 10-7. - Registry of units. 
(a)  Every mobile dwelling unit park operator shall keep a permanently bound registry with consecutively numbered pages. Such book shall contain the following: the name of the legal owner of the mobile dwelling unit and the lessee's name if any; names of all occupants; the number of school age children; the mobile home license number; make, size, year and model of the mobile home; dates of arrival and departure; the number of the mobile dwelling unit lot where the mobile home is berthed; and the registration number of any and all motor vehicles in possession of the mobile dwelling unit owner and occupants. Entries are to be made the day a mobile dwelling unit is berthed in such park. 
(b)  All entries in the registry book shall be made with permanent ink. Any error is to be canceled by drawing a single line through it. No erasures shall be permitted. 
(c)  No pages of the registry book shall be removed, mutilated or altered so as to become unreadable. 
(d)  Such registry books shall be open for inspection by all proper authorities. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-7) 
Sec. 10-8. - Inspection and report by building official; correction of violations; appeals from building official's decisions; judicial proceedings to secure compliance. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building official to inspect each mobile dwelling unit park annually in the month of May. Other inspections may be conducted as directed by the town manager. The building official shall inspect the entire park to ensure compliance with all appropriate health and safety standards. 
(b)  The building official shall make a written report of any hazards or violations noted and shall provide the park owner with copy of the report. The building official shall establish a time limit for correction of all violations and shall make followup inspections to ensure that violations are corrected within the prescribed limit. A written report of all followup inspections shall be made, a copy of which shall be provided to the mobile dwelling unit park operator. 
(c)  If hazards or violations noted by the building official are contested by the mobile dwelling unit park operator, appeal of the building official's decision may be made to the board of appeals designated in the building code. 
(d)  If hazards or violations noted by the building official are not corrected within the prescribed time limit, the building official shall initiate judicial proceedings to secure compliance. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-8) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4. 
State Law reference- State fire code, RIGL 1956, § 23-28.1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-9. - Permits for construction or alteration. 
    No mobile dwelling unit park shall be constructed, changed, altered or added to within the town until a permit therefor has been issued by the building official. All construction, changes, alterations and additions shall be in conformance with the state building code. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-9) 
Sec. 10-10. - Recreation area; maintenance of recreational facilities. 
    An area for recreational purposes within or adjoining the boundaries of a mobile dwelling unit park shall be provided by the operator. The recreation area shall be adequate for the recreational needs of the occupants of the new portion of the mobile dwelling unit park. The design of the recreation area shall be reviewed and approved by the director of planning before the building official may issue a building permit. The condition of the area and the equipment therein shall be good. The equipment shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe condition at all times by the operator. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-11. - Existing units. 
(a)  Existing parks must comply with all requirements relating to the health and safety of mobile dwelling unit occupants and the general public. 
(b)  Where existing mobile dwelling unit lots do not meet current area requirements, the lot shall be considered a legal nonconforming lot and shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The dimensions of the lot shall not be altered except to convert it to a conforming lot. 
(2)  The size of the mobile dwelling unit occupying the lot as of April 8, 1974, or, if the lot was vacant prior to April 8, 1974, the size of the mobile dwelling unit last occupying the lot prior to April 8, 1974, shall be deemed to be the maximum size unit to be located on the lot at any time in the future unless all replacement mobile dwelling units are in compliance with all applicable state and local codes, and certification has been submitted from the state department of environmental management, individual sewage disposal system division, that either the existing sewage disposal system is adequate or repairs to the existing system or replacement of the existing system is required. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-1-11; Ord. No. 89-16, § 1, 6-26-1989; Ord. No. 01-8, § 1, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 10-12. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the sections of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $10.00 or not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than ten days. 
Secs. 10-13-10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mobile and manufactured home park license required, RIGL 1956, § 31-44-1.7. 

Sec. 10-36. - Required. 
    No mobile dwelling unit park shall be operated within the town unless the town council has issued a license therefor. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-2-1) 
Sec. 10-37. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a license to operate a mobile dwelling unit park shall be made to the town council. The application shall contain the applicant's name, date and legal address. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by an up-to-date plan, drawn to scale, of the entire park layout. The plan shall show the lot lines of each mobile dwelling unit parking space and shall specify whether it is for a mobile home or a travel trailer. All roadways through the park must be shown on the plan, and the means of egress to the park must be indicated. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-2-2) 
Sec. 10-38. - Issuance. 
    A mobile dwelling unit park license shall be issued by the town council, and it shall be valid for one year beginning June 1 of each year at 12:01 a.m. and shall expire at 12:00 midnight on May 31. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-2-3) 
Sec. 10-39. - Renewal. 
    The license to operate a mobile dwelling unit park shall be renewed upon receipt by the town council of an updated plan and the report of the building official that all violations of health and safety standards noted in the previous year have been corrected or are being corrected. An updated plan must only be submitted if changes in the park layout have been made during the previous year. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-2-4) 
Sec. 10-40. - Fee. 
    The fee for a license to operate a mobile and manufactured home park shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table I. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-2-5; Ord. No. 90-10, § 1, 5-29-1990) 
Sec. 10-41. - Posting certificate. 
    The license certificate issued for a mobile dwelling unit park shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the mobile dwelling unit park at all times. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 11-2-6) 
Secs. 10-42-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 

Secs. 10-51-10-55. - Reserved. 
Chapter 11 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Noise from motorized vehicles, § 8-92; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 12; motor vehicles in parks, § 13-4; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Fines and violations of traffic and parking regulations, RIGL 1956, § 12-44-4; uniformity of vehicle regulations, RIGL 1956, § 31-12-11; powers of local authorities, RIGL 1956, § 31-12-12; local regulations to be posted, RIGL 1956, § 31-12-13; traffic control devices on local highways, RIGL 1956, § 31-13-3; service of notice, summons, RIGL § 31-27-12 et seq.; administrative adjudication of traffic infractions, RIGL 1956, § 31-43-9; nonmoving traffic violations, RIGL 1956, § 45-6.2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Authority of municipal court to collect and receive fines. 
    The municipal court is designated and authorized to collect and to receive the fines provided for violations of this chapter or the provisions of other traffic ordinances that are or shall be in effect in the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-1-1; Ord. No. 08-34, § 5, 11-25-2008) 
Cross reference- Police department, ch. 15. 
Sec. 11-2. - Citations for violations. 
    It shall be the duty of the town police officers, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the chief of police, to report the following: 
(1)  When a vehicle has violated any section of this chapter or the provisions of other traffic ordinances. 
(2)  The state of registration and the license plate number of each such vehicle. 
(3)  The specific nature or type of such violation. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-1-2) 
Sec. 11-3. - Payment of fines. 
(a)  Violation of ordinances providing for the regulation of the standing or parking of vehicles on the public highways, other than overtime parking (section 11-42) shall be punishable by a fine of $35.00 for each offense. Violations of ordinances involving overtime parking (section 11-42) shall be punishable by a fine of $35.00 for each offense. All such fines shall be payable to the municipal court. When an offense continues more than one day, each day, which such offense continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(b)  All other violations of any statute, rule, ordinance or regulation referenced in this chapter are subject to fines enumerated in RIGL 31-41.1-4. 
(c)  If the defendant elects to pay the fine by mail, payment shall be mailed within seven days of the offense, postage prepaid, addressed to the municipal court. Such payment may be in cash, by check or money order. However, if payment is attempted by a check drawn against insufficient funds, an additional payment of $25.00 shall be imposed. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-1-3; Ord. No. 02-16, § 2, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 08-34, § 6, 11-25-2008) 
State Law reference- Payment by mail of nonmoving traffic violations, RIGL 1956, §§ 45-6.1-1-45-6.1-7. 
Sec. 11-4. - Disposition and record of money received by municipal court. 
    All money received and collected by the municipal court pursuant to this chapter shall be turned over to the town treasurer. All charges, records and payments shall be entered forthwith by such municipal court, and the books of the municipal court containing records of such violations, dispositions and money received as fines from the violations shall be audited not less than once every three months by the comptroller. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-1-4; Ord. No. 08-34, § 7, 11-25-2008) 
Charter reference- Disposition of fees collected by town officers and employees, § 1018. 
Sec. 11-5. - Refusal or neglect to dispose of charges for violations. 
    If an offender chooses to deny the charge or neglects to dispose of the charges in accordance with section 11-3, such offender shall be brought before the municipal court for a hearing for each violation of this chapter or other traffic ordinances or parts thereof shall be subject to that fine or other penalty which such violated provision or ordinance shall therein dictate and set forth. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-1-5; Ord. No. 08-34, § 8, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 11-6. - Emergency powers of chief of police. 
(a)  All sections of this chapter or provisions of other ordinances regulating the methods and hours of parking or otherwise regulating vehicular traffic of any nature anywhere in the town may be suspended from operation by the chief of police during the existence of an emergency which shall, in the chief's sole discretion, be found to exist. 
(b)  During the existence of such an emergency, the chief of police may substitute for such sections or ordinances or may make and put into effect in the absence of any such section or ordinance such rules and regulations as the chief shall deem necessary. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-1-6) 
Sec. 11-7. - Roadways within senior high school complex. 
(a)  All of the roadways within the North Kingstown Senior High School complex are accepted as public highways. The speed limit on all such roadways and parking areas shall be five miles per hour. 
(b)  The roadway that is located on the eastern side of the campus, oriented in a general north to south direction on the map on file in the town clerk's office, which is made a part of this section, shall be named "Skippers Way." The roadway that is located on the south side of the campus, oriented in a general east to west direction on such map shall be named "Stadium Way." 
(c)  All vehicular traffic on all of the roadways and adjacent parking areas mentioned in this section shall move only in the direction indicated by arrows on the pavement, appropriate signage, and the map on file in the town clerk's office. 
(d)  No person owning, operating, driving, possessing or having charge of any motor vehicle of any description shall permit the vehicle to remain stopped, stored or parked on either side of any of the roadways within the senior high school complex between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. All vehicles utilizing this area during such hours will be parked only in authorized parking lots or parking spaces designated by the school department. Designated parking spaces for visitors shall be made available by the school department. 
(e)  Except as provided below no parking shall be permitted on any day between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(1)  School department employees may park in designated spaces. 
(f)  To carry out this section, appropriate signage and pavement markings denoting entrance, exit, one way, no parking, times for bus loading zone operations, special times for certain turns, no motor vehicle zones, and speed limit shall be posted along the roadways and parking areas within the senior high school complex. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-1-9; Ord. No. 03-16, § 1, 9-29-2003) 
Sec. 11-8. - One-way streets. 
    No person owning, operating, driving, possessing or having charge of any horse-drawn or motor vehicle of any description shall proceed in any direction or at any time except as designated on the following streets: 
(1)  East on Spink Street. 
(2)  West on Franklin Street. 
(3)  South on Gold Street. 
(4)  South on Fountain Street. 
(5)  North on Wall Street. 
(6)  North on that portion of Bay Street between Washington Street and Main Street. 
(7)  East on Washington Street. 
(8)  South on Seaview Avenue between Waldron Avenue and Worsley Avenue. 
(9)  Southeasterly on that portion of Periwinkle Drive, Nautilus Drive, Albatross Drive, Spindrift Drive and Lorelei Drive, commencing at Bridge Road for a distance of 25 feet northerly therefrom. 
(10)  Northwesterly on that portion of Boone Street commencing at Tower Hill Road for a distance of 25 feet southeasterly therefrom. 
(11)  Southerly on that portion of Casey Avenue commencing at Quonset Road for a distance of 50 feet southerly therefrom between 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(12)  Westerly on Preston Drive. 
(13)  North then east on Church Lane commencing at a point 220 feet north of Main Street, as measured along Church Lane, to Fowler Street. 
(14)  Southeasterly on Northrup Road between Belver Avenue and Conway Avenue. 
(15)  West then south on that portion of Ferry Road located west of Boston Neck Road. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 12-3-1-12-3-6; Ord. No. 84-8, § 1, 4-9-1984; Ord. No. 87-18, § 1, 9-14-1987; Ord. No. 91-13, § 1, 9-9-1991; Ord. No. 93-8, § 1, 4-12-1993; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 9-13-1999) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
Sec. 11-9. - Through traffic. 
(a)  Through trucking restricted. The use of motor vehicles with a registered gross vehicle weight of more than 12,000 pounds capacity in and upon the following streets or highways at any time is prohibited: Lafayette Road from Oak Hill Road northerly to Colonel Rodman Highway (Rt. 4), Featherbed Land from Hamilton Allenton Road to Annaquatucket Road, and South Road from the East Greenwich town line to Old Baptist Road. 
(b)  Commercial vehicles prohibited on certain streets. The operation of through commercial vehicles on School Street in the Village of Davisville is prohibited. The operation of through commercial vehicles on Old Boston Neck Road, from its northern entrance off Route 1A in North Kingstown (Saunderstown) to the Narragansett town line, is prohibited. The operation of through commercial vehicles on Clearview Drive from its southern entrance off Old Baptist Road in North Kingstown to its northern terminus at South Road in East Greenwich and the operation of through commercial vehicles on Crest Drive and Midway Drive from its eastern entrance off Old Baptist Road to Clearview Drive is prohibited. The operation of through commercial vehicles on Fairfield Drive from Peachtree Road to Potter Road, Peachtree Road from Post Road to Fairfield Drive, Stony Lane from Huling Road to South County Trial (Rt. 2), and Old Baptist Road from Ten Rod Road to Davisville Road is prohibited. 
(c)  Through vehicles prohibited on certain streets. The operation of through vehicles is prohibited on that portion of Conway Avenue between Northrup Road and Thornton Street. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, a commercial vehicle is defined as a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles used to transport passengers or property if the motor vehicle: 
(1)  Has a gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, of a towed unit with a gross vehicle rating of more than 10,000 or more pounds, or has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds; 
(2)  Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers including the driver; or 
(3)  Is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be placarded in accordance with 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as it may be revised from time to time. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall affect the use of such streets or highways by any fire truck, town public works department truck, police vehicle, ambulance or other motor truck using such streets or highways in any emergency or engaged in delivering goods, wares, merchandising or materials to or from any residence, building or lot within the town bordering on such streets or highways. 
(f)  In all instances where motor vehicle traffic is restricted or prohibited under this section the chief of police is directed to cause conspicuous signs to be erected on such streets or highways giving notice of such. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 12-1-7, 12-6-1; Ord. No. 83-16, § 1, 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 84-2, § 1, 1-23-1984; Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 95-9, § 1, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, 9-29-2003) 
Sec. 11-9.1. - Weight limit on bridges. 
    The use by any motor vehicle with a registered gross weight in excess of 26,000 pounds upon the following bridges is prohibited, and the chief of police is directed to cause conspicuous signs to be erected on such streets or highways giving notice of such prohibition: Dry Bridge Road railroad overpass and Stony Lane Road railroad overpass. Any vehicle with a registered gross weight in excess of ten tons or in excess of an axle weight that can be permitted consistent with state regulations shall be prohibited to pass over Forge Road Bridge. 
(Ord. No. 88-19, § 1, 9-26-1988; Ord. No. 96-4, § 1, 3-11-1996) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 88-19, § 1, adopted September 26, 1988, amended the 1974 Revised Ordinances by adding section 12-6-2; at the discretion of the editor, the provisions have been included herein as section 11-9.1. 
Sec. 11-10. - Speed limits. 
(a)  The following speed zones shall be in effect on the respective town streets and highways as indicated: 
Annaquatucket Road, 25 miles per hour. 
Austin Road, 25 miles per hour both eastbound and westbound from the Post Road to the town line. 
Camp Avenue, 25 miles per hour in a general eastbound and westbound direction from Post Road to Shore Acres Avenue intersection. 
Congdon Hill Road, 25 miles per hour in a northbound and southbound direction from West Allenton Road to Shermantown Road. 
Essex Road, 25 miles per hour both eastbound and westbound from the Post Road to the intersection of Sunnybrook Drive. 
Fairway, 25 miles per hour. 
Fletcher Road, 25 miles per hour both northbound and southbound from the intersection of North Quidnessett Road to the intersection of Newcomb Road. 
Forge Road, 25 miles per hour both northbound and southbound from the intersection of North Quidnessett Road to the town line. 
Gilbert Stuart Road, 25 miles per hour both eastbound and westbound from the Tower Hill Road intersection to the intersection of the Snuff Mill Road. 
Harrison Street, 25 miles per hour both northbound and southbound from the intersection of North Quidnessett Road to the intersection of Pettee Avenue. 
Hamilton Allenton Road, 25 miles per hour in both the eastbound and westbound directions from Boston Neck Road to the Tower Hill Road. 
Indian Corner Road, 25 miles per hour in a northbound and southbound direction from the West Allenton Road to Slocum Railroad Crossing. 
Lafayette Road, 25 miles per hour in a general northbound and southbound direction from the intersection of Col. Rodman Highway to the intersection of Exeter Road. 
Newcomb Road, 25 miles per hour in a general eastbound and westbound direction from the intersection of Post Road to the intersection with Potter Road. 
North Quidnessett Road, 25 miles per hour both eastbound and westbound from the intersection of Sunnybrook Drive to the intersection of Harrison Street. 
Oak Hill Road, 25 miles per hour eastbound and westbound from the intersection of Tower Hill Road to the intersection of Col. Rodman Highway. 
Old Baptist Road, 25 miles per hour from Ten Rod Road in a general northbound direction to the intersection of Davisville Road. 
Pettee Avenue, 25 miles per hour both eastbound and westbound from the intersection of Harrison Street to Narragansett Bay. 
Potter Road, 25 miles per hour. 
Prospect Avenue, 25 miles per hour in a general northbound and southbound direction from Annaquatucket Road to Updike Street. 
Shermantown Road, 25 miles per hour both eastbound and westbound from the intersection of Tower Hill Road to the intersection of Congdon Hill Road. 
Snuff Mill Road, 25 miles per hour both eastbound and westbound from the intersection of Gilbert Stuart Road to the Boston Neck Road. 
Stony Lane, 25 miles per hour in a general eastbound and westbound direction from the intersection of Post Road to the town line. 
West Allenton Road, 25 miles per hour in a general eastbound and westbound direction from Tower Hill Road to the intersection of Indian Corner Road. 
(b)  All other highways of the town are covered by RIGL 1956, § 31-14-2 entitled "Prima Facie Limits"-zoned at 25 miles per hour. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-5-1; Ord. No. 86-20, § 1, 10-27-1986; Ord. No. 87-12, § 1, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 89-20, § 1, 8-15-1989) 
Sec. 11-11. - Bicycles prohibited on sidewalks. 
    No person shall ride or run any bicycle upon any sidewalk or footpath in the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-1-8) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
Sec. 11-12. - Roadways within the General Dynamics Complex. 
(a)  Casey Avenue shall be designated one-way in a southerly direction from Quonset Road to McNaught Street. 
(b)  No parking on both sides of Casey Avenue. 
(c)  No parking on both sides of McNaught Street, its entire length; from the intersection with Casey Avenue, (area of Gate 15) to Roger Williams Way. 
(d)  No parking on Dillabur Avenue from Quonset Road to Gate #1. 
(e)  Stop intersection designated on Casey Avenue at McNaught Street complemented with two stop signs at the end of Casey Avenue. 
(f)  Installation of "Do Not Enter" signs on the back of the two stop signs on Casey Avenue and McNaught Street. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 15-03, § 1, 3-9-2015) 
Secs. 11-13-11-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Parking regulations authorized, § 108. 
Cross reference- Access to parking and loading, § 21-274; design requirements for parking and truck loading areas, § 21-275; parking and storage of commercial or recreational vehicles in residential areas, § 21-321; limited residential parking district, § 21-401 et seq. 
State Law reference- Violation of parking regulations, RIGL 1956, § 12-14-12; stopping, standing and parking, RIGL 1956, § 31-21-1 et seq.; payment of fines, RIGL 1956, § 45-6.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 11-31. - Double parking. 
    No person owning, operating, driving, possessing or having charge of any horse-drawn or motor vehicle of any description shall stop, store or park the vehicle or permit the vehicle to remain stopped, stored or parked abreast of or opposite another vehicle lengthwise in any street or in any other manner so as to constitute double parking. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-1) 
Sec. 11-32. - Within 25 feet of street intersections. 
    No person owning, operating, driving, possessing or having charge of any horse-drawn or motor vehicle of any description shall stop, store or park the vehicle or permit the vehicle to remain stopped, stored or parked within 25 feet of a street intersection in the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-2) 
Sec. 11-33. - On crosswalks. 
    No person owning, operating, driving, possessing or having charge of any horse-drawn or motor vehicle of any description shall stop, store or park the vehicle or permit the vehicle to remain stopped, stored or parked on any crosswalk in the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-3) 
Sec. 11-34. - Within intersections. 
    No person owning, operating, driving, possessing or having charge of any horse-drawn or motor vehicle of any description shall stop, store or park the vehicle or permit the vehicle to remain stopped, stored or parked within the intersections of any streets, except in an emergency or when directed to do so by a police officer. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-4) 
Sec. 11-35. - Within ten feet of fire hydrants. 
    No person owning, operating, driving, possessing or having charge of any horse-drawn or motor vehicle of any description shall stop, store or park or permit the vehicle to remain stopped, stored or parked abreast of, opposite to or within ten feet of any fire hydrant on any public highway of the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-5) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 5. 
Sec. 11-36. - Emergency storm conditions. 
(a)  No parking shall be permitted on any street or highway within the town during the times designated when emergency storm conditions exist. 
(b)  The director of public works, in the director's discretion, may declare that emergency conditions exist, provided that a snow emergency condition shall be considered to exist whenever one inch or more of snowfall accumulates on the road surfaces. Emergency storm conditions will be declared to be in effect by means of radio, television or other local news media announcements. 
(c)  During periods when emergency storm conditions are in effect, any vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be towed away, and the owner of such vehicle shall be liable for the cost of towing, storage and other incidental expenses in connection with such towing. The charges for towing illegally parked vehicles will be in accordance with the charges filed with the state department of public utilities by the towing service utilized. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-6) 
Sec. 11-37. - No parking or limited parking. 
    No person owning, operating, driving, possessing or having charge of any horse-drawn or motor vehicle of any description shall stop, store or park such vehicle or permit such vehicle to remain stopped, stored or parked on the following streets or portions of streets during the periods designated following the description of such streets or portions of streets: 
Airport Road, northeast side from the intersection of Belver Avenue to a point 780 feet southeasterly from the intersection at any time. 
Amy Drive, either side, weekdays between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
Annaquatucket Road, northeast side from Prospect Avenue to Featherbed Lane; southwest side from its intersection with Fairway to a point 100 feet northwesterly and a point 100 feet southeasterly from such intersection between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays. 
Armington Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Baker Way, either side, weekdays between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
Beach Street: 
From Steamboat Avenue east to the water between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
From Boston Neck Road east to the water at any time during the period that the town beach facilities are officially open. 
Belver Avenue, northwest side from the intersection of Airport Road to a point 1,600 feet southwesterly from the intersection at any time. 
Brown Street, from Phillips Street up to and including the intersection of Brown Street with Main Street on all days except Sundays and holidays between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for a continuous period of more than three hours. 
Callahan Road, south side from the intersection of Koster Road to a point 600 feet westerly from the intersection at any time. 
Chadsey Road, from the south intersection of Post Road, north on Chadsey Road for a distance of 350 feet at any time. 
Church Way, south side from Willett Road to Briggs Road. 
Concord Avenue, from Lexington Avenue to Madison Avenue between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
East Court, east and west sides from the intersection of Nichols Road to the entrance to the Davisville Elementary School at any time. 
Eccleston Avenue, either side from Quonset Road to Airport Road. 
Edmond Drive, south side from Mark Drive in an easterly direction for a distance of 35 feet at any time. 
Elgin Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Elizabeth Court, either side, at any time. 
Esmond Avenue: 
Either side from the intersection of Ocean Avenue to a point 650 feet northerly from the intersection. 
West side from the intersection of Ocean Avenue to a point 175 feet northerly from the intersection. 
Either side from the point northerly to the intersection of Enfield Avenue. 
Fairway: 
Northwest side between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays. 
Southeast side from the intersection of Boston Neck Road to a point 400 feet westerly from the intersection at any time. 
Featherbed Lane, west side from a point 275 feet north of Hamilton-Allenton Road a distance of 400 feet at any time. 
    First Street, north side beginning at a point 156 feet west of Sauga Avenue thence westerly for a distance of 100 feet at any time. 
First Street, southerly side for a distance of 150 feet in a westerly direction from Sauga Avenue at any time. 
Fishing Cove Road, at any time in the areas designated as no parking zones on the plan prepared by the town engineer which is dated November 10, 1986, and which is on file in the office of the department of public works. 
Fountain Street, the right-of-way south of Washington Street (Plat 117 between Lots 234 and 239) and next to the dwelling known as 59 Washington Street (Plat 117, Lot 239) will be no parking. 
Franklin Street, north side at any time. 
Gilbert Stuart Road and Snuff Mill Road: 
Either side from such intersection to a point 175 feet west of the center of the second or westernmost bridge. 
Southerly or southeasterly side from a point 175 feet west of the center of the second or westernmost bridge to a point 950 feet west or southwest of such bridge. 
Either side beyond this point westerly to the top of Hammond Hill. 
Gold Street: 
West side from the intersection of Main Street for a distance of 85 feet at any time. 
East side at any time. 
Hatfield Street, north side beginning at a point 125 feet west of the centerline of Himes Street for a distance of 100 feet at any time. 
Lantern Lane East, either side, from Annaquatucket Road to a point in the road 200 feet west of Elizabeth Court, weekdays between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
Lexington Avenue, from Elgin Avenue to Madison Avenue between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Loop Drive, either side, at any time. 
Lorelei Drive, from Bridge Road to the intersection of Plum Point Road at any time. 
Main Street: 
Between Newtown Avenue and Gold Street on any day except Sundays and holidays between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for a continuous period of more than 60 minutes. 
First 18 feet of the south side measuring westerly from the curbline of the intersection of Wall Street and Main Street at any time. 
North side from its intersection with Fowler Street for a distance of 25 feet east and west. 
Mark Drive, east side from Edmond Drive in a northerly direction for a distance of 250 feet any time. 
Mark Drive, east side from Edmond Drive in a southerly direction for a distance of 35 feet any time. 
Morningside Drive, Entering from Post Road on to Morningside Drive, left side from Post Road to Gazebo Park known as "lot 23." Both outer lanes of Morningside Drive around Gazebo Park. Left side of Morningside Drive from Gazebo Park to Wysteria Court. From Wysteria Court to the open space known as "lot 24" both outer lanes. 
Newcomb Road: 
North side from its intersection with Post Road for a distance of 225 feet in a generally easterly direction. 
South side from its intersection with Post Road to the 90-degree turn and east side from the 90-degree turn to Fletcher Road at any time. 
Oak Hill Road, on either side of Oak Hill Road from Mill Road to #275 Oak Hill Road at any time. 
Oak Tree Drive, from the intersection of Pat Circle southeasterly along the southwesterly side a distance of 214 feet and from the intersection of Pat Circle southeasterly along the northeasterly side a distance of 159 feet. 
Pat Circle: 
Northwest side at any time. 
Southeasterly side beginning at a point 370 feet northeast of Devils Foot Road and then running around the corner to the right 116 feet at the intersection of Oak Tree Drive and the southeasterly side beginning at a point 750 feet northeast of Devils Foot Road and running southwesterly around the corner to the left 106 feet at the intersection of Oak Tree Drive. 
Pequot Street, west side from Camp Avenue in a northerly direction for a distance of 200 feet at any time. 
Pettee Avenue, at any time. 
Phillips Street: 
South side from Brown Street to a point on the south side of Phillips Street opposite the intersection of Boone Street with Phillips Street. 
North side from the driveway entrance to Wickford Junior High School easterly a distance of 750 feet at any time. 
Pleasant Street, east side starting at the water and running south for a distance of 300 feet. 
Pleasant Valley Road, no parking either side. 
Plum Beach Road, south side from a point 50 feet east of the intersection of Sunset Drive and Plum Beach Road west to Boston Neck Road at any time. 
Plum Beach Road, south side from Boston Neck Road (Rt. 1A) to Sunset Avenue at any time. 
Poplar Avenue, from Armington Avenue to Lexington Avenue, on the south side only, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Preston Drive, south side from Ten Rod Road to Tower Hill Road. 
Prospect Avenue, either side from the intersection of Updike Street to a point 360 feet westerly from such intersection. 
Riptide Drive, from the intersection of Lorelei Drive to Plum Point Road at any time. 
Rogers Place, either side from the cul-de-sac to Second Street at any time. 
Roosevelt Avenue, either side from the intersection of West Main Street to the intersection of Intrepid Road. 
Salisbury Avenue, north side from Boston Neck Road east for a distance of 360 feet weekdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
Sauga Avenue: 
Either side from a point 250 feet south of First Street in a southerly direction to the intersection of Shore Acres Avenue at any time. 
West side from First Street in a southerly direction to the intersection of Shore Acres Avenue at any time. 
School Street, south side from its intersection with the main entrance to the Davisville Junior High School for a distance of 150 feet to either side of such entrance, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on school days. 
Scrabbletown Road, west side of Route 4, along or in the cul-de-sac. 
Seaview Avenue, either side at any time. 
Seawynds Drive, South side from Morningside Drive west. 
Second Street, either side from the water to Shore Acres Avenue at any time. 
Shore Acres Avenue: 
Either side from Fourth Street south to Second Street at any time. 
Either side from Sauga Avenue to First Street at any time. 
Shore Drive, either side in the area beginning 1,350 feet west of Tower Hill Road, where Shore Drive abuts Secret Lake/Belleville Pond, to the first intersection with Jamaica Way, at any time. 
Spink Street, at any time. 
Steamboat Avenue: 
East side from Beach Street to Newport Avenue at any time. 
Either side from the intersection of Beach Street and Steamboat Avenue northerly a distance of 760 feet during the period that the town beach facilities are officially open. 
Stony Lane, either side of that portion of Stony Lane beginning at a point on Stony Lane 775 feet east of the intersection of the centerlines of Pebble Road and Stony Lane, thence running along both sides of Stony Lane in an easterly direction a distance of 600 feet. 
Terre Mar Drive, the dead end or cul-de-sac described as the last 85 feet of the road (a circular area), to have limited parking, to wit no parking from dusk to dawn. 
Third Street, south side for a distance of 100 feet in an easterly direction from the intersection of Shore Acres Avenue. 
Washington Street: 
North side at any time. 
First 18 feet of the south side measuring from the curbline of the intersection of Gold Street and Washington Street at any time. 
West Allenton Road, either side from the intersection with Tower Hill Road for a distance of 280 feet in a westerly direction at any time. 
West Main Street, in Wickford, north side within 100 feet west of a point opposite the southwest corner of the Industrial Trust Building at any time. 
Worsley Avenue, either side at any time. 
Wright Lane, from the intersection of Steamboat Avenue to the intersection of Elgin Avenue during the period that the town beach facilities are officially open. 
Yorktown Road Median, from Post Road to King Phillip Drive, at any time. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-7; Ord. No. 83-10, § 1, 7-25-1983; Ord. No. 85-16, § 1, 10-15-1985; Ord. No. 88-5, 1-25-1988; Ord. No. 88-22, § 1, 11-14-1988; Ord. No. 89-2, §§ 1, 2, 1-24-1989; Ord. No. 89-6, § 1, 2-27-1989; Ord. No. 89-15, § 1, 6-26-1989; Ord. No. 89-21, § 1, 8-15-1989; Ord. No. 89-24, § 1, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 90-14, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-1990; Ord. No. 91-8, §§ 1, 2, 6-3-1991; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-11-1993; Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, 1-25-1993; Ord. No. 93-9, § 1, 5-10-1993; Ord. No. 93-16, § 1, 9-13-1993; Ord. No. 93-18, § 1, 10-18-1993; Ord. No. 94-19, § 2, 10-17-1994; Ord. No. 94-26, § 1, 12-12-1994; Ord. No. 95-6, §§ 1, 2, 6-19-1995; Ord. No. 96-11, § 1, 7-8-1996; Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 4-14-1997; Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 99-19, § 2, 9-13-1999; Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 02-6, § 1, 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 04-22, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 06-10, § 1, 8-7-2006; Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 07-26, § 1, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 08-03, § 1, 2-25-2008; Ord. No. 08-31, § 1, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 3-26-2018) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
Sec. 11-38. - Parallel parking. 
    Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway in the town shall be so stopped or parked with the righthand wheels to such vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the righthand curb or curbline. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-8) 
Sec. 11-39. - Loading zones. 
    It shall be unlawful for any private passenger vehicle to be parked in any area which has been designated by the town council as a "loading zone" and which area has been so marked or designated by signs. 
    Reynolds Street, the dead end, beginning at the northeast end of Reynolds Street extending 50 feet in a southwesterly direction toward Boston Neck Road, on both sides of the street, is designated at all times as a "loading zone". The loading zone is provided to allow for the immediate loading or unloading of passengers, goods or freight. It is not provided for short-term parking. The "loading zone" is indicated by diagnonal lines across the width of the dead end roadway. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-9; Ord. No. 11-24, § 1, 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 11-40. - Standing in no parking or no standing zone. 
    It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stand upon any street, road, highway or lane in the town which has been designated by the town council as a "no parking" or "no standing" zone and which area has been so marked or designated by signs. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-10) 
Sec. 11-41. - Owner's responsibility for violations. 
    No person shall allow or permit any vehicle registered in such person's name to stand or park in any street or highway in violation of any of the sections of this chapter or any amendment of this chapter. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-11) 
Sec. 11-42. - Overtime parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked for more than 60 minutes in any area in the town that is designated as a 60-minute parking zone. 
(b)  It shall be a separate violation for a vehicle to remain parked in a 60-minute parking zone for each consecutive unit of time beyond the first unit of time, up to a maximum of three violations. A unit of time shall mean the period of permitted parking time. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-12) 
Sec. 11-43. - Limited parking areas. 
(a)  Limited residential parking district. Except for an officer or employee of the United States, the state or the town or any agency thereof, while in the course of official business, no person shall park a vehicle on a public street in a limited residential parking district that has been designated and established by the council in accordance with article XVI of chapter 21 or any amendment thereto, unless a permit is in effect which authorizes the parking of such vehicle in the district and a parking sticker is affixed to a window of such vehicle or a guest permit is displayed in a window of the vehicle while it is parked. 
(b)  Designation of Mount View area as limited residential parking district. The Mount View area, as may be more particularly identified as the land and streets including Allen Avenue, Atlantic Avenue, Bayview Avenue, Coolidge Avenue, Dawes Avenue, Finn Street, Floral Avenue, Harding Street, Harrison Street, High Bank Avenue, Hoover Street, Lincoln Street, Mount View Avenue, Murray Avenue, Narragansett Street and Pettee Avenue, as shown on the town assessor's plat 166, is designated as a limited residential parking district in accordance with article XVI of chapter 21. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 12-2-13, 12-2-13.1) 
Sec. 11-44. - Fire lanes. 
    No person owning, operating, driving, possessing or having charge of any horse-drawn or motor vehicle of any description, except authorized emergency vehicles, shall stop, store or park the vehicle or permit the vehicle to remain stopped, stored or parked within any fire lane or emergency vehicle lane, whether on private or public property, except in an emergency or when directed to do so by a police officer. Such fire lane or emergency vehicle lane, if located on private property, shall have been so designated by the landowner, and such area shall have been clearly marked and designated by signs. 
(Ord. No. 84-1(A), § 1, 1-9-1984) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 5. 
Sec. 11-45. - Removal of illegally parked vehicles. 
    Any police officer may remove or cause to be removed any vehicle parked upon any street in violation of any section of this chapter providing for the regulation of the standing or parking of vehicles, other than overtime parking as provided in section 11-42, and the owner of any vehicle so removed shall be liable for the cost of towing, storage and other incidental expenses in connection with such removal in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 31-22-14. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-2-4) 
Sec. 11-46. - Trailers and recreational vehicles parking. 
    Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter, other town ordinances, or zoning ordinance, no person shall park any boat, camper, trailer, recreational vehicle or similar type vehicle or any snowmobile on any street for more than 72 hours. 
    Violation of this section may be punishable by removal of said illegally parked vehicle in accordance with section 11-45 and/or a fine not exceeding: 
(1)  $35.00 for the first offense; 
(2)  $70.00 for the second offense within a year of the first offense; 
(3)  $100.00 for the third and any subsequent offenses within a year of the second offense. 
    All such fines shall be payable to the Municipal Court. When an offense continues more than one day, each day which such offense continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 14-10, § 1, 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 11-47-11-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOP INTERSECTIONS 

Sec. 11-66. - Stop signs. 
    Suitable and conspicuous boulevard stop signs shall, under the supervision of the chief of police, be placed at all stop intersections on town highways as shall be designated from time to time by the town council. The specific intersections of the town which are designated as stop intersections are not printed in this Code but are on file in the town clerk's office. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 12-4-1, 12-4-3; Ord. No. 87-13, § 1, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 88-10, § 1, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 88-17, § 1, 9-26-1988; Ord. No. 89-4, § 1, 1-24-1989; Ord. No. 89-12, § 1, 4-4-1989; Ord. No. 89-22, § 1, 8-15-1989; Ord. No. 89-23, § 1, 9-11-1989; Ord. No. 90-4, § 1, 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, 8-14-1990; Ord. No. 90-17, § 1, 9-17-1990; Ord. No. 91-5, §§ 1, 2, 2-11-1991; Ord. No. 91-16, § 1, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 92-21, § 1, 11-16-1992; Ord. No. 92-22, § 1, 12-21-1992; Ord. No. 93-5, § 1, 2-22-1993; Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 4-12-1993; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 7-12-1993; Ord. No. 93-19, § 1, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 94-1, § 1, 1-10-1994; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 3-14-1994; Ord. No. 94-13, § 1, 7-11-1994; Ord. No. 94-19, § 1, 10-17-1994; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 11-14-1994; Ord. No. 94-27, § 1, 12-12-1994; Ord. No. 95-13, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-1995; Ord. No. 96-19, § 1, 11-18-1996; Ord. No. 97-1, § 1, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 97-11, § 1, 8-4-1997; Ord. No. 98-11, §§ 1, 2, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 99-4, §§ 1, 2, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 99-8, § 1, 6-7-1999; Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 7-12-1999; Ord. No. 99-19, § 3, 9-13-1999; Ord. No. 00-7, § 1, 3-13-2000; Ord. No. 00-21, § 1, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 01-6, § 1, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 01-11, § 1, 6-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-16, § 1, 9-10-2001; Ord. No. 02-1, § 1, 4-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-2, § 1, 4-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-15, § 1, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-16, § 1, 9-29-2003; Ord. No. 04-01, §§ 1-3, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 5-10-2004; Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 07-15, § 1, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 07-17, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 07-27, § 1, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 2-11-2008; Ord. No. 09-09, § 1, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 5-24-2010; Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 11-07, § 1, 2-28-2011; Ord. No. 12-09, §§ 1-3, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 16-11, § 1, 7-18-2016; Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-13-2017; Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 11-67. - Vehicles to come to full stop. 
    Any person operating a motor vehicle upon approaching an intersection marked by a boulevard stop sign as provided in section 11-66 shall bring such motor vehicle to a full stop at such intersection before entering the intersection. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 12-4-2) 
Sec. 11-68. - Right turn on red. 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing a traffic control signal exhibiting the color red or the word "stop" shall remain standing until the color green or the word "go" is shown alone and shall not be permitted to make a righthand turn prior to such time at the intersections designated in subsection (b) of this section. All such intersections shall be marked by a suitable sign in a conspicuous location. 
(b)  The following intersections are designated as no righthand turn on red intersections: Fairway at Boston Neck Road for traffic turning from Fairway onto Boston Neck Road. 
(Ord. No. 83-15, § 1, 11-14-1983) 
Secs. 11-69-11-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED, JUNKED OR DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, RIGL, 1956, § 31-42-1 et seq. 

Sec. 11-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means a vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated, which is located on premises not owned or occupied by the owner of such vehicle. 
    Dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicles includes major parts of vehicles including bodies, engines, transmissions, rear ends, etc. 
    Premises means public or private property, town streets and public highways. 
    Private property means property owned by any person, except property owned by the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
    Public property means property owned by the town or state or any political subdivision thereof, property acquired by the town at tax sales and all streets and highways within the town, whether or not they are public highways. 
    Vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated means a vehicle that has not been duly registered and inspected according to law or that lacks the equipment in good operating condition as required by law to enable it to be registered and inspected. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-2-1; Ord. No. 90-5, § 1, 4-9-1990) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-82. - Prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored or kept outside of a building or structure upon public property a dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicle, an unserviceable vehicle, or a vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated or a vehicle that does not display, if required by state law, a current safety inspection certificate on its windshield. 
(b)  No person shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored or kept outside of a building or structure upon private property more than one dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicle, an unserviceable vehicle, or more than one vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated or more than one vehicle that does not display, if required by state law, a current safety inspection certificate on its windshield. 
(c)  If a single dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicle, an unserviceable vehicle, or a single vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated or a single vehicle that does not display a current safety inspection certificate on its windshield is being deposited, stored or kept upon private property pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, every such vehicle shall be deposited, stored or kept in a location on the property that conforms to the minimum side yard, rear yard and front yard setbacks required by chapter 21 pertaining to zoning. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-2-2; Ord. No. 90-5, § 2, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 11-83. - Accumulation declared nuisance. 
    Unless otherwise permitted by this article, the accumulation and storage of any dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicle or any vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated, as defined in this article, shall constitute a nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-2-3; Ord. No. 90-5, § 3, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 11-84. - Notice and removal. 
(a)  The owner of any dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicle or vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated, as defined in this article, or the owner of the private property on which such vehicle is stored or located shall be responsible for its removal upon appropriate notice. Such notice shall be in writing signed by the building official and shall be served by mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by the police department delivering a copy of the notice to the person to which the notice is directed or by leaving a copy of the notice at the last and usual place of abode of such person if within this state. However, if the premises are unoccupied or the residence of such person is unknown or without the state, the notice may be served by posting a certified copy of the notice on the premises and by advertising in one or more newspapers in such manner and for such length of time as the town council may direct. 
(b)  The owner of any dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicle or vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated, as defined in this article, or the owner of the private property on which such vehicle is stored or located shall remove the vehicle within 20 days after being ordered to do so in writing. If the owner of any such vehicle is not known or cannot readily be ascertained, notice to remove may be given by attaching the notice to the vehicle. The police department, upon request, shall assist in ascertaining the name and address of the owner of any such vehicle. 
(c)  If the violation designated in the notice has not been remedied within 20 days after service or if a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the town council after the hearing is held, the department of public works shall have the right to remove and dispose of such vehicle at the expense of the owner of the vehicle or at the expense of the owner of the land where the vehicle is located, jointly and severally. The cost of such removal shall be recovered in an action brought in the name of the town. Vehicles shall be removed to a location to be provided for such purpose by the town. 
(d)  If any such vehicle is on a town street or public highway, 48 hours' notice to remove the vehicle shall be given by the police department. However, if such vehicle constitutes a present hazard or unduly obstructs traffic ingress to or egress from private or public property, the vehicle may be removed by the police department without any prior notice. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 8-2-4, 8-2-5; Ord. No. 86-24, § 1, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 90-5, § 4, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 11-85. - Hearings. 
    Within 20 days after service of the notice, as provided in subsection 11-84(a), the person to whom the notice is directed or the person's duly authorized agent may file a written request for hearing before the town council for the purpose of defending the charge. Such hearing shall be held as soon as is practicable after the filing of the request, and the person to whom the notice is directed shall be advised of the time and place of the hearing at least five days in advance of the hearing. At any such hearing, the town and the person to whom the notice has been directed may introduce such witnesses as are deemed necessary and proper by the town council. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-2-6) 
Sec. 11-86. - Redemption; sale by town. 
(a)  The owner of any vehicle removed in accordance with subsection 11-84(c) may regain possession of the vehicle from the town by making application therefor within two months after its receipt by the town upon paying to the town all reasonable costs of removal, which shall be repaid to the person who paid or incurred such charges, plus an additional charge of $15.00 for storage charges of the vehicle while in possession of the town. 
(b)  If no claim for such vehicle is made within two months after receipt of the vehicle, the town may sell the vehicle for the best price obtainable as junk or otherwise, and the proceeds of the sale shall be available to pay the reasonable charges of delivering the vehicle to the town, if claim therefor is made by the person who paid such charges, and the expense of keeping and disposing of the vehicle. Any balance shall be paid into the general fund. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-2-7) 
Sec. 11-87. - Liability for damage to junked vehicles. 
    Neither the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises from which any junked vehicle shall be removed nor such owner's, lessee's or occupant's servant or agent nor the town shall be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle while being removed or while in the possession of the town or as a result of any subsequent sale or other disposition. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 8-2-8) 
Sec. 11-88. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Any business that is lawfully operating a junkyard or salvage yard and that has received a license to do so from the proper authorities. 
(2)  Any person who or business that is lawfully operating an automotive services business in conformance with chapter 21 pertaining to zoning. 
(3)  The storage of any dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicle, an unserviceable vehicle, or any vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated or any vehicle that does not display a current safety inspection certificate on its windshield which is undertaken by or at the direction of the town. 
(Ord. No. 90-5, § 5, 4-9-1990) 
Secs. 11-89-11-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOTOR VEHICLES FOR SALE ON COMMERCIAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 11-101. - Parking for the purpose of selling prohibited. 
    No motor vehicle may be parked or permitted to be parked on any commercial lot, store, business or premises for the purpose of advertising that motor vehicle for sale, except on a commercial property which is solely or primarily dedicated to the sale of new or used motor vehicles. Motor vehicles owned, operated, or maintained by the commercial property owner, store, or business are exempt. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 2, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 11-102. - Term defined. 
    For the purposes of this article, an "offense" shall be defined as the parking of one motor vehicle in any one day. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 2, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 11-103. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person or property owner who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $50.00 for the first violation, $75.00 for the second violation within one year, $100.00 for each subsequent violation within one year. If there is no previous violation (within one year), the violation at hand shall be treated as the first. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 2, 5-20-2013) 
Chapter 12 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11. 
State Law reference- Criminal offenses, RIGL 1956, tit. 11; offenses punishable by state law shall not be imposed by ordinance, RIGL 1956, § 45-5-6. 

Sec. 12-1. - Alcoholic beverages in public places. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "public place" shall mean and include any public highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot or parking area; any public beach, dock, wharf, park, square or plaza; or any property owned by the town and dedicated to municipal purposes, including the grounds and buildings under the control of the town school committee. 
(b)  Consumption and possession in open containers prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, while on or at any public place within the town, to consume an alcoholic beverage of any kind or have in such person's possession an open container in which there is an alcoholic beverage of any kind. 
(c)  Exceptions for licensed premises and permitted occasions. The prohibitions of subsection (b) of this section notwithstanding, it shall not be unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage or have in such person's possession an open container in which there is an alcoholic beverage: 
(1)  At or on premises for which a class F or class F-1 alcoholic beverage license has been issued between the hours of the day authorized by such license for the sale of alcoholic beverages and if such alcoholic beverage was purchased from the holder of such license; or 
(2)  On an occasion and at a location specifically authorized in writing by the town manager if such consumption or possession is in accordance with the conditions specified in such written authorization. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-1) 
Charter reference- Alcoholic beverage licenses, § 1107. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, RIGL 1956, § 3-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-2. - Drunkenness in public or on premises of another. 
    Every person who shall be found so drunk as to amount to a violation of decency upon the premises of any other person or in any public hall or at any public meeting or in any street, alley, lane or other public place within this town shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-5) 
State Law reference- Limitation on punishment for intoxication, RIGL 1956, § 23-1.10-16; authority to punish indecent intoxication, RIGL 1956, § 45-6-3. 
Sec. 12-3. - Covers required for wells, cesspools, tanks or vaults. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any land in the town upon which is situated a well, cistern, cesspool, tank or vault shall have the aperture covered and closed at all times or so guarded at all times as to render it impossible for persons or animals to fall therein. 
(b)  Such covers or means of guarding such apertures shall be of durable materials, strong and well fitting and subject to the approval of the building official. 
(c)  This section shall be enforced by the building official, and whoever shall violate this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-2) 
Sec. 12-4. - Removal of doors before discarding refrigerators. 
    Whoever, being the owner or having possession or custody of a container originally used for refrigerative purposes, fails to remove the door from such container before discarding the container shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-11) 
Sec. 12-5. - Destruction of property generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, wantonly or carelessly throw down, extinguish, break, injure or deface any lamp, lantern or lamppost erected for the purpose of lighting any street, lane, highway, alley or bridge in the town. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly daub with paint or otherwise injure by scratching or marking or in any manner deface any fence, post, railings, signboard, sign or building situated in or upon any street, highway, bridge, wharf or public place in the town or to wantonly tear down, deface or destroy any notice of any public meeting, auction or other sale or any other public notice. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-3) 
Sec. 12-6. - Disorderly conduct. 
    No person, acting alone or in concert with others, may engage in conduct which violates this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of such person's life, limb or health. 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  In a public place, use fighting words or language or words which by the very utterance of such language or words inflicts injury or tends to incite outrage and immediate turmoil. 
(4)  Use violent and forceful behavior at any time in or near a public place, such that there is a clear and present danger that free movement of other persons will be arrested or restrained or other persons will be incapacitated in the lawful exercise of business or amusement. 
(5)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another. 
(6)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(7)  Disturb the peace of others by violent, indecent, offensive or boisterous conduct or language when such conduct or language was calculated to cause anguish or injury to another. 
(8)  Be found roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place. 
(9)  Throw any stone, snowball or any other missile upon or at any person, vehicle, building, tree, sign or other public or private property. 
(10)  Throw any stone, snowball or any other missile from any vehicle, either moving, stopped or parked, upon or at any person, building, vehicle, tree, sign or other public or private property. 
(11)  By acts of violence, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(12)  Expectorate, urinate or defecate on any public street, alley, sidewalk or floor of any public building or a building where the public gathers or has access. 
(13)  Wantonly make a false alarm with reference to the request of firefighting apparatus or cry fire in any public place for the sole purpose of causing turmoil. 
(14)  Prowl or wander upon the private property of another or peek in the door or window of any inhabited building or structure located thereon without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant thereof. 
(15)  Maliciously interrupt the speaker of any lawful assembly or impair the lawful rights of others to participate effectively in such assembly or meeting when such conduct is calculated to provoke or tend to cause turmoil or disturbance. 
(16)  Act in a manner which tends to cause or provoke a disturbance near any public building wherein matters affecting the public are being considered or deliberated, which is designed or having the effect to interfere and the conduct interferes with the public matters. 
(17)  Frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal or fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices. 
(18)  Assemble for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the town or aid and abet therein. 
(19)  Display any deadly weapon in a public place in a manner which is calculated to alarm or frighten other persons present. 
(20)  Collect in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by this Code or town ordinances. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-4) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, RIGL 1956, § 11-45-1. 
Sec. 12-7. - Firearms. 
(a)  Discharging in town. Every person, except police officers and military officers in the line of duty, who shall discharge any rifle, pistol or airgun loaded with ball, bullets or slug within the town shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Use prohibited in certain areas. The discharge of firearms is prohibited in that area bounded northerly by the Hunt River and Potowomut River, easterly by Narragansett Bay, southerly by Newcomb Road and land occupied by the Naval Construction Battalion Center and westerly by Post Road. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement officers or military personnel so engaged in the discharge of official duties or to a property owner or member of such property owner's immediate family who hunts on such owner's own property. 
(c)  Use of shotguns during legal hunting season. Shotguns may be used in other unposted and open areas of town in the pursuit of game during the legal hunting season and in conformity with the state hunting laws. No firearm of any type may be carried upon the highway while loaded, and no shotgun shall be discharged within 200 yards of any occupied building, park, playground, public road or posted land. 
(d)  Target practice restricted. At the request of any town resident, the chief of police, when requested so to do, may, in the chief's discretion and with permission of the owner or occupant of suitable land, designate a place where target practice with firearms may be carried on under such circumstances, conditions, regulations and restrictions as the chief of police shall impose. Whenever the chief of police shall subsequently determine that the circumstances or conditions have altered to such an extent that the continuation of such target practice in such location is unsafe or likely to be or that the rules or regulations imposed by the chief have been violated or are likely to be violated or that the safety of the public is likely to be endangered, the chief of police may revoke the permission previously granted and forbid and abate such target practice with firearms without first obtaining permission from the chief of police under circumstances, conditions, rules or regulations imposed by the chief. Any person so engaging in target practice after the chief of police shall have revoked permission to do so shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the subsections of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-8) 
Cross reference- Hunting, § 13-2. 
State Law reference- Preemption of regulation of transportation, etc., of firearms, RIGL 1956, § 11-47-58; hunting and hunting safety generally, RIGL 1956, §§ 20-13-1-20-23-15. 
Sec. 12-8. - License required for fireworks displays. 
    No person shall offer for sale, use or explode or cause to explode for exhibition or amusement any fireworks except when application is made in writing and filed not less than ten days prior to the date of the proposed display and a license is granted by the town council on condition 
that such display shall be made by a competent operator approved by the licensing authority. A license fee shall be charged in accordance with section 9-4, table I. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-9) 
State Law reference- Fireworks, RIGL 1956, § 11-30-1. 
Sec. 12-9. - Playing games, throwing stones or discharging firearms in streets. 
    Every person who shall play at ball or any other game or sport; throw stones or other missiles; or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm in any street or highway in the town shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-10) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
Sec. 12-10. - Reports of persons moving household goods or personal effects commercially. 
(a)  Required. Every person owning or operating any moving van, transfer wagon, express wagon, delivery wagon, commercial automobile or vehicle who shall haul or move or cause to be hauled or moved household goods, chattels or personal effects, located in the town, of any town resident changing the place of residence, whether such removal is to another location in the town or to any other city or town in the state or elsewhere, shall make a report thereof to the town clerk. 
(b)  Time for making; filing. The report required by subsection (a) of this section shall be made of such household effects as specified in subsection (a) of this section before the expiration of ten days from the date of the removal on blanks furnished by the state director of labor and which are obtainable at the office of the town clerk and shall answer in full the questions thereon. The town clerk shall keep such reports on file in the clerk's office in a register or by other suitable methods for a period of at least six years after the time such reports, respectively, are filed, and such reports shall be open to public inspection. 
(c)  False information to movers. No person procuring the removal of any property described in subsection (a) of this section shall give false information to the owner or operator of any vehicle employed to haul such property or willfully deceive the vehicle owner or operator as to the property. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $5.00 and not more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 13-1-12-13-1-14) 
State Law reference- Movers, RIGL 1956, § 5-17-1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-11. - Sleeping after sunset in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep after sunset on any public beach, picnic area, highway or any other public place subject to the jurisdiction of the town. Whoever violates this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-15) 
Sec. 12-12. - Obstructing passage after order to move. 
(a)  Every person who shall be or remain on any footwalk, sidewalk, doorstep, passageway or in any doorway of any dwelling or other building in this town to the obstruction, hindrance, delay, disturbance or annoyance of passersby or of persons residing or doing business in the vicinity thereof, after a police officer or person owning or occupying such dwelling or building shall order such person to depart, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to hand carriages for the conveyance of children. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-16) 
State Law reference- Obstruction of lawful pursuits, RIGL 1956, § 11-44-1; blocking or obstructing public rights-of-way, RIGL 1956, § 11-44-24. 
Sec. 12-13. - Trespassing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within this town upon either public or private property. 
(b)  Without constituting any limitation upon subsection (a) of this section, any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of subsection (a) of this section, and appropriate action may be taken at any time or from time to time to prevent or punish any violation of this section. The enumerated acts shall include the following: 
(1)  An entry upon the premises or any part of the premises of another, including any public property, in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or occupant of the premises. 
(2)  The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or occupant of the land or premises. 
(3)  A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another when being requested, either orally or in writing, to depart by any owner or occupant of the premises. 
(4)  An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control thereof or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the subsections of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not exceeding $25.00. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-23) 
State Law reference- Trespass, RIGL 1956, § 11-44-26. 
Sec. 12-14. - Residential picketing. 
(a)  Findings and declaration of policy. The town is primarily a residential community and the town residents are desirous of being protected in the peaceful and tranquil use of their personal residences. The town has an abiding interest in ensuring that its public rights-of-way are available for traffic and that persons utilizing the public rights-of-way for passage on foot do not unreasonably interfere with vehicular use of such rights-of-way. It is declared that: 
(1)  Protection and preservation of the home is the keystone of democratic government; 
(2)  The public health and welfare and the good order of the community require that the members of the community enjoy in their homes and dwellings a feeling of well-being, tranquility and privacy and, when absent from their homes and dwellings, carry with them the sense of security inherent in the assurance that they may return to the enjoyment of their homes and dwellings; 
(3)  The practice of picketing before or about residences and dwellings causes emotional disturbance and distress to the occupants and neighbors, obstructs and interferes with the free use of public sidewalks and public rights-of-way for travel; 
(4)  Such practice has as its object harassment of such occupants and without resort to such practice a full opportunity exists and under the terms of this section will continue to exist for the exercise of freedom of speech and other constitutional rights; and 
(5)  The provisions enacted in this section are necessary for the public interest and are to avoid the detrimental results set forth in this section and are also necessary to preserve the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Prohibition. Picket lines and picketing shall be prohibited in front of, adjacent to or on any property used for residential purposes, except where such picketing relates to a use or activity being carried on within such property or the owner or occupant of such property has consented to the picketing. 
(c)  Rules. Where permitted, picketing shall be subject to the following additional regulations: 
(1)  Picketing shall be conducted only on sidewalks or other town-owned areas normally used or reserved for pedestrian movement, including easements and rights-of-way, and shall not be conducted on a portion of any street, whether publicly or privately owned, used primarily for vehicular traffic where, in the opinion of the chief of police, such use would result in a threat to the safety of the pickets or constitute an unreasonable obstruction of traffic. 
(2)  Not more than ten pickets promoting the same objective shall be permitted to use a public area in which picketing is permitted within one block in the town at any time. 
(3)  Such pickets may carry written or printed placards for signs not exceeding two feet in width and two feet in height promoting the objective for which the picketing is being carried on, provided that the words used are not defamatory or violence-provoking in nature. The staff on which such placard is carried shall not exceed 40 inches in length, shall be made of wood, shall not exceed three-fourths of an inch in diameter at any point and shall be blunt at each end. 
(4)  Pickets shall walk in single file and not abreast and shall not march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. 
(5)  If pickets promoting different objectives desire to use the same public area for picketing and such use would result in the presence of more than ten pickets thereon, the chief of police shall allot time to each group of pickets for the use of such public area on an equitable basis. 
(d)  Possession of weapons. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any gun, knife, blackjack, nightstick or other dangerous weapon or instrument utilized as a weapon while participating in a picket line or group demonstration. 
(e)  Interruption of passage. Whenever the free passage of any street or other public area in the town shall be obstructed by pickets, persons picketing shall disperse or move along when directed to do so by a town police officer. 
(Ord. No. 87-7, § 1 (13-2-1-13-2-5), 3-30-1987) 
Sec. 12-15. - Historical and archaeological burial sites. 
(a)  Authority. In compliance with RIGL 1956, § 23-18-1 et seq., the town adopts this section to govern the preservation of historic and archaeological burial sites in the town. 
(b)  Purpose. The town council recognizes that historic and archeological gravesites possess archaeological and scientific value and are often of great artistic, cultural and religious significance and represent for all cultures a respect for the sanctity of human life. It is, therefore, the policy of the town that marked or unmarked historic cemeteries are to be preserved and are not to be altered or removed except as provided for in this section. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means the owner of the land on which an archeological burial site or family cemetery is located for which a permit must be sought for alteration or removal. 
    Archaeological burial site means an area of land which has been designated and/or used for the interment of human remains in the prehistoric or distant past. Archaeological burial sites may include American Indian or other ethnic groupings. 
    Family cemetery means a historic cemetery which is not associated with a specific religious organization but which is the site of burial for persons related by blood, marriage or household. 
    Historic cemetery means any tract of land which has been used for a period in excess of 100 years as a burial place, whether or not marked with a historic marker or gravestone, including but not limited to ancient burial places known to contain the remains of one or more American Indians. For the purposes of this section, the term "historic cemetery" also includes an area 25 feet in width around the perimeter of the cemetery. 
    Human remains means any parts or remains of deceased persons including skeletal remains or cremated ashes. 
    Grave means any site where human remains have been purposefully interred. The term also includes gravemarkers, funerary objects and associated cultural remains and artifacts. A grave includes mausoleums, crypts or other structures designed to house human remains. 
    Least disruptive means means a means of construction, excavation, removal or other activity which, in the opinion of the state historic preservation commission, has the least overall destructive impact on the grave, human remains or cemetery. 
    Owner means the owner of a parcel of land. 
    Religious cemetery means any cemetery owned or maintained by a religious organization. 
    Religious organization means the organization representing the adherents of any religious society. 
    Site alteration plan means a document showing in written text and by illustration the proposed alteration of a historic cemetery, an archaeological burial site or a family cemetery, including detailed specifications for alteration, removal and reinterment of human remains. 
    Town means the town, its agents or its officers. 
(d)  Procedures. Procedures regarding disturbance of historic cemeteries or archaeological burial sites shall be as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, disrupt, excavate, deposit, fill in or on, remove or destroy gravemarkers, burial objects or buried human remains or conduct any other activities that would damage or diminish the integrity of any historic cemetery or archaeological burial site or family cemetery without first obtaining a permit to alter or remove such historic cemetery, archaeological burial site or family cemetery from the town council. 
(2)  Once a discovery of a previously unknown burial site is made, the owner or contractor shall immediately notify the building inspector who in turn shall contact the state medical examiner and state historical preservation commission pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 23-18-1 et seq. 
(3)  The town shall require the cessation of construction activities pending preliminary verification of the property as a human burial site by the state medical examiner or historic preservation commission. If the site is verified as a human burial site, work within 25 feet of the site shall be halted unless or until a permit to alter or remove is issued by the town pursuant to this section. 
(4)  The owner shall be required, at the owner's expense, to conduct an archaeological investigation of the area to establish the boundaries of the cemetery/burial site using the least disruptive means feasible. The least disruptive means shall be determined by the town through the town's consultation with the state historic preservation commission (RIHPC). A survey report shall be produced incorporating the findings of the investigation in test and graphic form. 
(5)  The applicant shall then submit the report and a detailed engineering plan, as required and identified in subsection (d)(8)a of this section, of the proposed construction project and all other proposed activities on the property that in any manner might lead to or necessitate any disruption of the cemetery/burial site. 
(6)  The applicant shall also submit a detailed site alteration plan proposal of the extent and method of removal of human remains and a reburial plan in text and drawing of the new gravesite. 
(7)  The town council may issue a permit to allow the alteration or removal of historic cemeteries, archaeological cemeteries or family cemeteries only after concluding, based on evidence submitted to the council at a public hearing, that all alternatives to the proposed activity have been examined and that no prudent and feasible alternative to the proposed activity exists or that the alteration serves the interests, health, welfare and safety of the public and is not solely for commercial expediency. 
(8)  The applicant shall submit the following to the town council prior to the consideration of any application for a permit to remove and/or alter a historic cemetery or an archaeological burial site: 
a.  Detailed site plans drawn to scale by a licensed professional registered land surveyor or professional engineer, as applicable, at a minimum scale of 1?=50', showing the boundaries of the property in question, topographical contour intervals of no more than one foot, a surveyed boundary of the cemetery and a setback area of no less than 25 feet, and a proposed plan of all improvements proposed on the site that would necessitate disturbance of the cemetery. 
b.  If known, a written description of the cemetery, its age and condition, and historical importance; whether the cemetery is religious, family, organization, publicly owned or other kind of cemetery; a listing of names and vital dates of those interred as may be determined from gravemarkers on site; and a cemetery plan indicating position of graves and to the extent possible the identities of those interred. 
c.  A detailed site alteration plan indicating the extent of disruption of the cemetery, methods of construction or removal of human remains, reburial plan, including in text and illustration the relocation of graves. 
d.  If a family cemetery, a genealogical study to identify whether decedents of the families of the interred still reside in the state. 
e.  If a religious cemetery, a listing of the religious organization that owns or maintains the cemetery. 
f.  Any further information and study the town council deems necessary to complete its consideration of the request to alter a cemetery in compliance with RIGL 1956, § 23-18-1 et seq. 
(e)  Hearing. A hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Public notice. Once the required documents are submitted by an applicant and published, the town council shall set the date for a public hearing. Notice of the date, time and location of the public hearing shall be at the applicant's expense, in a local newspaper, for a period of not less than two weeks prior to the hearing. The state historic preservation commission shall be notified not less than two weeks prior to the scheduled hearing, and an advisory opinion shall be requested by pertinent town staff. 
(2)  Notice to interested parties. Notice to interested parties shall be given as follows: 
a.  For archaeological burials and historic Native American graves, the town shall cause the tribal council of the Narragansett Tribe to be notified by regular mail of the subject, date and time of the scheduled hearing. 
b.  If an application involves the cemetery of an extant religious society, such society shall be so notified by regular mail of the scheduled hearing. 
c.  If the application involves a family cemetery, the interred of which have living lineal descendants, the applicant, at the applicant's expense, shall make all reasonable efforts to notify the lineal descendants as to the scheduled hearing, which efforts may include sending notice to the descendants via first class mail or publication of the notice in a newspaper of statewide circulation at least once per week for two successive weeks prior to the scheduled hearing. 
(3)  Burden of proof. At the hearing, the applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the town council that: 
a.  The applicant has examined all possible alternatives and conclusively demonstrated that no prudent and feasible alternative to the proposed alteration is possible; or 
b.  The proposed alteration serves the interests of health, welfare and safety of the public and is not solely for commercial expediency. 
(f)  Final action. The town council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed project and shall render a decision approving, denying or approving with reasonable conditions the proposed site alteration plan and may set other conditions and/or requirements necessary to carry out the purposes of RIGL 1956, § 23-18-1 et seq. 
(g)  Legal status. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the routine maintenance and repair of historical gravesites or the use of historic cemeteries as places of interment, nor shall it be construed to preclude the town boards or commissions or agents from otherwise acting within their authority to regulate and protect historical and archaeological cemeteries. 
(h)  Severability. If any subsection, clause, provision or portion of this section shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other subsection, clause, provision or portion of this section. 
(i)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the town council shall have a right to appeal the decision to the superior court pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 23-18-11.1. 
(Ord. No. 94-25, § 1, 11-14-1994) 
Cross reference- Historical zoning, § 21-331 et seq. 
State Law reference- Historical and archaeological burial sites, RIGL 1956, § 23-18-1 et seq.; historic burial sites, RIGL 1956, § 23-18-10.1; historic preservation, RIGL 1956, § 42-45-1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-16. - Operating motor vehicles on beaches. 
    Except for vehicles operated by public safety employees on official business, no motor vehicles shall be operated or driven on any beach within the town. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 5-8-2000) 
Sec. 12-17. - Notice required. 
    Notification of matters subject to notification shall be given to farmers as required by RIGL tit. 2, ch. 23.1, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 6-9-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, adopted June 9, 2008, amended the Code by renumbering former § 9-320 as a new § 12-17. 
Sec. 12-18. - Officials responsible. 
    The following officials are hereby designated to provide the notification required by RIGL § 2-23.1-4 and to receive requests for work sessions in accordance with RIGL § 2-23.1-6: 
Subject Matter Responsible Town Official Changes of the zoning and/or permitted uses of land used for farming Director of planning and development Designation or amendment of the designation of land used for farming in the comprehensive plan or land use ordinances Director of planning and development Changes in the manner of taxation of real and personal property used for farming Assessor Regulation of water use for farming purposes Director of water supply Control of noise and hours of operation of machinery and equipment used in farming Town clerk  
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 6-9-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, adopted June 9, 2008, amended the Code by renumbering former § 9-321 as a new § 12-18. 
Chapter 13 - PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public recreation, § 817. 
Cross reference- Harbors, wharves and public waters, ch. 7; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Parks and recreational areas, G.L. 1956, tit. 32; municipal regulation of parks, G.L. 1956, § 32-3-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Hours of operation. 
    The director of recreation shall establish the hours of normal operation of all town parks and recreational areas, and the hours shall be prominently posted at each park and recreational area. The director may, by special permit, allow individuals or groups to use certain specified areas at times which extend beyond normal hours. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 6-4-1) 
Sec. 13-2. - Hunting. 
(a)  Prohibited. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, hunting shall be prohibited in all town parks and recreational areas. 
(b)  Waterfowl hunting-Belleville Pond. Waterfowl hunting on Belleville Pond by town and state residents is permitted in accordance with all restrictions imposed by state and federal laws to a limited season that may vary from 30 to 50 days. Such hunting of waterfowl shall be permitted between November 16 and January 31 next following but shall be, within that period, restricted to the annual state waterfowl hunting season as established by the department of environmental management. Such waterfowl hunting shall be permitted in a clearly marked area west of a line, running north and south through the pond, 200 yards from the eastern shore of upper Belleville Pond. It shall be restricted to the open water areas over decoys. Discharge of firearms while waterfowl hunting shall be restricted to discharge towards open water. Upland hunting shall be prohibited. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 6-4-3; Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 6-12-2000) 
Cross reference- Firearms regulations, § 12-7. 
Sec. 13-3. - Animals. 
    No dogs, horses or other animals shall be allowed at the recreational area adjoining the town beach which is commonly known as the Cold Spring Property, so-called, without a special permit, although Seeing Eye dogs shall be excepted. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 6-4-4) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 3. 
Sec. 13-4. - Motor vehicles. 
(a)  Operation. No person shall operate or be in actual physical control of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor scooter or other motor-driven cycle or snowmobile within or upon any public park, playground, playfield, schoolyard, cemetery, recreation area, conservation area, beach or any other grounds owned or controlled by the town, except within those areas and roadways designated for such use or parking, unless a special permit is first obtained from the director of recreation. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "roadway" shall mean that portion of a road, street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
(c)  Speed limit. The speed of vehicular traffic, unless otherwise posted, shall not exceed 20 miles per hour on any road or trail in any park or recreational area. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $20.00 and cost of prosecution or by imprisonment not exceeding ten days or by other fine and imprisonment for each offense. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 6-4-2, 6-4-6) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11. 
Sec. 13-5. - Additional rules and regulations. 
    The director of recreation may establish additional rules and regulations for the operation and use of parks and recreational areas. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 6-4-5) 
Secs. 13-6-13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC BEACHES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Responsibility of towns for bathing areas, G.L. 1956, § 23-22.5-11. 

Sec. 13-26. - Enforcement of article. 
    This article shall be enforced by the duly appointed lifeguard on duty at any public beach. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 6-2-1) 
Sec. 13-27. - Safe conduct generally. 
    No person, while on any public beach in the town, shall engage in conduct as to endanger the safety of such person or others on the beach. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 6-2-2) 
Sec. 13-28. - Use of dangerous devices by bathers. 
    No person, while bathing in the waters of any public beach in the town, shall use or employ any device for floating or swimming that may be dangerous to such person's safety or to the safety of others bathing in such waters. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 6-2-3) 
Sec. 13-29. - Proper clothing of bathers; indecent exposure. 
    Every person who shall openly and publicly bathe at any place in sight of and within 150 rods of any public highway, place of resort or dwelling house in the town, in the daytime, without being at the time properly and sufficiently clothed or dressed, or who shall make an indecent exposure of the person at such place shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 6-2-4) 
Sec. 13-30. - Glass or metal containers prohibited; disposal of containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take any disposable glass or metal container on any public beach or picnic area within the town. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of containers made of glass, rubber, plastic, metal, wood, clay or paper or any combination thereof on any highway, beach or picnic area within the town. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with section 1-4. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 6-2-5) 
Sec. 13-31. - Use by nonresidents. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any nonresident person to use any public beach within the town that is not protected with lifeguards or that is without adequate sanitary facilities. Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with section 1-4. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "resident" shall mean any person: 
(1)  Who has established residence in the town. 
(2)  Leasing or renting real estate in the town. 
(3)  Owning property and paying local taxes in the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 6-2-6) 
Sec. 13-32. - Beach parking permits. 
(a)  Required. In order to control the use of the parking facility at the town beach, no vehicle will be permitted to enter such facility unless a parking permit is conspicuously affixed on the vehicle. 
(b)  Transferability; term. Nontransferable permits shall be issued annually and shall be good only during the year of issue. 
(c)  Persons eligible. The owner of a pleasure vehicle or a commercial vehicle of not over one-half ton capacity may apply for and receive for each vehicle a parking permit subject to this section. 
(d)  Definition of resident. The term "resident," as referred to in this section, shall mean any person: 
(1)  Who has established residence in the town. 
(2)  Leasing or renting real estate in the town. 
(3)  Owning property and paying local taxes in the town. 
(e)  Contents. Permits shall be numbered consecutively and shall indicate thereon the following information: 
(1)  Date of issue. 
(2)  Vehicle owner's name and address. 
(3)  Registration number of the vehicle. 
(4)  Description of the vehicle; i.e., make, model and year. 
(f)  Space-available admission. The permit shall admit the vehicle to the parking facility only when parking space is available. 
(g)  Revocation or suspension. A permit issued under this section is a revocable privilege and may be suspended at any time by the director of recreation. Such suspension shall endure until the next regular meeting of the town council, when the permit may be revoked or such suspension lifted at the pleasure of the council. 
(h)  Responsibility of vehicle operator. Any person operating the vehicle bearing a permit is subject to all sections of this Code and town ordinances and police regulations which may have been ordered by the town council relative to the operation of the town beach facilities. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 6-2-7-6-2-13; Ord. No. 04-08, § 2, 6-7-2004) 
Secs. 13-33-13-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GOLF COURSES 

Sec. 13-56. - Hours of operation. 
    Golf course may be open March 1 through January 1 of the following year as playing conditions permit. The hours of operation are generally first light until dark. The actual hours shall be set by the leisure activities director and will vary by season. 
(Ord. No. 84-3, § 1 (6-5-1), 1-23-1984; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 01-21, § 2, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 13-57. - Course fees. 
(a)  Golf fees, greens fees, and other rental fees will be set for the season by the town council. In season competitive discounts may be set with the town council's approval. 
(b)  No refund of fees after teeing off shall be allowed. Rain checks will be given only if inclement/hazardous conditions exist prior to play or occur during play and only if less than 12 holes of golf have been completed for an 18-hole round and only if less than six holes of golf have been completed for a nine-hole round. In addition, a fee may be charged for no shows for guaranteed tee times. 
(c)  All players will have and produce, as requested, a proper receipt which indicates that the players conformed to all requirements for play. The receipt shall be in the form of a cash register receipt. 
(d)  The golf course superintendent, assistant golf course superintendent, operations manager, and assistant operations manager will be allowed to use the municipal golf course to play without paying the required fees. The golf course superintendent, assistant golf course superintendent, operations manager and assistant operations manager may play the course only when there is no conflict with their duties or interference with normal play. Resident rates apply for all other employees of the golf course for reserved tee times. Employee golf policies are noted in the golf course policy manual. 
(e)  The leisure activities director will receive, at the discretion of the town council, an annual complimentary services budget. The leisure activities director will have the discretion to provide complimentary services to individuals or groups who bring business to the golf course. 
(f)  The pro shop will offer sets of rental clubs to interested individuals. The cost for these clubs will be in accordance with section 9-4, table VI, Recreation Department Fees. 
(Ord. No. 84-3, § 1 (6-5-2), 1-23-1984; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 01-21, § 3, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, 12-12-2005) 
Sec. 13-58. - Pro shop. 
(a)  The golf course pro shop shall order and maintain an inventory for sale of items of consumable nature relating to the sport of golf. 
(b)  All purchases at the pro shop shall be paid for in full at the time of sale. 
(Ord. No. 85-15, § 1, 9-23-1985; Ord. No. 96-7, § 3, 5-13-1996) 
Secs. 13-59-13-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALLEN HARBOR 

Sec. 13-76. - Marina concession. 
(a)  The marina concession at Allen Harbor shall order and maintain an inventory for sale of items related to boating activities. 
(b)  All purchases at the marina concession shall be on a cash basis. No credit may be extended to any person. 
(c)  The marina concession and the Allen Harbor Marina are town departments or agencies, and as such all purchases and contracts executed by them shall follow the normal purchasing and contracting procedures used by the town. 
(Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 4-11-1994; Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 11-5-2001) 
Chapter 14 - PERSONNEL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any personnel regulations or any ordinance establishing salaries of town officers and employees or civil service rules saved from repeal, § 1-9(3); administration, ch. 2; officers, § 2-46 et seq.; police department, ch. 15. 

Sec. 14-1. - Enumeration of policies generally. 
(a)  Employment in the town government shall be based on merit and fitness, free of personal and political considerations. 
(b)  Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation of the town government. 
(c)  Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and compensated on a uniform basis. 
(d)  Appointments, promotions and other actions requiring the application of the merit principle shall be based on tests and evaluations. 
(e)  High morale shall be maintained by fair administration of this chapter and by every consideration of the rights and interests of employees consistent with the best interests of the public and the town. 
(f)  Tenure of employees covered by this chapter shall be subject to good behavior, the satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the performance of work and the availability of funds. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Classified and exempt services generally. 
(a)  Classification. All officers and positions of the town are divided into the classified service and the exempt service. 
(b)  Exempt service. The exempt service shall include the following: 
(1)  All elected officials and members of boards and commissions. 
(2)  The town manager; town solicitor; town clerk; directors of public safety, public works, finance, welfare, recreation, personnel and planning; health officer; tax assessor; town engineer; comptroller; deputy town clerk; and building official. 
(3)  Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without pay. 
(4)  Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional service. 
(5)  Positions involving seasonal or part-time employment or which consist of unskilled work, as may be specifically placed in the exempt service by the personnel rules. 
(6)  Positions under the control of the school committee. 
(c)  Classified service. The classified service shall include all other positions in the town service that are not specifically placed in the exempt service by this chapter. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Determination of class; applicability of remainder of chapter. 
(a)  The class in which each town employee shall have status shall be determined in the manner provided in section 14-8. 
(b)  The following sections of this chapter apply only to the classified service, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Personnel director. 
    The personnel program established by this chapter shall be administered by a personnel director who shall be the manager or a person appointed by the manager. The personnel director shall: 
(1)  Attend all meetings of the personnel board. 
(2)  Administer all the sections of this chapter and the provisions of the personnel rules. 
(3)  Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the personnel rules. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-4) 
Cross reference- Officers, § 2-46 et seq. 
Sec. 14-5. - Contracts with consultants authorized. 
    The town council, upon recommendation of the personnel director and the town manager, may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of such technical services as may be desired in the establishment and operations of the personnel program. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-5) 
Sec. 14-6. - Personnel board. 
(a)  Composition; term; vacancies; chair. There shall be a personnel board which shall consist of three members to be appointed by the council for terms of three years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term. The board shall elect a chair from among its members. 
(b)  Auxiliary member. The town council shall have the right to name an auxiliary or fourth member to the personnel board who shall sit as an active member of the board when and if a regular member is unable to serve at any hearing. Such auxiliary or fourth member of the board shall serve upon the request of the chair of the board. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-6) 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-216 et seq. 
Sec. 14-7. - Rules. 
    The personnel director shall draft such rules as may be necessary to carry out this chapter. The draft of such rules shall be submitted to the town manager for approval. These rules, when approved by the town manager, shall be submitted for adoption by resolution of the town council. The rules shall have the force and effect of law. Amendments to the rules shall be made in accordance with the procedure in this section. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-7) 
Sec. 14-8. - Classification. 
(a)  Initial plan. The personnel director shall make or have made an analysis of the duties and responsibilities of all positions in the town's classified service, and the director shall recommend to the town manager a job classification plan for the town manager's approval and submission to the town council. Each position in the classified service shall be assigned to a job class on the basis of the kind and level of its duties and responsibilities, to the end that all positions in the same class shall be sufficiently alike to permit use of a single descriptive title, the same qualifications requirements, the same test of competence and the same pay scale. A job class may contain one position or more than one position. 
(b)  Council approval. Within 60 days after the recommended initial classification plan has been approved by the town manager and submitted to the council, the council shall approve a classification plan, and the director shall thereafter allocate each position to its appropriate class. 
(c)  Revision. The initial classification plan shall be revised from time to time as changing conditions require, upon recommendations of the personnel director and the town manager and with the approval of the council. Such revisions may consist of the addition, abolishment, consolidation, division or amendment of existing classes. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-8) 
Sec. 14-9. - Compensation. 
(a)  Pay plan and rules for administration. The personnel director, under the direction of the town manager and in consultation with the finance officer, shall prepare a pay plan for town employees and rules for its administration. The rate or range for each class shall be such as to reflect the differences in duties and responsibilities and shall be related to compensation for comparable positions in other places of public and private employment. 
(b)  Council approval of pay plan. The personnel director shall submit the pay plan and the rules for its administration to the town manager for approval and submission to the council. The council may adopt the plan and the rules, with or without amendment. All amendments shall apply uniformly to all positions within the same class. 
(c)  Assignment of job classes to pay ranges. After the pay plan and the rules for its administration have been adopted by the council, the personnel director shall assign each job class to one of the pay ranges provided in the pay plan. 
(d)  Amendments to pay plan. The pay plan may be amended from time to time as circumstances require, either through adjustment of rates or by reassignment of job classes to different pay ranges. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-9) 
Sec. 14-10. - Appointments, promotions and veteran's preference. 
(a)  Original appointments based on competitive examinations. Original appointments to vacancies in town employment shall be based on merit as determined by competitive examinations. 
(b)  Form of examinations. Examinations shall be in such form as will fairly test the abilities and aptitudes of candidates for the duties to be performed and may not include any inquiry into the political or religious affiliations or race of any candidate. 
(c)  Qualified candidates on eligible list. Candidates who qualify for employment shall be placed on an eligible list for the appropriate job class in the rank order of the grades they obtained on the examination. 
(d)  Preference to veterans. Preference in entrance examinations, but not in promotion, shall be granted to qualified persons who have been members of the armed forces of the United States in time of war and who seek to enter the service of the town within five years immediately following such persons' honorable discharge from military service. Such preference shall be in the form of points added to the final grades of such persons, provided that such persons first achieve a passing grade. The preference may be as much as five points for nondisabled veterans and as much as ten points for persons currently receiving compensation from the U.S. Veteran's Administration for war-service-incurred disabilities. The rank order of such persons among other eligibles shall be determined on the basis of such persons' augmented rating. 
(e)  Promotions filling vacancies. Vacancies in positions above the entrance level shall be filled by promotion whenever, in the judgment of the personnel director, it is in the best interests of the town to do so, and promotions shall be on a competitive basis. 
(f)  Temporary appointments. Pending the availability of an eligible list determined by the personnel director to be appropriate for a class, vacancies may be filled by temporary appointment. Such appointments shall have a maximum duration of six months and may not continue beyond one pay period after the establishment of an appropriate eligible list. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-10) 
Sec. 14-11. - Eligible lists. 
(a)  Generally. For the town's classified service, eligible lists, in the order of priority, shall be reemployment lists, promotional eligible lists and original appointment eligible lists. 
(b)  Reemployment. Reemployment lists shall contain the names of permanent employees laid off in good standing for lack of funds or work. 
(c)  Promotional and original appointment. Promotional eligible lists and original appointment eligible lists shall be created as provided in section 14-10. 
(d)  Reinstatement of probationary employees. Probationary employees laid off for lack of work or lack of funds and probationary employees who resign and whose resignations are withdrawn within one year, with the approval of the appointing authority and the personnel director, may have such probationary employees' names restored to the eligible lists from which appointments were originally made. 
(e)  Selection of candidates for appointment. When an appointment is to be made to a vacancy, the personnel director shall submit to the appointing authority the names of the three persons ranked highest on the appropriate list who have indicated willingness to accept appointment. When more than one vacancy is to be filled, the number of names submitted shall equal the number of vacancies plus two. 
(f)  Administration. Policies and procedures for administering eligible lists shall be provided in the personnel rules, covering the duration, cancellation, replacement and consolidation of such lists and the removal or suspension of the names of eligibles therefrom. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-11) 
Sec. 14-12. - Probation. 
(a)  Term. Town employees appointed from original appointment eligible lists or from promotional eligible lists shall be subject to a period of probation. The regular period of probation shall be six months, provided that the personnel rules may specify a longer or shorter period of probation for certain designated job classes or for extension of the probation period in individual cases. No probationary period may extend beyond 18 months. 
(b)  Evaluation of work and conduct. The work and conduct of probationary employees shall be subject to close scrutiny and evaluation, and if found to be below standards satisfactory to the appointing authority, the appointing authority may remove or demote the probationer at any time during the probationary period. Such removal or demotion shall not be subject to review or appeal. 
(c)  Grant of permanent status. An employee shall be retained beyond the end of the probationary period and granted permanent status only if the appointing authority affirms that the services of the employee have been found to be satisfactory and recommends that the employee be given permanent status. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-12) 
Sec. 14-13. - Hours of work; leaves of absence. 
    Rules shall be adopted prescribing hours of work and the conditions and length of time for which leaves of absence with pay and leaves of absence without pay may be granted by the town. These shall cover, among others, vacation, sick leave and leave for military service. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-13) 
Sec. 14-14. - Separations. 
    The tenure of every town employee shall be conditioned on good behavior and the satisfactory performance of duties. Any employee may be temporarily separated by layoff or suspension or permanently separated by resignation or dismissal. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-14) 
Sec. 14-15. - Layoffs. 
    Whenever there is lack of work or lack of funds requiring reductions in the number of employees in a department or division of the town government, the required reduction shall be made in such job classes as the department head may designate. Within each affected job class, all temporary employees shall be laid off before probationary employees, and all probationary employees shall be laid off before permanent employees. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-15) 
Sec. 14-16. - Suspensions. 
    When, in the judgment of an appointing authority, a town employee's work performance or conduct justifies disciplinary action short of dismissal, the employee may be suspended without pay. A suspended employee may not request a hearing before the personnel board unless the suspension is for more than 15 working days or unless the employee has already received a previous suspension within the six months immediately prior thereto. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-16) 
Sec. 14-17. - Dismissal; demotion. 
    A permanent town employee may be dismissed or demoted whenever, in the judgment of the appointing authority, the employee's work or misconduct so warrants. When the appointing authority decides to take such action, the appointing authority shall file with the employee and the personnel board a written notification containing a statement of the substantial reasons for the action. The employee shall be notified not later than the effective date of the action. The notice shall inform the employee that the employee shall be allowed two calendar weeks from the effective date of the action to file a reply with the appointing authority and the personnel board and to request a hearing before the personnel board. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-17) 
Sec. 14-18. - Hearings requested by employees. 
(a)  If the employee files a reply and requests a hearing within the period prescribed in section 14-17, the personnel board shall schedule a hearing. At the discretion of the employee, the hearing may be private or open to the public. 
(b)  In conducting a hearing, the proceedings shall be informal and it shall be assumed that the action complained of was taken in good faith unless proved otherwise. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-18) 
Sec. 14-19. - Findings by the personnel board in disciplinary actions. 
    If the personnel board finds the action of the appointing authority taken pursuant to section 14-17 was based on political, religious or racial prejudice or that the appointing authority failed to follow the proper procedure outlined in section 14-17, the employee shall be reinstated to the former position without loss of pay. In other cases wherein the personnel board does not sustain the action of the appointing authority, the personnel board's findings and recommendations shall be advisory in nature, and the appointing authority may affirm the original action or modify it pursuant to the personnel board's recommendations. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-19) 
Sec. 14-20. - Resignation. 
(a)  A town employee may resign by filing such employee's reasons with the appointing authority. 
(b)  An employee resigning in good standing may be reinstated to any position in the same class if there is need for such employee's services within two years after the date of resignation. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-20) 
Sec. 14-21. - Records to be kept by personnel director. 
    The personnel director shall maintain adequate records of the proceedings of the personnel board and of the personnel director's own official acts, the examination record of every candidate and the employment record of every employee. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-21) 
Sec. 14-22. - Witnesses for investigations and hearings. 
    During the course of any investigation or hearing, the personnel board or the personnel director may request any town employee to attend and give witness. Any employee refusing to do so may be subject to disciplinary action as provided in sections 14-14 through 14-20. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-22) 
Sec. 14-23. - Political considerations and activities generally. 
    Town employees in the classified service shall be selected without regard to political considerations, may not be required to contribute to any political purpose and may not engage in improper political activity. The personnel rules shall define the scope of improper political activity. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-23) 
Sec. 14-24. - Discrimination. 
    There shall be no discrimination against any person seeking employment or employed in the classified service of the town because of any considerations of political or religious affiliation or belief or race, sex or marital status. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-5-24) 
Sec. 14-25. - Whistleblower complaints. 
(a)  Introduction. 
(1)  The town is committed to the prevention deterrence, detection and investigation of all forms of fraud and abuse through a reporting system which shall include an anonymous hotline and internet based contact center so that any individual can report suspicious activities. Complaints may be made by employees and non-employees alike. The complainant has the option to have the complaint processed internally (through town or school committee staff) or externally (through an independent screening committee). 
(2)  The intent of this section is to receive, track and resolve complaints about the delivery of government services, wasteful and inefficient government practices, misuse of government funds, or improper activities by, employees and contractors. The screening committee monitors the program ensuring that all complaints received by town or school department officials directly, or through the toll free telephone number or the internet will be collected in a central secure database for reporting, processing and assessment purposes. When appropriate, the screening committee causes investigations and attempts to resolve individual complaints. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized officer shall be the screening committee with full authority over the third party reporting system. 
    Complaint means a report of an alleged prohibited conduct. 
    Prohibited conduct means any activity by a town or school employee and/or appointed official that is undertaken in the performance of the employee's duties, or otherwise, and that: 
(1)  Is in violation of any municipal, state or federal policy, ordinance, law or regulation, including, but not limited to, corruption, malfeasance, bribery, theft of government property, fraudulent claims, fraud, coercion, conversion, malicious prosecution, misuse of government property, or willful omission to perform duty, or 
(2)  Involves gross misconduct or gross inefficiency. 
(3)  For purposes of this section such conduct does not include allegations of ethical misconduct or violations of rights under the Constitutions of the United States or the State of Rhode Island. Such complaints are more properly brought before the state ethics commission or state or federal courts. 
    Screening committee shall be comprised of two members of the town audit committee, who shall serve staggered two-year terms, one of whom shall be the school committee appointee. A screening committee member may designate another member of the audit committee as an alternate to act on his/her behalf if he/she is temporarily unable to perform for any reason (e.g. illness). 
    System administrator shall be the town's information technology administrator. The system administrator's duties shall be limited to working with the third party reporting system's agent to set-up additional users as required, request password changes and resolve technical issues. The system administrator shall not have access to reports of complaints unless specifically authorized by the authorized officer. 
    Whistleblower means any individual making a complaint. 
(c)  Town or school department employee reporting of allegations of suspected prohibited conduct. 
(1)  Normally, a complaint made by a town or school department employee should be made to the reporting employee's immediate supervisor or to the town manager or superintendent of schools. However, in the interest of confidentiality and anonymity, when there is a potential conflict of interest, when the alleged prohibited conduct involves the town manager or superintendent of schools or for other reasons, such reports may be made directly to the screening committee. 
a.  Filing a complaint. Any employee of the town or school department who becomes aware of information that reasonably leads him/her to a good faith belief that any prohibited conduct has taken place may either: 
1.  Report the suspected prohibited conduct, directly to his/her supervisor or to the town manager or superintendent of schools. 
2.  Communicate the complaint directly to the screening committee. 
(2)  All complaints should be made in writing so as to assure a clear understanding of the issues raised, but also may be made orally. Such complaints should be factual rather than speculative or conclusory, and contain as much specific information as possible to allow for proper assessment of the nature, extent and urgency of preliminary investigative procedures. 
(3)  Complaints to supervisors and to the town manager and superintendent of schools. 
a.  Supervisors. A supervisor or department head who receives any complaint shall immediately forward the information to the town manager or superintendent of schools, unless the town manager or superintendent of schools is alleged to be involved in the prohibited conduct, in which case the supervisor or department head shall immediately forward the information to the screening committee. 
b.  Town manager or superintendent of schools. If a town employee believes his/her supervisor is involved in the prohibited conduct, he/she may communicate the complaint directly to the town manager or superintendent of schools, unless the town manager or superintendent of schools is alleged to be involved in the prohibited conduct, in which case he/she shall communicate the complaint directly to the screening committee. 
(4)  Anonymous reporting. Any town or school department employee who becomes aware of information that reasonably leads him/her to a good faith belief that any prohibited conduct has taken place may anonymously report that information directly to the screening committee, using the toll free telephone number or the internet based reporting system established pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Non-employee reporting allegations of suspected prohibited conduct. 
(1)  Non-employees may file a complaint directly with the town manager or superintendent of schools. However, in the interest of confidentiality and anonymity, when there is a potential conflict of interest, when the alleged prohibited conduct involves the town manager or superintendent of schools or for other reasons, such complaint may be made directly to the screening committee. 
(2)  Filing a complaint. Any non-employee who becomes aware of information that reasonably leads him/her to a good faith belief that any prohibited conduct has taken place may either: 
a.  Report the suspected prohibited conduct, directly to the town manager or superintendent of schools; or 
b.  Communicate the complaint directly to the screening committee. 
(3)  All complaints should be made in writing so as to assure a clear understanding of the issues raised, but may be made orally. Such complaints should be factual rather than speculative or conclusory, and contain as much specific information as possible to allow for proper assessment of the nature, extent and urgency of preliminary investigative procedures. 
(4)  Anonymous reporting. Nonemployees who become aware of information that reasonably leads him/her to a good faith belief that any prohibited conduct has taken place may anonymously report that information directly to the screening committee, using a best practice recording system established pursuant to this section. 
(e)  Processing complaints. 
(1)  In the interest of fairness and to avoid publication of erroneous or false charges, it is imperative that the screening committee maintain the highest degree of confidentiality with respect to all complaints and the identity of the person making the complaint, consistent with their obligations with respect to investigation and resolution of the complaint. 
a.  The screening committee shall have oversight authority to ensure that all complaints are processed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
b.  Screening and initial investigation. 
1.  The screening committee shall cause all complaints to be logged into the internet based reporting system established pursuant to this section and consistent with the terms of this section, shall cause all complaints to be screened for credibility and investigated. 
2.  No individual alleged to be involved in any prohibited conduct in any complaint will be designated to receive or investigate any such complaint. 
3.  Investigations should be initiated only after preliminary determination that the complaint, if true, constitute prohibited conduct and either: 
A.  The allegation is accompanied by information specific enough to be investigated, or 
B.  The allegation has or directly points to corroborating evidence that can be investigated. Such evidence may be oral or documentary. 
4.  Consistent with the terms of this section, the town manager or superintendent of schools or any other official designated to receive and investigate a complaint shall cause an investigation of the complaint referred to him or her to be conducted as expeditiously as practicable, in any case no later than 30 days after receipt of the complaint. The allegations contained in a complaint shall be kept as confidential as practicable given the need to investigate thoroughly and to interview all potential witnesses. The identity of the person making the complaint shall be kept confidential to the extent it is practicable to do so during the investigation. In cases where a Whistleblower desires anonymity, their anonymity shall be protected to the best of the investigating parties' abilities. The town manager or superintendent of schools may request the assistance or advice of the screening committee in cases in which he/she believes it is necessary or appropriate to do so. 
5.  Consistent with the terms of this section, the screening committee shall cause the investigation of any complaint involving the town manager or superintendent of schools to be conducted promptly. 
A.  Should a complaint involving a member of the screening committee be received by the other member of the screening committee or another member of the audit committee, the recipient shall ensure that the complaint is entered into the secure internet database. 
B.  The screening committee member against whom the complaint is filed shall recuse himself or herself and designate another member of the audit committee pursuant to subsection (b) to investigate and resolve said complaint. 
6.  The screening committee shall cause an initial notification of receipt of a complaint to be issued to each whistleblower. The screening committee shall cause a procedure to be established to maintain contact with each whistleblower and to allow the whistleblower to anonymously and securely provide documents or additional evidence to substantiate their complaint. 
7.  If practicable, any findings as to whether or not prohibited conduct has occurred will be communicated to the person or persons alleged to have violated the policy and to the whistleblower, consistent with all applicable personnel polices, rules, contracts and regulations. 
8.  All town and school department employees and officials have a duty to cooperate fully in any investigation conducted hereunder. 
9.  If the screening committee finds that a complaint involving the town manager or superintendent of schools has merit and is supported by documentary or oral evidence, the screening committee shall refer the matter either to the town council or school committee, in executive session. 
(f)  Reporting and documentation. 
(1)  Record of complaints. The screening committee shall cause a record of all complaints submitted pursuant to this section to be retained for a period of no less than four years. 
(2)  Log of complaints. The town manager or superintendent of schools or any other official designated to receive and investigate a complaint pursuant to this section shall submit each complaint, in writing, to the screening committee no later than 14 business days after receipt of each complaint containing, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  A specific reference identification of each complaint; 
b.  The nature of the allegation; 
c.  The action to be taken; and 
d.  A detailed assessment of credibility of the complaint, including reasons for such assessment. 
(3)  Status report. The town manager or superintendent of schools shall submit in writing, a follow-up status report to the screening committee no later than 60 days after receipt of any complaint detailing all conclusions, actions taken and any further action or investigation planned or made. The town manager or superintendent of schools shall continue to submit monthly status reports until the conclusion of the investigation. 
(4)  The list of complaints received and status reports required in this section shall contain sufficient detail and shall include copies of all documents received or referenced in any complaint. The town manager or superintendent of schools or any other official designated to receive and investigate a complaint will promptly provide any further information or documents that the screening committee may from time to time request. 
(5)  All of the reporting obligations in this section may be fulfilled by utilizing a third party vendor intake and tracking system. 
(6)  All reporting obligations in this section will be made in compliance with all applicable confidentiality agreements and guarantees. 
(g)  Results of investigation. 
(1)  The screening committee shall provide reports of all complaints received and actions taken at least semi-annually, either to the town council or school committee, noting the need for executive session as required. 
(2)  If an investigation leads the screening committee, the town manager or superintendent of schools or other official designated to investigate a complaint, to conclude that a crime has probably been committed; the results of the investigation shall be reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency. The town solicitor should normally be the conduit for communications with law enforcement agencies. 
(3)  Violations of this policy may result in remedial or corrective action and/or in disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment consistent with the terms of any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(h)  No retaliation/intentionally making false reports. 
(1)  Any employee or individual who files in good faith a complaint or who cooperates in an investigation of a whistleblower complaint shall not be subject to any form of retaliation, harassment, intimidation or adverse consequences. 
(2)  No employee shall make a complaint he/she knows, or has reason to know, to be false. 
(3)  Violations of this section may result in disciplinary action which may include termination of employment consistent with the terms of any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(i)  No harassment. 
(1)  Nothing in this policy is intended to condone or permit harassment, intimidation or slander. 
(j)  Compliance with law. 
(1)  This section is intended to be consistent with R.I.G.L. 28-60-1 et seq. 
(2)  When an individual files a complaint to an appropriate authority pursuant to this section, that report is known as a protected disclosure. The rights of employees and individuals when making a protected disclosure are covered by R.I.G.L. 28-60-1 et seq. 
(k)  Adoption of whistleblower policy. 
(1)  Chapter VI personnel rules and regulations, responsibilities, discipline and complaint procedures shall be amended so as to be consistent with this section. This article shall be submitted to the school committee for a vote of affirmation as to its applicability to school department employees. 
(2)  The town shall establish and publish its whistleblower policy to implement this section. The town may authorize a third party vendor to establish and operate a toll free telephone number and internet based contact center for the submission, tracking, and routing of complaints. All complaints shall be logged into this system. The audit committee shall assist the town and school department with the implementation of any third party vendor system and the whistleblower policy. Any town or school department employee, administrator, department head or person who receives a complaint pursuant to this section shall process that complaint according to the procedures outlined in the whistleblower policy. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 11-21, §§ 1-3, 11-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-26. - Organization of the fire department. 
(a)  Introduction. 
(1)  The town stands in fiscal crisis and has incurred over $3.44 million in structural losses of state aid since FY2008, not including reductions in unrestricted state aid to the school department. 
(2)  The town incurred over $2.1 million of losses in state aid in FY2012 alone, and it anticipates having to expend upwards of $721,000.00 from its general fund balance in FY2012 to balance the budget. 
(3)  The town's unfunded liability arising out of the other post employment benefits ("OPEB") obligates the town to provide to current and future retirees is $34,510,724.00 and growing, and $10,718,289.00 (or 31%) of that unfunded debt is attributable to the town's fire department. 
(4)  Municipal services have been cut to minimize costs, yet taxes have consistently increased by levels that residents cannot and should not have to endure. Most paid fire departments in America operate with a three-division structure for line firefighting and rescue personnel. 
(5)  The town can realize an estimated reduction in costs of $1.2 million in its first full year of implementation by changing to a three-division structure in its line fire/rescue operations without any layoffs or reductions in salaries, with even greater savings expected through anticipated reductions in overtime costs and the town's annual required OPEB contribution. 
(6)  Scientific studies show that a three-division structure, operating in conjunction with a shift schedule in which firefighters are on-duty for 24 consecutive hours followed by 48 hours off-duty, enhances public safety and improves firefighter health and safety as compared with the division structure and shift schedule the town's firefighters currently follow. 
(7)  Paid firefighters would reduce their work days, on average, to 100 days per year on a three-division structure operating in conjunction with a 24 consecutive hours duty schedule. 
(8)  The town can increase the number of firefighters on duty by over 30 percent by having a three-division structure, and still eventually realize an estimated savings of over $1.2 million per year. 
(9)  Similar savings can only be realized by effecting drastic and unacceptable cuts in public safety and other essential town services, contrary to the public good and welfare. 
(10)  The same savings, efficiencies and level of protection to the town could only be realized in the fire department by changing the nature of fire/rescue operations in the town, including changing from an all-professional fire department to one that includes volunteers, call persons and private contractors. 
(11)  The citizens of the town already bear a property tax burden that is among the highest in the state per capita and cannot afford another large tax increase. 
(b)  Effective March 1, 2012, the town fire department shall convert and reorganize into a three-division organizational structure for all full-time, paid line personnel, including the positions of deputy chief, fire and rescue captain, fire and rescue lieutenant, rescue driver, firefighter/rescueman/EMT-C, firefighter/rescueman, and fire alarm operator. Each of the three fire/rescue divisions shall consist of approximately 1/3 of the department's line firefighting and rescue personnel. Individuals who are not permanently assigned to a position within a division shall act as floaters pursuant to the parties' collective bargaining agreement. The department shall maintain a separate fire prevention bureau, training division, fire alarm division and automotive repair division, which may or may not be staffed with full-time personnel as determined by the town council and/or the town manager from time to time. The department will continue to provide fire/rescue services 24 hours per day, seven days per week. 
(c)  Effective March 1, 2012, unless a different arrangement is incorporated into an agreement with the collective bargaining representative of affected employees, the same annual salaries increased by ten percent shall be provided; the same number of hours of paid sick leave, paid vacation leave and other paid time off shall accrue to firefighters per week or month or year of service or event as currently is provided by the parties' collective bargaining agreement; and, overtime pay shall be given as prescribed by the federal Fair Labor Standards Act. 
(d)  Effective March 1, 2012, unless otherwise agreed between the town and the collective bargaining representative of affected employees, the three line firefighting/rescue divisions will operate on a regular schedule consisting of one ten-hour day tour on-duty followed by one fourteen-hour night tour on-duty, followed by one 48-hour period off-duty. 
(e)  The town manager is urged and supported in exploring options and seeking bids for privatization of any or all functions of the fire department and for developing call and volunteer forces to perform some or all fire/rescue services. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 1-30-2012) 
Chapter 15 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public safety, § 813. 
Cross reference- Powers and duties of police department for enforcement of noise, § 8-96; authority of police department to collect and receive fines, § 11-1; personnel, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Qualifications of law enforcement agents regarding firearms, G.L. 1956, §§ 11-47-15.1-11-47-18; qualifications of police officers, G.L. 1956, § 42-28.2-8; police officers' bill of rights, G.L. 1956, § 42-28.6-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-1-15-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 15-11. - Established. 
    The town council hereby establishes a permanent police force. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-1) 
Sec. 15-12. - Composition. 
    The police department shall consist of a chief of police and such additional personnel of other ranks and grades as the town manager may from time to time determine. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-2) 
Sec. 15-13. - Microfilming of records. 
(a)  The police department is authorized from time to time to microfilm all original reports, data or other records required to be kept by section 15-36 as part of the regular course of its business and recordkeeping procedures. All microfilms shall be retained by the police department as part of its permanent records. 
(b)  After completion of microfilming of original records, such originals shall be put in storage for safekeeping in such place as may be decided by the chief of the police department. After a period of two years, such original records may be destroyed by the police department. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-8.1) 
State Law reference- Microfilming of records in North Kingstown, G.L. 1956, § 45-7-7. 
Sec. 15-14. - Formulation of training program; list of qualifications for certain appointments; appointment of special officers. 
    The chief of police may formulate, under the direction of the director of public safety and the town manager, a program of training within the police department and for future officers and may incur such expense within the appropriation therefor as may be approved by the town manager. The chief of police shall keep on file printed lists of the qualifications necessary for appointment to the department for the use of any and all applicants for training or for appointment to the force. The director of public safety, with the approval of the town manager, may appoint certain special officers as may be deemed necessary to supplement the regular members of the police department, but such officers shall not be a part of the permanent police force. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-9) 
Sec. 15-15. - Appointment of members generally. 
    Each member of the police department and all other personnel of the department shall be appointed by the director of public safety, subject to the approval of the town manager, pursuant to law and ordinance, and with the approval and recommendation of the chief of police. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-10) 
Sec. 15-16. - Provisional appointments. 
(a)  Generally. Each appointment of a member of the permanent police force shall be provisional for a period of one year, and during such period each appointee shall temporarily possess all the powers of the position to which appointed, but the appointee shall not be a member of the permanent police force during such probationary period. 
(b)  Termination. Any provisional appointment, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, may be terminated by the director of public safety at any time during such one-year period following a written recommendation by the chief of police. 
(c)  Change to permanent status. At the end of one year, a provisional appointee shall become a member of the permanent police force if ordered by the director of public safety. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 14-1-11-14-1-13) 
Sec. 15-17. - Suspension or reduction in rank. 
    The chief of police and any member of the permanent police force may be suspended by the director of public safety and shall be subject to reduction in rank or to removal from office by the director of public safety for misconduct, incapacity, neglect of duty or insubordination of such a character as the director of public safety may deem a disqualification for such office. All such reductions or removals shall be by the director of public safety upon charges made in writing, if requested by any such officer, and of which the officer complained of shall have notice and opportunity at a time appointed to be heard on the charges. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-14) 
Sec. 15-18. - Administration and management generally. 
    All matters relating to police administration shall be considered by the director of public safety, who with the police chief shall be responsible to the town manager for administration and management of the police department. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-15) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 15-19. - Assignment of members. 
    Members of the police department may be assigned to patrol, traffic, detective or other duties in the discretion of the chief of police, and the chief may change such designations. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-17) 
Sec. 15-20. - Devotion to duty. 
    The chief of police and each member of the permanent police force shall devote full time to police department duties and shall not engage in any other business, profession or occupation, either directly or indirectly, unless with the approval of the director of public safety. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-18) 
Sec. 15-21. - Uniform. 
    Every member of the permanent police force while on duty shall wear a uniform which shall comply with the rules and regulations. The chief of police may issue specific orders authorizing the performance of certain duties while not in uniform. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-19) 
Sec. 15-22. - Badge. 
    Each member of the police department and special officers of the department shall wear a suitable badge to be furnished by the town. Any member of the department or other officer who shall lose or destroy the badge or other property furnished by the town shall be required to pay the cost of replacement. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-20) 
Sec. 15-23. - Accounting for town property upon termination of service. 
    Whenever any member of the police department or other officer shall terminate services for any reason, the member shall deliver the badge and all other town property in such person's possession to the chief of police, and all sums due such person shall be withheld pending the final settlement. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-21) 
Sec. 15-24. - Compensation of members. 
    All regular and special police officers, constables and other town police employees shall receive such compensation within the appropriation therefor as the town manager may determine. Such compensation shall be in lieu of all special fees, rewards or remuneration arising from the police service. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-22) 
Sec. 15-25. - Allowance for automobile expenses. 
    Each member or employee of the police department using such member's or employee's own automobile in the service of the town shall be paid such allowance for the expense of gasoline, oil, tires and depreciation as the town manager may determine and shall be required to furnish insurance in such amounts as the town manager may prescribe. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-23) 
Sec. 15-26. - Disposition of funds collected. 
    All monies arising out of police department operations that may be collected by any member of the department shall be deposited with the town treasurer at least once each week. The chief of police shall file with each deposit a statement showing in detail the source of such receipt. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-24) 
Sec. 15-27. - Police matron. 
    The director of public safety, with approval of the town manager, may appoint a police matron or police officer, either on a full-time or a part-time basis or as a special officer, without regard to qualifications as required for members of the permanent police force. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-25) 
Cross reference- Officers, § 2-46 et seq. 
Secs. 15-28-15-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POLICE CHIEF[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Chief of police, § 813(d). 
Cross reference- Officers, § 2-46 et seq. 

Sec. 15-31. - Duties generally. 
    The head of the police department shall be the chief of police. The chief of police and police department shall enforce the laws of the state, the sections of this Code and the provisions of other town ordinances and shall exercise and perform the powers and duties by law imposed upon and required of the police department and the chief of police in the several towns of the state. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-3) 
Sec. 15-32. - Appointment; tenure; qualifications. 
    The chief of police shall be appointed by the director of public safety, with the approval of the town manager, and shall hold office for an indefinite term. Any person appointed as chief of police shall have graduated from high school and shall possess all other qualifications for a member of the police department, except that the maximum age limit shall not apply. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-4) 
Sec. 15-33. - Direct management and control of department. 
    The chief of police shall be the executive officer of the police department and shall have direct control and management of all members and other personnel of the department in the lawful exercise of department personnel and members' duties, according to law. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-5) 
Sec. 15-34. - Promulgation of rules and regulations; maintenance of discipline. 
    The chief of police shall adopt, subject to the approval of the director of public safety and the town manager, reasonable rules and regulations covering government, discipline, uniforms and equipment of police officers and fixing such officers' duties and prescribing penalties for violations of any of such rules and regulations. The chief of police shall maintain discipline so as to secure complete efficiency in the department and may, with the approval of the director of public safety, impose penalties involving loss of pay or extra hours of duty. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-6) 
Sec. 15-35. - Custody and control of property and equipment. 
    The chief of police shall have custody, care and control of all property and equipment of the police department, subject to the direction of the director of public safety and the town manager. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-7) 
Sec. 15-36. - Records and reports. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep accurate and complete records of all complaints, arrests, convictions and traffic violations and the disposition of each case handled by the police department. The chief of police shall also keep a record of the accomplishments and performance of each police officer. The chief of police shall submit to the director of public safety and the town manager an annual report of all transactions and activities of the department. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-8) 
Sec. 15-37. - Acting chief. 
    If a vacancy occurs in the office of chief of police, the director of public safety, with approval of the town manager, shall designate an officer of the police department to be acting chief, and the person so designated shall exercise the authority of the chief until a chief of police has been appointed. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 14-1-16) 
Secs. 15-38-15-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE OFFICERS' DISABILITY PENSIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 15-50. - Definitions. 
    The words, terms and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings as ascribed to them in the pension plan covering police officers of the town (referred to as "the pension plan"). 
(Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 6-19-1995) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-51. - Disability retirement. 
(a)  Occupational disability. If a participant of the police officers' pension plan becomes totally and permanently disabled as the natural and proximate result of an illness contracted or injury sustained in the performance of the participant's duties, the participant shall be entitled or may be required by the town to retire due to an occupational disability. The committee shall set a hearing date for the determination of eligibility to retire pursuant to this article. At the hearing, the participant or, if retirement is at the instance of the town, the town shall present such information believed necessary to prove the participant's total and permanent disability. The participant shall also be required to sign a medical authorization form allowing a medical examination and any related tests. The committee may, in its discretion, require the participant to be examined by up to three physicians engaged by the committee. Any physician engaged by the committee shall certify to the committee whether the participant is totally and permanently disabled and whether such disability resulted from an illness contracted or injury sustained in the performance of duties. If, at any time, the committee has reason to believe that a participant who has retired pursuant to this article is not totally and permanently disabled, the committee may require the participant to sign a medical authorization form and to be examined by up to three physicians engaged by the committee. Any physician engaged by the committee shall certify to the committee whether the participant is totally and permanently disabled and whether such disability resulted from an illness contracted or injury sustained in the performance of duties. 
(b)  Occupational disability benefit. The monthly occupational disability benefit payable to a participant who becomes entitled thereto according to this article shall be an amount equal to 66 2/3 percent of the participant's income (referred to as "average compensation") as specified in the pension plan, as such plan may be amended from time to time. The benefit shall be payable monthly and shall continue until the earlier of (i) the participant's date of death or, (ii) the first day of the month following a determination that the participant has recovered from the disability. The occupational disability benefits established in this subsection are to be administered through the pension plan and are not in addition to the benefits provided under the pension plan. The benefits provided by this article are in lieu of workers' compensation benefits which are not available to retirees receiving benefits pursuant to this article. The amount of the benefit shall not be determined or affected in any way by age or length of service. 
(c)  Annual certification of disability. The committee may require, on an annual basis, any participant who has retired pursuant to this article to sign a medical authorization form and to submit to a medical examination and any related tests. The committee may engage up to three physicians to determine whether the participant continues to be totally and permanently disabled from an occupational cause. If any participant under the minimum age of retirement refuses to submit to a medical examination in any year by a physician designated by the committee, the participant's retirement allowance may be discontinued until the withdrawal of such refusal. If such refusal continues for one year after a request has been made, all of the participant's rights in and to benefits provided under this article may be revoked by the committee. 
(d)  Recovery from disability; gainful employment. If it is determined that a participant who retired pursuant to this article is no longer totally and permanently disabled and is capable of engaging in gainful employment, the participant's name shall be placed on such appropriate lists of candidates as are prepared for appointment to positions for which the participant is stated, by a physician engaged pursuant to this article, to be qualified, with a salary grade not less than that from which the participant was last retired. If a participant is engaged in gainful employment by the town or any other employer, the committee shall adjust and from time to time readjust the amount of the disability benefit to an amount which, when added to the amount of compensation then earnable by the participant, shall not exceed the rate of earnable compensation in force on the date of retirement. Any participant reinstated to active service according to this subsection shall be reinstated as a member and shall participate in the benefits of the retirement system and the pension plan to the same extent as any other member. 
(e)  Commencement of payments. Disability payments will commence no later than 60 days after the close of the plan year in which total and permanent disability is established as of a date determined by the plan administrator on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(f)  Recertification of certain prior retirees. Participants who, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, retired because of disability due to illnesses contracted or injuries sustained in the line of duty may elect to be recertified as disabled due to occupational disability under this article. Upon application by the participant for recertification, the committee shall have the option to require the participant to either submit to a medical examination by a physician appointed by the committee or, in the alternative, submit all of the existing medical records of the participant for examination and review by a physician appointed by the committee. Evidence of disability due to occupational injury will be determined by the evaluation of the physician who either examined the individual or reviewed and examined the individual's existing medical records. If the physician does not find evidence of disability due to occupational injury, the participant may appeal such finding, in which event the participant shall then be required to submit to a medical examination by three physicians appointed by the committee. Evidence of disability due to occupational injury will be determined by the evaluation of the majority of the physicians who examined the participant. 
(g)  Retroactive recertification. Any participant who elects recertification and is recertified under this article shall be deemed to be eligible under this article from the date of the participant's disabling injury or illness or January 1, 1988, whichever occurred later. 
(Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 6-19-1995; Ord. No. 95-10, § 1, 10-16-1995) 
Sec. 15-52. - Authority for article; construction and severability. 
    This article has been enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the town under G.L. 1956, § 45-19-19. It is intended to be entirely consistent with the police officers' pension plan and to be construed accordingly. If any provision of this article shall be unenforceable for any reason, the remainder of the article shall be unaffected and shall remain enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 6-19-1995) 
Sec. 15-53. - Effective date. 
    The entire article entitled "Police Officers' Disability Pensions," adopted on June 19, 1995, shall apply retroactively to January 1, 1988. 
(Ord. No. 95-10, § 2, 10-16-1995) 
Secs. 15-54-15-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Burglar and robbery alarm system businesses, G.L. 1956, § 5-57-1 et seq. 

Sec. 15-60. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to users and installers of burglar, holdup and automatic telephone dialer alarms within the town; to provide penalties for noncompliance; and to encourage the installation of protective alarm systems in dwellings and commercial structures. 
(Ord. No. 96-9, § 1, 6-10-1996) 
Sec. 15-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices or a single device, such as a solid state unit which may operate from a 110-volt AC line, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention to which police personnel are expected to respond. This includes all burglar alarms, holdup alarms and automatic telephone dialer alarms, but does not include smoke detectors which do not signal outside an alarmed premises or alarm systems on motor vehicles. 
    Alarm user means any person on whose premises any burglar, holdup and automatic telephone dialer alarm system is maintained within the town. 
    Automatic telephone dialing device means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
    Calendar year means the period commencing January 1 and ending December 31. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of such owner's or lessee's employees or agents. A false alarm does not include alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other normally infrequent violent natural conditions or acts of God. 
(Ord. No. 96-9, § 1, 6-10-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-62. - Registration of alarm systems. 
    Any person installing an alarm system other than a fire alarm within the town shall register with the police department within ten days of installation. Alarm users shall register alarm systems with the police department. 
(Ord. No. 96-9, § 1, 6-10-1996) 
Sec. 15-63. - Installation and requirements for alarm systems. 
(a)  Under this article, no alarm system shall be installed by other than a licensed person or other person meeting the requirements set forth in the state building and electrical codes. No alarm system shall be installed unless an electrical permit to install an alarm system has been obtained from the town building official or designated representative as required by the state building and electrical codes. 
(b)  Automatic telephone dialing devices in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall be programmed to a special telephone number which is to be designated by the chief of police. No new automatic dialing devices will be permitted. 
(c)  No person shall install or maintain an automatic telephone dialing device within the town terminating at any number other than the number referred to in subsection (b) of this section after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(d)  Every alarm system that sounds an audible signal which may be heard outside of the protected premises shall be equipped with a device which shall limit the duration of such audible signal to not more than 30 minutes. 
(e)  A maximum of three false alarms per calendar year shall be allowed from any alarm system of any person. Upon receipt of a fourth or fifth false alarm during the calendar year, the alarm user may be assessed a user fee by the chief of police in the amount of $50.00. Upon receipt of a sixth false alarm during the calendar year and for each subsequent false alarm in the calendar year, the alarm user may be assessed a user fee by the chief of police in the amount of $100.00. The fee shall be paid to the town. Alarms originating from any building owned by any federal, state or local government shall be exempt from the user fee requirement. The determination of whether a particular alarm was false shall be made by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 96-9, § 1, 6-10-1996) 
State Law reference- State building code, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-100.0 et seq.; state electrical code, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-100.1.5. 
Sec. 15-64. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be in violation of subsection 15-63(c) may be fined $100.00 for each violation. 
(b)  Any person who shall fail to pay a user fee assessed as provided in subsection 15-63(e) within 30 days of written notice thereof by the town shall be fined $100.00. Each day a user fee remains delinquent shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person found to be in violation of any other subsection or section of this article shall be fined $50.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 96-9, § 1, 6-10-1996) 
Sec. 15-65. - Responsibility of alarm user. 
    Under this article, it shall be the sole responsibility of the alarm user to notify the police department of the removal or discontinued use of an alarm system, and the alarm user shall maintain on file with the police department a current listing of the contact persons having access to the alarmed premises and knowledge of the alarm system operation registered pursuant to this article, and such shall be provided, in writing, within five days of such removal or discontinued use. 
(Ord. No. 96-9, § 1, 6-10-1996) 
Chapter 16 - SOIL AND EARTH REMOVAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Purpose. 
    For purposes of promoting health, safety or general welfare and in order to effect uniform regulation within the town for earth removal as defined in section 16-2, the town in this chapter provides for the regulation, control and licensing of earth removal, such power to be restricted and exercised in accordance with the Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Earth removal means the extraction or removal of any sand, gravel, loam, topsoil, stone, clay or shale from deposits on any tract of land, excluding extracting, removing, digging, mining or quarrying of limestone, limerock or granite and excluding operations of a sand and gravel plant in operation upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives and the immediately surrounding 20 acres of industrial-zoned land upon which such sand and gravel plant is located and also excluding earth removal involved in the process of grading land for the following: 
(1)  The construction of a building for which a building permit has been issued; such excavation shall be limited to 20,000 square feet and additional area needed to connect disturbed and undisturbed areas with a slope no greater than three horizontal to one vertical. 
(2)  The construction of a roadway. 
(3)  A subdivision in accordance with a plat plan provided by or in accord with an ordinance of any city or town or any duly authorized board of authority thereof. 
(4)  The removal of less than 20 cubic yards over a period of one year from any single parcel of land recorded as such. 
    Residential use means any zone in which no use except dwellings, including multifamily dwellings, is permitted without first obtaining a special exception from the zoning board of review. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-3. - Operating conditions. 
(a)  Earth removal operations shall be limited in a residential district to the period between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or Saturday, except a legal holiday. Earth removal on Sunday and on any legal holiday or for hours prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. may be authorized after a majority vote of the town council on the application for a special exception, which vote shall be at a regular meeting of the town council after the matter has been advertised in a local newspaper on the matter of the application of special exceptions. 
(b)  The lateral expansion of earth removal shall be prohibited within a distance of the greater of 25 feet of the boundary of the tract of land upon which earth removal is to be carried on adjacent to residential use property or within 50 feet of any dwelling. 
(c)  Fencing shall be provided where portions of the boundary of the tract of land upon which earth removal is being conducted are adjacent to developed residential property. Such fencing shall be five feet in height and effective to control access to the area in which such earth removal is being conducted. 
(d)  Calcium chloride or oil shall be applied to non-hard-surfaced roads to be used for vehicular ingress or egress to the tract of land and to the regularly traveled roads within such tract of land on which earth removal is to be conducted. 
(e)  Drainage shall be provided to prevent the permanent collection and stagnation of surface or underground waters and to prevent the flooding and erosion of surrounding property. 
(f)  In order to limit erosion and siltation, the following measures shall be taken: 
(1)  No vegetation shall be removed within 25 feet of the property line. 
(2)  Stripping of the site shall be limited to the area of immediate operations. 
(3)  A siltation basin shall be appropriately located to catch runoff and silt before the drainage leaves the property. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-4. - Licensing procedure. 
(a)  There shall be a submission to the building official and the building official's approval required of a plan prepared by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor in compliance with this chapter. The following plan shall set forth the existing contours of the tract of land, and be based upon classifications of preliminary samples of the material to be removed: 
(1)  The final contours of the tract of land upon completion of earth removal operations. 
(2)  The type of ground cover to be planted or applied upon completion of earth removal operations to effectively control wind and water erosion providing, if suitable fertile ground cover existed at the beginning of earth removal, enough of such ground cover to be held in reserve and reapplied for a minimum thickness of three inches. The area shall be seeded with perennial rye grass or other approved vegetation and maintained until the area is stabilized. 
(3)  Such maps and plans should include the area to be excavated as well as the surrounding area within 100 feet of the excavation, drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch, and with contours of not more than five feet also shown. 
(4)  Rehabilitation shall proceed as soon as operations are completed in any section of the excavation in order to minimize wind and water erosion. 
(5)  When earth removal ceases, all slopes shall remain at the natural angle of repose. 
(b)  There shall be a written opinion by a registered engineer that, upon completion of earth removal operations, all slopes on such tract as set forth in the plan referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall remain at the natural angle of repose. 
(c)  A bond, the amount of which shall be fixed by the town council, shall be submitted to ensure compliance with this section. 
(d)  The building official shall request a review by the town engineer of all documents submitted for licensure. The town engineer's written report shall be received and studied by the building official prior to issuance of the license. 
(e)  As a condition precedent to any earth removal as defined in this chapter, a license to be issued by the building official shall be obtained upon submission of the required documents and upon the building official's approval and the payment of an annual license fee in accordance with section 9-4, table III. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-5. - Variances. 
    Upon special application and after a showing that the literal enforcement of this chapter will work a hardship, the zoning board of review may grant an exception to any terms of such earth removal activity upon a finding that such exception will not result in a substantial depreciation of surrounding property. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-6. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from the decisions of the building official made pursuant to this chapter to the zoning board of review shall be taken in the same manner as other appeals to the zoning board, and the procedure as to notice and hearings shall be the same insofar as they are consistent with this chapter. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-7. - Revocation of license. 
    Soil and earth removal sites shall be inspected on a regular basis. If the operations are not proceeding in conformance with this chapter or the approved plan, the zoning board of review, after notice and hearing, shall revoke any license issued under the authority of this chapter for violation of any of the sections of this chapter. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-8. - Violations. 
(a)  If there is not compliance with the plan set forth as required in this chapter, the town shall undertake and complete such plan, and the owner of the tract of land shall reimburse the town for its necessary expenses in connection with the plan, and the town shall have a lien on the tract of land for such expenses. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the sections of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1-4. Each and every violation and nonconformance of this chapter or each day that any section of this chapter shall have been violated shall be construed to be a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Suit shall be brought in the superior court in the name of the town to restrain any violation of or to compel compliance with this chapter. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-9. - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to earth removal being conducted on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives on any tract of land within the town until 60 days after such effective date. Upon submission to the building official of the plan and all other material as required, except that no such plan need set forth existing contours for that portion of any tract of land on which earth removal has been completed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, the building official shall forthwith issue a license for the continuance of earth removal on any such tract of land. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-10. - Effect on property acquired or leased prior to effective date of chapter. 
(a)  Real property acquired or leased prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives for the purpose of earth removal and held for such purpose on such effective date shall be considered in use for earth removal, whether or not extraction has then actually commenced. A license for earth removal on such property shall be issued upon compliance with this chapter. In order for real property to qualify under this section, the following conditions shall be considered as conclusive evidence that such real property was acquired or leased and held for the purpose of later mineral extraction: 
(1)  Such real property was acquired or leased prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(2)  Such real property was acquired or leased by an individual, corporate or otherwise, engaged at the time of acquisition in the business of mineral extraction. 
(3)  Such real property or the substantial portion of such property has not been permanently developed for any residential; commercial, other than farm or agriculture; or industrial purpose. 
(4)  Such real property contains mineral deposits of a demonstrable economic value. 
(b)  However, if the owner or lessee, as the case may be, of any such tract of land shall file in the office of the town clerk, on or before December 31, 1973, a statement setting forth such owner's or lessee's intention to engage in earth removal on such tract of land and describing such tract of land, such tract of land shall be deemed to qualify under this section. As to any tract of land for which such intention is not so filed, the provisions of this section shall have no force and effect. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-11. - Compliance by town. 
    If the town shall engage in earth removal for municipal purposes, it shall comply with this chapter. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Sec. 16-12. - Interpretation of chapter. 
    This chapter shall not be deemed to limit by implication or otherwise any zoning ordinance enacted pursuant to the authority of G.L. 1956, § 45-24-1 et seq. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-4-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 130, Public Laws of 1989, ch. 332. 
Chapter 17 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public works, § 812. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the town saved from repeal, § 1-9(4); any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in the town saved from repeal, § 1-9(5); any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-9(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-9(7); animals on sidewalks, § 3-17; buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; harbors, wharves and public waters, ch. 7; depositing substances on highways, streets or sidewalks prohibited, § 8-18; deposit of sewage, wastes or water in streets, public places or state waters, § 8-23; peddlers and hawkers, § 9-126 et seq.; mobile and manufactured home parks, ch. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11; one-way streets, § 11-8; bicycles prohibited on sidewalks, § 11-11; no parking or limited parking, § 11-37; playing games, throwing stones or discharging firearms in streets, § 12-9; parks and recreational areas, ch. 13; subdivisions, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 20; zoning, ch. 21; off-street parking and truck loading generally, § 21-270; off-street loading spaces, § 21-273. 
State Law reference- Improvement and grading by towns, G.L. 1956, § 24-3-1 et seq.; federal aid to towns, G.L. 1956, § 24-4-1 et seq.; maintenance of town highways, G.L. 1956, § 24-5-1 et seq.; abandonment by towns, G.L. 1956, § 24-6-1 et seq.; sidewalks, G.L. 1956, § 24-7-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Repair of defective sidewalks. 
(a)  Generally. Any sidewalk or part of a sidewalk adjoining any building or lot of land on any street, highway, square or public place, whether such sidewalk or part of a sidewalk is supported by curbing or not, shall be repaired by the director of public works at the expense of the abutting owner of such building or lot in the way and manner provided in this section. 
(b)  Notice to abutting owners. Whenever any hole, depression or obstruction exists in any sidewalk referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the director of public works may make such orders as may be deemed expedient, directing the owner of land abutting on such sidewalk, at the owner's own expense, to fill or cause to be filled any such hole or depression or to remove any such obstruction on the sidewalk within such time as the director of public works shall in such order direct. The order shall be in writing and shall be served upon the abutting owner or owners as in the case of a change in grade as set forth in G.L. 1956, § 24-3-23. 
(c)  Neglect by owners. If any owner of abutting land shall refuse or neglect to obey any order referred to in subsection (b) of this section within 24 hours after such order has been served upon such owner in writing or within such other time as the director of public works shall deem to be reasonable, the director of public works shall proceed at the expense of the town to repair such sidewalk with materials suitable and satisfactory to the director. The director of public works shall keep an exact account of the cost of labor, material and supervision of work done in making such repairs for each owner and shall report to the town council immediately upon completion of the work. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, §§ 15-1-2-15-1-4) 
Sec. 17-2. - Obstructing passage. 
(a)  Every person who shall ride, drive, lead, leave, allow to stand or fasten any horse or other animal or any carriage, team, velocipede, bicycle or other vehicle, unless for the purpose of necessarily crossing the same, upon any sidewalk, footwalk, doorstep, doorway or passageway in the town, to the obstruction, hindrance, delay or annoyance of passersby, or of persons residing or doing business in the vicinity thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be so construed as to apply to hand carriages for the conveyance of children. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 13-1-17) 
State Law reference- Blocking or obstructing certain ways, G.L. 1956, § 11-44-24. 
Secs. 17-3-17-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSE NUMBERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; zoning, ch. 21. 

Sec. 17-21. - Purpose. 
    The standards set forth in this article are made for the purpose of promoting the public health and safety by providing a means of locating residential and other structures by police, fire and other emergency services and for other purposes requiring the location of residential and other structures as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 90-16, § 1, 8-28-1990) 
Sec. 17-22. - Display of numbers required. 
    All buildings within the town shall display street numbers in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-16, § 1, 8-28-1990) 
Sec. 17-23. - Assignment of numbers by tax assessor. 
    The town tax assessor or designee shall assign numbers for buildings along all the streets in the town. 
(Ord. No. 90-16, § 1, 8-28-1990) 
Sec. 17-24. - Criteria for numbering system. 
(a)  Number interval. The system of numbering established pursuant to this article shall be established at five even and five odd numbers for each 100 feet of street frontage. 
(b)  Odd and even numbers. Odd numbers shall be assigned to the righthand side of a street beginning at its point of intersection with a street which is its point of origin, and even numbers shall be assigned to the lefthand side of a street in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 90-16, § 1, 8-28-1990) 
Sec. 17-25. - Manner of display of numbers. 
    All residents and other occupants are required to display numbers assigned pursuant to this article in the following manner: 
(1)  Number on structure or residence. All numbers affixed to or inscribed on buildings shall be prominently placed on the front of the structure or residence in the vicinity of the front door or entryway. 
(2)  Number at street line. When the entrance to the residence or structure is not plainly visible from the street or highway, the assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the building or upon any convenient placard or mailbox on the front of the lot adjacent to the walk or access drive to the residence or structure. 
(3)  Size. All numbers affixed to or inscribed on residences, mailboxes, placards or structures shall be plainly visible from the street and shall not be less than 21/2 inches high. 
(Ord. No. 90-16, § 1, 8-28-1990) 
Sec. 17-26. - Installation of designated numbers. 
    No owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant of a building in the town shall, for a period of more than 45 days after notice from the tax assessor or designee, fail to affix the officially designated street number to such building. No owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant of a building in the town shall, for a period of more than 45 days after notice from the assessor or designee, affix or cause to be affixed to the building or inscribe or cause to be inscribed thereon or retain thereon a street number other than the one officially designated. 
(Ord. No. 90-16, § 1, 8-28-1990) 
Sec. 17-27. - Plat showing official numbers. 
    The tax assessor shall cause a plat to be made of each street showing the official numbers thereon. Such street plat shall be filed with the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 90-16, § 1, 8-28-1990) 
Secs. 17-28-17-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATION OF PUBLIC HIGHWAY PERMIT 

Sec. 17-46. - Applicability of article. 
    This article shall not apply to excavating or digging conducted by the department of public works in the construction, improvement or maintenance of state roads; to the department of water supply in the construction, improvement or maintenance of the town water service; or to corporations operating railroads. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-3-1; Ord. No. 89-28, § 2, 12-18-1989) 
Sec. 17-47. - Required. 
    No person shall excavate or dig into any portion of any of the public highways of the town without having first obtained the special permit mentioned in section 17-48. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-3-2) 
Sec. 17-48. - Application; bond; issuance; designation of purpose, time and place; retention of duplicate. 
(a)  The director of public works may at any time issue a special permit authorizing any person to excavate or dig into the public highways of the town. Before issuing such special permit, however, the director of public works shall first receive from such person a written application setting forth the name and address of such applicant and a designation of the particular portion of the public highways which the applicant desires to excavate or dig into and a designation of the purpose for which such excavation or digging is to be carried on. 
(b)  Before issuing such special permit, the director of public works shall first receive a bond from such applicant running to the town, in such sum not less than $1,000.00 as the director of public works may fix, with such sureties as are satisfactory to the director of public works. The bond shall contain a condition that the obligation of the bond shall be in full force and effect unless the applicant shall, upon final completion of work, leave such public highways in as good condition as before the commencement of the work and unless the town shall be held free and harmless from all loss or damage arising because of any fault or neglect on the part of the applicant in the performance of the work. 
(c)  Such special permit, if issued by the director of public works, shall designate the purpose of the excavating or digging permitted and shall designate the particular portion of the public highways to be excavated or dug into and, also, the time limit within which such excavation or digging shall be completed. The director of public works shall retain on record a duplicate of the permit. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-3-3) 
Sec. 17-49. - Compliance with purpose, time and place designated. 
    No person who has received the special permit provided for in section 17-48 shall be authorized to excavate or dig into the public highways of the town at any other time or place or for any other purpose than the time, place and purpose designated in such special permit. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-3-4) 
Sec. 17-50. - Compliance with orders and rules of director of public works. 
    No person who has received the special permit provided for in section 17-48 shall do any work, excavating or digging under the permit, except in conformity with such orders, rules or regulations, general or special, established by the director of public works, as shall have been brought to the attention of such person by notice in writing from the director of public works. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-3-5) 
Sec. 17-51. - Revocation. 
    The director of public works may at any time revoke any special permit issued pursuant to this article, and thereupon such person holding the special permit shall cease to excavate or dig into the public highways of the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-3-6) 
Sec. 17-52. - Notice to fire chief and chief of police on issuance. 
    Upon issuance of the special permit as provided in this article, the director of public works shall forthwith notify the chief of police and the fire chief of the location, size and probable duration of the excavation or digging for which such special permit is granted, together with the name and address of the permittee. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-3-7) 
Sec. 17-53. - Compensation for inspection services. 
    Upon issuance of each special permit as provided in this article, the director of public works shall estimate the number of employee hours necessary for town inspection service, and the permittee shall pay to the town an inspection fee as established in section 9-4, table VIII, calculated upon this estimate. The total fee for each permit shall not exceed $500.00. If the estimate of employee hours turns out to be deficient or excessive, the permittee will be required to pay the difference or will be refunded accordingly at a similar rate. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 15-3-8) 
Secs. 17-54-17-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET TREE ORDINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-60. - Authority. 
(a)  Section 2-286 of this Code describes the powers and duties of the conservation commission. One of these duties is to preserve the natural aesthetic areas within the town. The conservation commission may recommend to the town council, boards or agencies a program for the better promotion, development, utilization or preservation of open areas, streams, shores, wooded areas, roadsides, swamps, marshlands and natural aesthetic areas. 
(b)  G.L. 1956, §§ 2-14-2 through 2-14-11, establishes the position of town tree warden to be appointed by the town council. The town tree warden has jurisdiction over the care and control of all trees and shrubs within the limits of any public road or grounds. It also falls within the town tree warden's charge to make suitable regulations governing the care and preservation of those trees and shrubs subject to the approval of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-61. - Findings. 
(a)  The town council hereby finds that: 
(1)  Trees aid in the prevention of air, noise and visual pollution; 
(2)  Tree root systems aid in the stabilization of soil; 
(3)  The presence of trees can increase property values; 
(4)  Trees provide glare and heat protection; 
(5)  Trees enhance the overall aesthetics and general quality of life of the town; and 
(6)  Trees provide valuable shelter, cover and food for wildlife. 
(b)  The incorporation of forests, woodlands and trees into community planning enhances the quality of life. Because of their value for providing shade, reducing air pollution, providing wildlife habitat, preventing soil erosion and sediment control, increasing property values, and generally improving the aesthetic quality of the town, it shall be the policy of the town to preserve existing street trees. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-62. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the protection, preservation, planting and nonpublic safety related maintenance and removal of trees within the rights-of-way in the town. 
(2)  Establish a tree board to assist the town tree warden in the regulation, protection, maintenance, removal and planting of trees within town rights-of-way, and to assist in the management of trees within town parks and other property when requested by the specific municipal body or department having the designated responsibility for that property. 
(3)  Establish guidelines for removing, maintaining and planting trees so as to: 
a.  Enhance the natural landscape through the planting of additional trees; 
b.  Promote the planting of appropriate species to increase diversity and mix; and 
c.  Provide for improved wildlife habitat. 
(4)  Develop and implement a systemized tree management program as designed by the tree warden. 
(5)  Establish and manage a tree nursery in the town to be utilized to mature sapling trees for transplanting and replacement throughout the town. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-63. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person applying for a permit required by this article. 
    Approval means a written assent from the town tree warden pursuant to a duly executed application for approval. 
    Permit means a nonfee written form issued by the town tree warden granting permission to an applicant to conduct only those activities allowed by this article. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind including public utilities and municipal departments. 
    Public parks means, for the purposes of this article, any town public spaces designated for recreation and/or conservation under the authorized control of the town public works department. 
    Street tree means any tree or shrub in whole or in part within the limits of any road or grounds within the town. This term includes such limbs, roots or parts of trees that extend or overhang the limits or bounds of any town road or grounds from private property. 
    Tree board means that town body composed of the conservation commission membership. 
    Tree-lined street means all town public roads and grounds with existing street tree populations. 
    Tree removal means any act that will cause a street tree, as defined in this section, to die within a three-year period subsequent to such act. 
    Tree warden means the municipal arborist or other qualified designated official of the town assigned to carry out the enforcement of this article. 
    Tree well means an opening in the ground surrounding the base of the tree trunk not covered by sidewalk or paving; the tree warden shall determine the size of each tree well. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 17-64, 17-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE WARDEN 

Sec. 17-66. - Appointment and qualifications. 
    The town tree warden shall be appointed by the town council in accordance with G.L. 1956, § 2-14-2. The tree warden shall have training and experience in arboriculture and shall have passed the state arborist examination. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-67. - Duties. 
(a)  Duties of the town tree warden shall conform to those duties and responsibilities outlined in G.L. 1956, §§ 2-14-1-2-14-10 and 2-15-1-2-15-17, and include the following: 
(1)  The tree warden shall have charge of and be responsible for the management of all town forest areas, including those trees within town rights-of-way. 
(2)  The tree warden shall assume the care and control of trees within town public parks. 
(3)  The tree warden shall assume the care and control of trees on town school grounds. 
(4)  The tree warden shall expend all sums that shall be appropriated for the planting, removal, maintenance, care and management of trees within town rights-of-way and town public places under his/her control, in accordance with all local ordinances and the town Charter. 
(5)  The tree warden shall grant or deny and attach reasonable conditions to permits required under this section. The tree warden may obtain an advisory opinion from the tree board prior to granting or denying a permit. 
(6)  The tree warden will act as the liaison with the state department of transportation in matters involving the planting, removal and maintenance of trees within the rights-of-way of state roads within the corporate boundaries of the town. 
(7)  The tree warden may enlist the assistance of appropriate state or federal agencies in identifying diseases, verifying the need for removal, and determining procedures for removal of diseased trees. 
(b)  The town tree warden may authorize tree pruning as a result of normal maintenance in ensuring the ongoing health, growth and aesthetic appearance of the tree. All pruning shall be conducted in a manner that creates the least impact to tree health, growth, and aesthetic appearance, and shall be done in a manner that conserves the character of the tree-lined street. 
(c)  Requests for pruning healthy street trees which do not pose an immediate threat to public safety, but which may pose a threat to the health or appearance of the tree, shall be referred for review on a case by case basis by the town tree warden. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000; Ord. No. 01-15, § 1, 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 17-68. - Enforcement. 
    The town tree warden shall, as provided for in G.L. 1956, §§ 2-14-1-2-14-10 and G.L. 1956, §§ 2-15-1-2-15-17, enforce such rules, regulations and procedures as are deemed necessary to enforce the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Secs. 17-69-17-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TREE BOARD 

Sec. 17-74. - Duties. 
(a)  The tree board shall assist the tree warden when he/she requests such assistance when he/she proposes to the town council such rules, regulations, and permit and penalty procedures deemed necessary to carry out the intent and enforcement of this article. 
(b)  The tree board shall assist the tree warden in the preparation of a systemized tree management program for the town, which may be considered for adoption by the town council within five years of the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)  The tree board shall communicate and work with civic and public interest groups and individuals concerned with tree care, management, preservation and planting in order to maintain and enhance the town's street tree population. 
(d)  The tree board shall provide recommendations to the tree warden, who shall be responsible for the annual update of the systematized tree management program. 
(e)  The tree board shall assist the tree warden in performing a windshield inventory of street trees by July 1 of each year. The purpose of this inventory shall be to locate sick or damaged trees that may present a safety hazard, to locate trees of special concern, and to determine streets to the town where street trees are needed. 
(f)  The tree board shall work with other interested groups and agencies. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-75. - Authority. 
(a)  The town tree board shall assist the town tree warden in: 
(1)  Regulating and enacting the maintenance, removal and planting of trees within the town rights-of-way to ensure public safety; 
(2)  Preserving the aesthetics of town rights-of-way with regard to trees. 
(3)  Protecting the value and health of town forests as a whole. 
(b)  The tree board may review upon request by the tree warden all nonpublic safety related requests for permits for any planting, removal or trimming of trees within any town right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-76. - Membership. 
    The tree board shall be composed of the membership of the conservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Secs. 17-77-17-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 17-81. - Protection of trees within town rights-of-way and public parks. 
    The following restrictions shall apply concerning any tree within the town rights-of-way and public parks: 
(1)  No person shall knowingly damage, cut, carve or transplant any tree; attach wire, nails, advertising poster or other contrivance to any tree; allow any gaseous, liquid, chemical or solid substance that is harmful to trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof shall injure any portion of any tree without first obtaining a written permit from the town tree warden. 
(2)  No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain any stone, brick, sand, fill material, concrete or other materials that may impede the passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing in the town, except by written permit from the tree warden. 
(3)  No person shall preclude the percolation of water or nutrients and gaseous exchange vital to a tree's survival by placing any impervious materials within the confines of the tree well opening. 
(4)  No person shall move any building or any other large object that may injure public trees or parts thereof without first obtaining the written approval of the tree warden. 
(5)  All trees within the town rights-of-way and public parks that are within 30 feet of any excavation or construction of any building/structure or nonpublic safety-related street work shall be guarded through the length of the project with a good substantial fence, frame or box not less than four feet high or other methods approved by the tree warden. Tree protection material shall not be attached by nailing or otherwise penetrating or otherwise damaging a tree and must be removed upon the completion of work. The owner of the property where the excavation or construction occurs shall be responsible for compliance with this provision of this article. 
(6)  Requests for removal of healthy street trees, which do not pose an immediate threat to public safety, shall be reviewed on a case by case basis by the town tree warden. Removal of healthy street trees is not to be promoted. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-82. - Planting of trees within any public right-of-way. 
(a)  Any person desiring to plant a tree within any town right-of-way must first obtain a written permit from the tree warden. Any permit shall be granted to a date certain and shall include consideration of appropriateness of the species, location, size and public safety. 
(b)  If plantings are to be performed by persons other than the town tree warden or his/her agents, the proposed method and quality of work for planting as prescribed by the tree warden shall be adhered to. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Secs. 17-83-17-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PERMITS 

Sec. 17-90. - Required. 
(a)  A written nonfee permit shall be required for planting, spraying, pruning, removing, cutting or otherwise disturbing any tree within a town right-of-way. Any permit shall be granted to a date certain and shall include consideration of appropriateness of the species, location, size and public safety. 
(b)  The tree warden may issue a permit provided that the proposed method and quality of work shall be of a satisfactory nature and the project shall be consistent with this article. The tree warden may request an advisory opinion from the tree board prior to issuance of the permit. 
(c)  Any permit shall be deemed null and void if its terms are violated. 
(d)  The tree warden and tree board shall be notified by the bearer of such permit upon satisfactory completion of designated work. 
(e)  A notice shall be posted at the site of pending street tree removal by the town tree warden according to procedures outlined in G.L. 1956, § 2-14-8. 
(f)  All costs for nonemergency tree removal shall be the responsibility of the party requesting tree removal. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-91. - Expiration. 
    A permit shall contain a definitive date of expiration and applicable work shall be completed within the time allowed in the permit and in the manner described. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-92. - Copies retained. 
    The town shall retain copies of all tree permit applications, approvals and verifications of compliance for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000; Ord. No. 01-15, § 1, 8-6-2001) 
Secs. 17-93-17-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 17-96. - Compensation. 
(a)  All trees removed, destroyed or damaged as a result of unauthorized activity shall be replaced at the expense of the responsible person. Replacement of trees shall be made with 21/2-inch to six-inch caliper trees as directed by the tree warden, following consultation with the tree board. When and where deemed suitable by the tree warden, trees of less than 21/2 inches in diameter may be approved. The sum of the diameters of the replacement trees shall be equivalent to the sum of the diameters of the trees removed, destroyed or damaged as a result of the unauthorized activity. The tree warden will have discretion in determining the appropriate level of replacement where trees are removed due to disease. The tree warden shall consider the following when determining the replacement of lost trees: 
(1)  Selecting trees that reflect or enhance the character of a neighborhood. 
(2)  Selecting trees for their suitability to the given environment such as soil type, resistance to pollution, size, growth rate, appropriate hardiness zone, branching habit, rooting habit, fruiting habit, disease resistance and aesthetics. 
(3)  Giving consideration to diversity of species in a given area to avoid decimation by epidemic. 
(b)  In accordance with G.L. 1956, § 2-15-8(b), "Any person, firm, corporation or governmental entity that removes or substantially damages in whole or in part any tree on public grounds shall replace said tree with substantially equivalent trees or trees, the sum of which are equal to twice that removed or damaged...." This section shall not apply to public utility companies if the work conducted is in accordance with a tree trimming and tree replacement program filed with and approved by the local tree warden. Any work conducted by a utility company in the town must be accompanied by an approved tree trimming and tree replacement program. 
(c)  Trees will be replaced in the same general location as the tree that has been removed. In instances where tree replacement in the same general area is determined not to be possible, the town tree warden with assistance from the tree board may designate an alternate location for tree placement. Trees must be replaced in a timely fashion, within one season if possible. 
(d)  The town tree warden with assistance from the tree board shall coordinate the activity of volunteers, licensed professionals, the public works department, and public safety officials to ensure the timely replacement and planting of street trees in a manner which is in the best interest of public safety. Consideration must be given to avoiding tree/sidewalk conflicts through careful selection of appropriate street trees and planting techniques such as the use of pavers and graters or root barriers to avoid such conflicts. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-97. - Emergencies. 
    The requirements of this article may be waived by the town director of public safety in the case of emergencies such as winter storms, tropical storms, hurricanes or other natural or human made disasters, so that they in no way shall hinder private or public work to restore order to the town. All emergency work shall, to the degree practicable, follow the standards of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-98. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The requirements of this article shall not apply to decisions of the director of public safety or his/her designee in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of his/her office. 
(b)  Emergency activities of the public works department, required to ensure the public safety, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000; Ord. No. 01-15, § 2, 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 17-99. - Interference with the tree warden. 
    No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the tree warden or any of his/her assistants while they are engaged in carrying out the implementation of this article, provided, however, that nothing in this article shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the town. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-100. - Severability. 
    This article and the various parts, sentences, sections and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, section or clause is adjudged invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this article shall be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-101. - Effective date. 
    This article and any amendment thereto shall be declared to be of immediate necessity for the preservation of public peace, health and safety and shall be in full force and effective from and after its passage and publication as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 17-102. - Relationship to other ordinances. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to restrict, amend, repeal or otherwise limit the application or enforcement of the zoning ordinance, chapter 21, or the subdivision and land development regulations, appendix A, of the town. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Secs. 17-103-17-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - APPROVAL OF PRIVATE ROADS IN POJAC POINT FIRE DISTRICT 

Sec. 17-110. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Pojac Point Fire District. That geographical area located within the boundaries of the Pojac Point Fire District as established by the General Assembly in Public Law, 1950, Chapter 2506, Section 1, with the exception of Lot 12 on Assessor's Plat 172, and is the same geographical area designated on the official zoning map and zoning description as being the Pojac Point Residential District (see section 21-37). 
    Private road. A nonpublic street, avenue, highway, boulevard, parkway, road, lane or other way or any part thereof which on May 29, 1979, did not serve as the primary means of access to and egress from three or more existing lots then recorded as such. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 2-10-03) 
Sec. 17-111. - Approval-Required. 
    No private road within the Pojac Point Fire District shall be used to measure the frontage required by section 21-37 unless the part thereof along which such frontage is measured has been approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 2-10-03) 
Sec. 17-112. - Same-Procedure. 
(a)  An application for approval of a private road within the Pojac Point Fire District must be made or joined in by the legal owner of that part of the road for which approval is requested and shall contain: 
(1)  Plans drawn no smaller than one inch to 100 feet showing that part of such road along which the frontage required by section 21-37 could be measured and all of the lots for which such frontage could be measured if the application were approved. 
(2)  The details and specifications of any proposed road construction or improvements, including grades, elevations, provision for drainage and materials to be used. 
(3)  Information as to the legal ownership of that part of such road covered by the application and the documents, existing or proposed, conveying or to convey to the present and future owners of each lot for which the frontage required by section 21-37(3) [3] could be measured along such road a right to pass over such road and roads connected thereto from such lot to a public road as a primary means of access to and egress from such lot to such public road. 
(b)  The planning commission may approve such application, with or without modifications or conditions, after a public hearing thereon, due notice of which shall be given by the applicant at least ten days in advance of the hearing to the director of public safety, the town engineer the secretary of the Pojac Point Fire District, and the owners of property within 200 feet of any lot for which the frontage required by section 21-37 could be measured along such road if the application were approved. Notice of such public hearing shall include a complete copy of the application and be by certified mail, return receipt requested. Approval of an application shall be granted only when the planning commission is satisfied that such road conforms, or after improvement or construction will conform, to reasonable standards as established, from time to time, by the town engineer. 
(c)  A decision of the planning commission approving a private road under this article shall include a plan of that part of such road as is approved by such decision, together with any conditions of such approval and shall be recorded in the office of the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 2-10-03) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, adopted May 8, 1995, eliminated former subsection (3), which contained minimum lot dimensions for the Pojac Point district. This former subsection included the following frontages: dwelling-200 feet; other permitted uses-300 feet; day care center, nursery school or nonprofit activity-200 feet. See art. IV, table 2A for dimensional regulations for residential districts. 

Sec. 17-113. - Improvements to be completed prior to issuance of building permits. 
    No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building on any lot in the Pojac Point Fire District for which the frontage required by section 21-37 is measured along a private road approved under this article until: The decision of the planning commission has been recorded in the office of the town clerk as required by subsection (c) of section 17-112; the town engineer has certified that the improvement or construction of such private road has been performed in accordance with such decision; and all conditions of such approval, including the recording of required legal documents, have been fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 2-10-03) 
Chapter 18 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning commission, §§ 802-806. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town saved from repeal, § 1-9(8); any ordinance establishing the official plat of the town saved from repeal, § 1-9(9); any subdivision ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-9(13); buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; mobile and manufactured home parks, ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; utilities, ch. 20; zoning, ch. 21; subdivision and land development regulations, app. A. 
State Law reference- Subdivision of land, G.L. 1956, § 45-23-1 et seq.; board of review, G.L. 1956, § 45-23-14 et seq.; judicial review, G.L. 1956, § 45-23-20; suspension of special acts, G.L. 1956, § 45-23-22; zoning board of review, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-13 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Approval and recordation of plat prerequisite to installation of improvements. 
    Materials for recordation with the town clerk shall consist of two copies (one on Mylar and one on heavy paper) on sheets 30 inches by 40 inches maximum. Each plat for recordation shall show the assessor's plat number, assessor's lot number for each lot and the street address number for each lot. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 16-1-6; Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, 12-18-1989) 
Chapter 19 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxing power of council, § 315; tax collector, §§ 607-609; assessment, art. VII. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town, or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instruments or obligation assumed by the town or creating interest and sinking funds saved from repeal, § 1-9(1); any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-9(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-9(7); any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-9(14); any ordinance granting specific tax exemptions saved from repeal, § 1-9(15); administration, ch. 2; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
State Law reference- Taxation, RIGL 1956, tit. 44; exemptions, RIGL 1956, § 44-3-3; local taxes, RIGL 1956, § 44-5-1 et seq.; levy and assessment of local taxes, RIGL 1956, § 44-5-3 et seq.; power to tax property, RIGL 1956, § 45-2-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Board of assessment review. 
(a)  There shall be a board of assessment review consisting of three members appointed by the town council. Each member shall be appointed to serve for a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled by the town council for the unexpired term. If a member of such board shall cease to be a resident of the town, such member's office shall thereby become vacant. 
(b)  No member of the board shall hold any other public office except that of notary public or member of the national guard or naval or military reserve. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-7-1) 
Charter reference- Board of assessment review, §§ 702-706. 
Sec. 19-2. - Waiver of interest on overdue quarterly tax payments. 
(a)  In accordance with the authority granted to the Town of North Kingstown pursuant to RIGL § 44-5-8.1, the town finance director, subject to the approval of the town manager, is authorized to waive interest on one quarter's overdue real property tax payment, subject to the terms and conditions below, and allow the remaining balance of real property taxes owed for that year to be paid on a quarterly basis if all of the following conditions are satisfied by the taxpayer. 
(1)  The property subject to the overdue payment is the residence of the taxpayer and has been for the five years immediately preceding the tax payment which is overdue. 
(2)  The request for a waiver of interest is in writing, signed and dated by the taxpayer. 
(3)  The taxpayer, without prior waiver, has made timely payments of taxes to the town for the five years immediately preceding the tax payment, which is overdue. The burden of proof of timely payments shall be upon the taxpayer and shall be so proven at the time that the written request for waiver is made. 
(4)  The bill for which the payment is overdue was issued less than two years prior to the date of the request for a waiver of interest, but no earlier than July 1, 2016. 
(b)  In no event shall the waiver of interest on any tax bill exceed $500.00. Decisions by the town manager regarding requests for waivers of interest shall be in writing and contain notice to the town council. If the taxpayer receives an adverse decision, the taxpayer must pay the interest and may file a claim for reimbursement with the town council within ten days of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 17-10, § 1, 6-26-2017) 
Secs. 19-3-19-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX EXEMPT STATUS 

Sec. 19-21. - Certain real and personal property of St. Bernard's Roman Catholic Church. 
    The town assessor is authorized to exempt from taxation the real and personal property of the St. Bernard's Roman Catholic Church in conformity with the provisions of Act S-250 passed by the legislature at its January 1965 session, entitled: 
"An act authorizing the Town Council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation certain real and personal property of the St. Bernard's Roman Catholic Church of Wickford, Rhode Island." 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-7-2) 
Sec. 19-22. - The Cocumscussoc Association. 
    The town assessor is authorized to exempt from taxation the real and personal property of the Cocumscussoc Association in conformity with the provisions of Public Law Chapters 275 and 276 passed by the legislature at its January 2009 session, entitled,: 
"An act authorizing the Town Council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation the Cocumscussoc Association." 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-7-4; Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 12-14-2009) 
Sec. 19-23. - The Gilbert Stuart Memorial, Inc. 
    The town assessor is authorized to exempt from taxation the real and personal property of the Gilbert Stuart Memorial, Inc. in conformity with the provisions of Public Law Chapters 273 and 274 passed by the legislature at its January 2009 session, entitled,: 
"An act authorizing the Town Council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation the Gilbert Stuart Memorial, Inc." 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-7-5; Ord. No. 09-10, § 2, 12-14-2009) 
Sec. 19-24. - The South County Museum, Inc. 
    The town council is authorized to exempt from taxation for such period as it may deem advisable all or any part of the real estate and personal property of the South County Museum, Inc., a corporation duly created under the laws of this state, to an amount not exceeding in value $100,000.00, so long as such real estate and personal property shall be used exclusively for public purposes, in conformity with the provisions of an act passed by the legislature at its January 1972 session, entitled: 
"An act authorizing the Town Council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation the South County Museum, Inc." 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-7-6) 
Sec. 19-25. - Household furniture and family stores. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of RIGL 1956, § 44-3-3(17), as amended by Public Laws of 1979, ch. 335, the town assessor is authorized to exempt from taxation the household furniture and family stores of a housekeeper in the whole, including bedding and other white goods, books and all such tangible personal property items which are common to the normal household. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-7-7; Ord. No. 99-23, § 1, 11-8-1999) 
Sec. 19-26. - Persons over 65 years of age. 
(a)  The tax assessor is hereby authorized to grant an exemption of $30,000.00 of valuation to any person of the age of 65 or more years who for a period of at least 15 years has owned and had title to the real estate in the town which he or she occupied, at least on a seasonal basis. Only one such exemption shall be allowed to co-tenants, joint tenants, and tenants by the entirety even though all or more of them meet the qualifications of this subsection. To obtain this exemption, an application must be therefor which establishes entitlement and compliance with non-income based provisions of the town's rules and regulations for exemption from property taxes to persons 65 or more years of age. 
(b)  In addition, the tax assessor is authorized to grant to every person who is a citizen and resident of the town of the age of 65 years or more years and residing in the town in a dwelling house owned by the person which is a constituent part of his or her real property, on proper claim being made therefor, a tax exemption subject to compliance with the town's rules and regulations for exemption from property taxes to persons 65 years or more years of age, as amended, and in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Taxpayers having an annual income of less than 180 percent of the appropriate one-person or two-person poverty income level determined and published by the United States Department of Commerce, Census Bureau, Poverty Branch, an exemption of $142,200.00 of the assessed valuation. 
(2)  Taxpayers having an annual income of less than 200 percent of the appropriate one-person or two-person poverty income level determined and published by the United States Department of Commerce, Census Bureau, Poverty Branch, an exemption of $113,900.00 of the assessed valuation. 
(3)  Taxpayers having an annual income of less than 220 percent of the appropriate one-person or two-person poverty income level determined and published by the United States Department of Commerce, Census Bureau, Poverty Branch, an exemption of $85,500.00 of the assessed valuation. 
(c)  The rules and regulations for exemption from property taxes to persons 65 or more years of age are as follows: 
(1)  Applicants must be 65 years of age in the calendar year in which the taxes were assessed; except for the surviving spouse provision in subsection (b)(6)b., above which applies to the exemptions authorized by subsections (a) and (b) of this section. If husband and wife are joint tenants, tenants in the entirety, or tenants in common, either husband or wife (at least one) must be 65 or over. 
(2)  Applicants must be legally domiciled in the town and must have actually resided in this town the year in which the taxes were assessed and the year in which the exemption is claimed. 
(3)  The applicant must own and live in the house to which the exemption is to be applied and must own the dwelling as of the date of assessment for which the exemption is claimed. 
(4)  No income-producing property, residential or otherwise, owned and occupied by any person 65 or more years of age shall be entitled to an exemption. 
(5)  Professional persons who operate and conduct their respective professions from their residences shall not be entitled to an exemption. 
(6)  Only one exemption will be granted to joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common, even though all such tenants meet eligibility requirements and are 65 years of age or older and/or all occupy the property. 
(7)  The tax assessor's application for exemption form (current edition) must be filled out in its entirety and submitted to the tax assessor. The tax assessor's confidential statement of income (current edition) must be completed if the applicant requests an exemption authorized by subsection (b) of this section. A completed application must: 
a.  Be filed annually; 
b.  Indicate whether or not the claimant is required under law and regulation to file a state personal income tax return; 
c.  Waive, by signature of the unmodified waiver contained in the form, the applicant's Privacy Act rights with respect to tax assessor's confidential confirmation of claimed income; 
d.  Be subscribed and sworn to by the claimant before a notary public or any member of the tax assessor's staff. 
(8)  All required forms must be filed with the tax assessor on or before March 15, or the next normal business day following, of the year for which application is made. If the applicant was required to submit a federal personal income tax return for the year prior to that for which application for exemption is made, a copy of that return shall be submitted to the tax assessor by March 15 or the next normal business day following. No exemption shall be approved in the absence of the federal personal income tax return or statement that such return was not required. All statements concerning income, whether or not taxable, are subject to independent verification by the tax assessor. These forms and the federal personal income tax return are required as due evidence that the applicant is, in all respects, qualified for the relief provided for by this section. All statements are subject to verification, and the burden of proof for all requirements shall be with the applicant. The tax assessor may require certified proof of place and date of birth, voter registration, period of abode or domicile and ownership of property. 
(9)  Income, as used in this section, means all funds received by an individual and such individual's spouse and any other individuals residing in the individual's dwelling for more than 50 percent of the calendar year from whatever derived source, including but not limited to realized capital gains, gifts and in their entirety, pension, annuity, retirement and Social Security benefits. Income shall be determined on the basis of the calendar year ending on the date of assessment of the taxes from which exemption is claimed and each calendar year thereafter. 
(10)  Exemptions shall terminate upon the death or removal of the person receiving the exemption (except with respect to the exemption authorized by subsection (b) of this section, in cases where there is a surviving spouse, not remarried and residing in the exempted domicile) or upon sale or transfer of the exempted property. 
(11)  The tax assessor may, at any time, inquire into the right of a claimant to the continuance of an exemption under this section, and for that purpose the tax assessor may require the filing of a new application or the submission of such proofs as deemed necessary to determine the right of the claimant to a continuance of such exemption. 
(12)  If the tax assessor denies a claim for exemption or terminates a previously approved exemption, the claimant may appeal the tax assessor's decision to the town's tax assessment board of review. 
(13)  The office of the town manager shall make a reasonable effort to contact each elderly taxpayer by mail to ensure maximum dissemination of information concerning tax exempt status of real estate owned and occupied by persons of 65 years and over and shall take the following additional actions: 
a.  Advertise the potential for tax relief for the elderly in the newspaper of record at least two times between January 1 and the closing date for receipt for exemption applications. 
b.  Mail all necessary application forms to potentially qualified applicants not later than January 31 of the current tax year. The term "potentially qualified applicants" includes: 
1.  Claimants granted exemption for the prior tax year. 
2.  Persons requesting applications through the town's senior center. 
3.  Persons who may, from time to time, make formal or informal inquiries at the tax assessor's office concerning tax relief for the elderly. 
c.  Make available to the general population all necessary application forms at appropriate public places in the town, such as: 
1.  Banks. 
2.  Savings and loan associations. 
3.  Credit unions. 
4.  The town's free library. 
5.  The town's senior center. 
6.  The tax assessor's office. 
d.  Direct the town's senior representative at the town's senior center to prepare and present to users of the town's senior center, not later than March 15 annually, one or more briefings on the intent, provisions and requirements of the town's tax relief for the elderly program. 
e.  Provide such assistance to applicants as may be required to ensure accurate and complete applications. 
(14)  This subsection shall be reviewed not later than February 1, 2005, and every five years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 83-18, § 1, 12-12-1983; Ord. No. 90-11, § 1, 5-29-1990; Ord. No. 94-9, § 1, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 00-3, § 1, 1-10-2000; Ord. No. 01-12, § 1, 6-12-2001; Ord. No. 02-8, § 1, 8-5-2002; Ord. No. 03-11, § 1, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 6-7-2004; Ord. No. 07-08, §§ 1, 2, 5-14-2007; Ord. No. 16-05, §§ 1, 2, 5-23-2016) 
Sec. 19-27. - Prisoners of war. 
    The tax assessor is authorized to except from taxation, up to a maximum of $15,000.00 of valuation, upon proper claim being made therefor, the real and personal property of any town citizen and resident who is a veteran of the military or naval service of the United States of America and who has been or shall be classified as or determined to be a prisoner of war by the Veterans' Administration of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, § 1, 1-26-1987) 
State Law reference- Veterans' exemption for Town of North Kingstown, RIGL 1956, § 44-3-4(a)(viii); additional exemption for veteran, prisoner of war, RIGL 1956, § 44-3-4(e). 
Sec. 19-28. - Totally disabled persons. 
(a)  Authorization. The tax assessor is authorized to grant to every person who is a town citizen and resident and who is determined to be totally disabled by the Social Security Administration an exemption on the assessed value of that person's residential real property. The amount of the exemption will be in accordance with the schedule set forth in subsection (b) of this section, and entitlement to the exemption shall be determined by the person's compliance with the town's rules and regulations for exemption from property taxes for person's who are totally disabled. 
(b)  Schedule of exemptions. The schedule of exemptions shall be as follows: 
(1)  Taxpayers having an annual household income, as that term is defined in the rules, of less than $10,000.00 shall receive an exemption of $91,200.00 of the assessed valuation. 
(2)  Taxpayers having an annual household income, as that term is defined in the rules, of at least $10,000.00 but less than $15,000.00 shall receive an exemption of $72,800.00 of the assessed valuation. 
(3)  Taxpayers having an annual household income, as that term is defined in the rules, of at least $15,000.00 but less than $20,000.00 shall receive an exemption of $54,800.00 of the assessed valuation. 
(4)  Taxpayers having an annual household income, as that term is defined in the rules, of at least $20,000.00 but less than $25,000.00 shall receive an exemption of $36,700.00 of the assessed valuation. 
(c)  Rules and regulations for exemption from property taxes for totally disabled. Rules and regulations for exemption from property taxes for the totally disabled shall be as follows: 
(1)  All applicants must be determined to be totally disabled by the Social Security Administration and must be under the age of 65 years. 
(2)  Applicants must be legally domiciled and must have actually resided in the town for a period of five years ending with the date of assessment (December 31) for the year which exemption is claimed (the year following the date of assessment). Seasonal residents may not apply. Absence from this town for a period of one year shall constitute prima facie evidence of abandonment of domicile. When absence in excess of one year is due solely to hospitalization or other residential medical treatment (nursing homes and the like), the tax assessor is authorized to review individual cases and waive the absence standard, provided that all other requirements are satisfied and the facts presented so warrant. 
(3)  The applicant must own and live in the house to which the exemption is to be applied and must have owned that dwelling for at least two years prior to the date of assessment for which the exemption is claimed. 
(4)  No income-producing property, residential or otherwise, shall be entitled to an exemption. 
(5)  Professional persons who operate and conduct respective professions from the persons' own residences shall not be entitled to an exemption. 
(6)  Only one exemption will be granted to joint tenants, tenants by the entirety or tenants in common, even though all such tenants meet eligibility requirements. 
(7)  The tax assessor's application for exemption form must be filled out in its entirety and submitted each year to the tax assessor. 
(8)  The tax assessor's confidential statement of annual income form must: 
a.  Be filled out in its entirety. 
b.  Indicate whether or not the claimant is required under law and regulation to file a state personal income tax return. 
c.  Waive, by signature of the unmodified waiver contained in the form, the applicant's privacy act rights with respect to the tax assessor's confidential confirmation of claimed income. 
d.  Be submitted to the tax assessor each year with the application for exemption form. 
(9)  All required forms must be filed with the tax assessor on or before March 15, or the next normal business day following, of the year for which application is made. If the applicant was required to submit a state personal income tax return for the year prior to that for which application for exemption is made, a copy of that return shall be submitted to the tax assessor by April 16. No exemption shall be approved in the absence of the state personal income tax return or a statement that such return was not required. All statements concerning income, whether or not taxable, are subject to independent verification by the tax assessor. These forms and the state personal income tax return are required as due evidence that the applicant is, in all respects, qualified for the relief provided for by this section. All statements are subject to verification, and the burden of proof for all requirements shall be with the applicant. The tax assessor may require certified proof of place and date of birth, voter registration, period of abode or domicile and ownership of property. 
(10)  Household income shall be computed on the basis of the calendar year and shall include all earned and unearned income. Earned income shall include wages, salaries, fees and monies received for personal services rendered. Unearned income shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Gifts. 
b.  Pensions and annuities. 
c.  Insurance proceeds, other than medical. 
d.  Social security benefits. 
e.  Supplementary security income and attendant state and federal supplementary benefits. 
f.  Interest, regardless of source. 
g.  Dividends. 
h.  Net income from business, farm, rental and capital gains as determined in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service. 
(11)  Exemptions shall terminate upon the death or removal of the person receiving the exemption (except when there is a surviving, qualified spouse) or upon sale of the exempted property. 
(12)  The tax assessor may, at any time, inquire into the right of a claimant to the continuance of an exemption under this section, and for the purpose the tax assessor may require the filing of a new application or the submission of such proof as deemed necessary to determine the right of the claimant to the continuance of such exemption. 
(13)  If the tax assessor denies a claim for exemption or terminates a previously approved exemption, the claimant may appeal the tax assessor's decision to the town's tax assessment board of review. 
(14)  The office of the tax assessor shall take the following action to ensure maximum dissemination of information concerning tax exempt status of real estate owned and occupied by persons who are totally disabled: 
a.  Advertise the potential for tax relief in the newspaper of record at least two times per month between January 1 and the closing date for receipt of exemption applications. 
b.  Mail all necessary application forms to potentially qualified applicants not later than January 15 of the current tax year. The term "potentially qualified applicants" includes the following: 
1.  Claimants granted exemption for the prior tax year; and 
2.  Those persons who may, from time to time, make formal or informal inquiries at the tax assessor's office concerning tax relief for the totally disabled. 
c.  Provide such assistance to applicants as may be required to ensure accurate and complete applications. 
(Ord. No. 87-6, § 1, 3-23-1987; Ord. No. 07-08, § 3, 5-14-2007; Ord. No. 16-05, § 3, 5-23-2016) 
State Law reference- Exemption for disabled persons, RIGL 1956, § 44-3-13.3. 
Sec. 19-29. - Adjustment of exemption upon revaluation. 
    The town assessor shall and is authorized to adjust the tax exemptions for all persons entitled thereto pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 44-3-1 et seq. in any year that the town has a real property revaluation. All adjustments shall be made to reflect the same monetary savings that appeared on the property tax bill that existed for the year prior to revaluation of the real property. 
(Ord. No. 94-4, § 1, 3-14-1994) 
Sec. 19-30. - Wholesale inventory tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inventory or stock in trade means and includes the merchandise kept on hand for sale in the normal and regular course of a wholesale business. 
    Sales at wholesale and retail. If a wholesaler sold inventory or stock in trade, both at wholesale and at retail, in the preceding calendar year, the tax assessing authority shall assess on the same basis as a retailer's inventory or stock in trade as of December 31 of such year, to the extent permitted by applicable law, notwithstanding any exemption permitted this section, that proportion of inventory or stock in trade of such wholesaler which shall be equal to the percentage of such wholesaler's total sales during the preceding calendar year that were at retail. For the purposes of this subsection, sales at retail shall not include sales to employees of the wholesaler or to employees of the wholesaler's affiliates. If retail sales are less than one percent of total sales during such year, it shall be deemed that no sales were made at retail during such year. All sales of a wholesaler to a customer which is an affiliated entity shall be deemed to be retail sales for the purposes of this subsection if more than half of the dollar volume of the sales of such affiliated entity is made within the town. 
    Wholesaler means and includes a person, partnership, corporation or other business entity engaged in the business of selling goods for subsequent resale by its customers. Except as provided under the definition of sales at wholesale and retail in this subsection, no distinction shall be drawn between the following: 
(1)  A wholesaler, all or a portion of the sales of which are sales to one or more customers affiliated with such wholesaler. 
(2)  A wholesaler, the sales of which are exclusively sales to customers not affiliated with such wholesaler. 
    A wholesaler shall be considered affiliated with customers if the wholesaler controls, is controlled by or is under common control with such customers. 
(b)  Exemption. The stock in trade or inventory of wholesalers, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall be exempt from taxation. 
(c)  Procedures for verification. The tax assessing authority within the town may establish procedures for verification and review of any taxpayers who may be eligible under this section, consistent with procedures and reviewing processes currently established. 
(Ord. No. 95-1, § 1, 2-13-1995) 
Sec. 19-31. - Ocean State Soccer School, Inc. 
    The town assessor is authorized to exempt from taxation the real and personal property of the Ocean State Soccer School, Inc., in conformity with the provisions of S-0943 Substitute A (Act 120) and H-6315 Substitute A (Act 124) passed by the legislature at its January 2013 session, signed by the Governor on July 11, 2013, entitled: 
"An Act authorizing the Town Council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation for such period as it may deem advisable the real estate and personal property of Ocean State Soccer School, Inc., a not-for-profit corporation duly created under the laws of this state, to an amount not exceeding in value of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) so long as said property shall be located in the Town of North Kingstown and used for the purpose for which said corporation was incorporated and so long as Ocean State Soccer School, Inc. shall maintain nonprofit tax exempt status with the Internal Revenue Service." 
(Ord. No. 13-15, § 1, 10-2-2013) 
Sec. 19-32. - North Kingstown-Exeter Animal Protection League, Inc. 
    The town assessor is authorized to exempt from taxation the real and personal property of the North Kingstown-Exeter Animal Protection League, Inc., dba "The Pet Refuge", in conformity with the provisions of S-3005 (Act 300) and H-7934 (Act 332) passed by the legislature at its January 2018 session, effective July 5, 2018, entitled: 
    "An Act" authorizing the town council of the Town of North Kingstown to exempt from taxation North Kingstown-Exeter Animal Protection League, Inc., dba The Pet Refuge, 500 Stony Lane. 
(Ord. No. 18-25, § 1, 11-19-2018) 
Secs. 19-33, 19-34. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-35. - Retail inventory tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inventory or stock in trade means and includes the merchandise kept on hand for sale in the normal course of business of a retailer. 
    Retailer means a person, partnership, corporation or other business entity engaged in the business of selling goods at retail. 
(b)  Exemption. The inventory or stock in trade of retailers, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall be exempt from taxation. 
(c)  Schedule. The exemption from retail inventory tax shall be implemented and effective on a phase-in basis, pursuant to the following schedule: 
Year Percent 1997  20 1998  40 1999  60 2000  80 2001 and after 100  
(d)  Procedures for verification. The tax assessing authority within the town may establish procedures for verification and review of any taxpayers who may be eligible under this section, consistent with procedures and reviewing processes currently established. 
(Ord. No. 97-6, § 1, 4-14-1997) 
Sec. 19-36. - Tax exemption for real and personal property held and used by the Narrow River Land Trust. 
    It is hereby ordained by the town council that any real and personal property held and used by the Narrow River Land Trust, Inc., a not-for-profit corporation organized under the laws of the state, and exclusively used for the purpose of conserving open space as that term is defined in RIGL 1956, § 45-36-1 et seq., shall be exempt from taxation by the town; provided, however, that before any such property is sold or otherwise disposed of, the transaction shall first be submitted to the town council for its approval upon such terms and conditions as the town council deems advisable. 
(Ord. No. 00-1, § 1, 1-10-2000) 
Sec. 19-37. - Tax exemption for real and personal property held and used by the Nature Conservancy. 
    It is hereby ordained by the town council that any real and personal property held and used by the Nature Conservancy, a nonprofit corporation organized under the laws of the District of Columbia, and exclusively used for the purpose of conserving open space as that term is defined in RIGL 1956, § 45-36-1 et seq., shall be exempt from taxation by the town; provided, however, that before any such property is sold or otherwise disposed of, the transaction shall first be submitted to the town council for its approval upon such terms and conditions as the town council deems advisable. 
(Ord. No. 00-1, § 1, 1-10-2000) 
Sec. 19-38. - Tax exemption for real and personal property held and used by the Land Conservancy of North Kingstown. 
    It is hereby ordained by the town council that any real and personal property held and used by the Land Conservancy of North Kingstown, a not-for-profit corporation organized under the laws of the state, and exclusively used for the purpose of conserving open space as that term is defined in RIGL 1956, § 45-36-1 et seq., shall be exempt from taxation by the town; provided, however, that before any such property is sold or otherwise disposed of, the transaction shall first be submitted to the town council for its approval upon such terms and conditions as the town council deems advisable. 
(Ord. No. 00-2, § 1, 1-10-2000) 
Sec. 19-39. - Tax exemption for real and personal property held and used by the Friends of Plum Beach Lighthouse, Inc. 
    It is hereby ordained by the town council that any real and personal property held and used by the Friends of Plum Beach Lighthouse, Inc., a nonprofit corporation organized under the laws of the District of Columbia, and exclusively used for the purpose of conserving open space as that term is defined in RIGL 1956, § 45-36-1 et seq., shall be exempt from taxation by the town; provided, however, that before any such property is sold or otherwise disposed of, the transaction shall first be submitted to the town council for its approval upon such terms and conditions as the town council deems advisable. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, 12-12-2005) 
Sec. 19-40. - Economic development tax incentive. 
(a)  The town council is authorized to phase in, over a period of six years, the taxes due upon certain business property located in town, not to include residential purposes or multi-family housing. 
(b)  The real estate taxes shall be phased in pursuant to the following schedule: 
Year Percent 1   0 2  20 3  40 4  60 5  80 6 100  
(c)  No exemption shall be authorized under this section for land. Existing buildings and/or structures and land shall be taxed at 100 percent of its assessed value. The incentive authorized by this section shall be available only to new buildings, new structures, new additions to existing buildings or structures on taxable property, and for substantial improvements to existing structures costing in excess of 50 percent of the assessed value of the existing structure. 
(d)  The phase-in shall be intended to inure to the benefit of the town because of (i) the willingness of the business concerns to locate in the town, or (ii) the willingness of a business to replace, reconstruct, expand, or remodel existing buildings or facilities with modern buildings or facilities resulting in an increase in building investment by the firm in the town. 
(e)  Except as provided in this section, any new buildings, new structures and/or new additions to existing buildings or structures used essentially for offices, manufacturing or commercial enterprises and not for residential purposes, the payment of taxes on which has been so exempted or which has been so phased in shall not, during the period for which the phase-in is granted, be further subject to taxation by the town. 
(f)  To be eligible for this economic development tax incentive, the new building or structure and/or any new additions to existing buildings or structures and not for residential purposes shall be occupied pursuant to a duly issued town or State of Rhode Island certificate of occupancy. 
(g)  In the case of commercial or industrial condominiums, the phase in of taxes shall occur in the following manner: 
(1)  Six-year phase in for the value of the building that will contain condominium units. Phase in incentive accrues to the owner of the building at the time of its final inspection. 
(2)  Six-year phase in for the value of each condominium unit to commence at the time of said unit receiving its certificate of occupancy. Phase in incentive accrues to the owner of the condominium unit upon receipt of its certificate of occupancy. 
(h)  This section shall be repealed as of December 31, 2018 unless extended by further action of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 97-5, § 1, 4-7-1997; Ord. No. 08-21, §§ 1, 2, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 10-09, §§ 1, 2, 5-24-2010; Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 7-10-2010; Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 19-41. - Taxation of renewable energy systems. 
(a)  Findings. Pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 44-3-3(a)(48), (49), residential and manufacturing properties that install renewable energy systems are exempt from local taxation. 
    Pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 44-5-3(c)-(e), commercial renewable energy systems shall be subject to a tangible tax payment to the municipality through rules and regulations that have been adopted by the state office of energy resources for all commercial renewable energy systems. 
    Pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 44-3-21, city or town councils of the various cities and towns may, by ordinance, exempt from taxation any renewable energy system located in the city or town. 
(b)  Action. In accordance with RIGL 1956, § 44-5-3(c), the town hereby authorizes its assessor to levy a tax on renewable energy tangible property of commercial energy systems, as defined in RIGL 1956, § 39-26-5 in accordance with the rules and regulations executed by the state office of energy resources with the following exception: 
(1)  In accordance with RIGL 1956, § 44-3-21, the town hereby exempts from taxation commercial net-metered renewable energy systems whose sole purpose is to offset electricity bills and not to sell power back to the electric distribution system. 
    Property owners installing renewable energy systems shall be required to provide the interconnection application between the renewable energy developer and the electric distribution company (National Grid or any other utility company) and any documentation of program enrollment (e.g., renewable energy growth or net metering enrollment forms) to the town indicating if the renewable energy system is net-metered or if the system is selling a portion or all of the energy produced back to National Grid under the Renewable Energy Growth Program. A copy of the final interconnection service agreement executed between the renewable energy developer and electric distribution company shall be provided to the town prior to construction of the renewable energy system. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 3-5-2018) 
Chapter 20 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public works, § 812. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; garbage, trash and refuse, ch. 6; storage and removal of manufacturing, industry or utility wastes or materials, § 6-3; health and sanitation, ch. 8; deposit of sewage, wastes or water in streets, public places or state waters, § 8-23; water supply at public fairgrounds and carnivals, § 8-41 et seq.; North Kingstown wastewater management district, § 8-140 et seq.; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9; mobile and manufactured home parks, ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivisions, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Percolation tests and water table elevation determinations, G.L. 1956, § 2-319.5-1 et seq.; installers of individual sewage disposal systems, G.L. 1956, § 5-56-1 et seq.; sewer system cleaners, G.L. 1956, § 23-43.3-1 et seq.; penalty for violation of wastewater pretreatment program, G.L. 1956, § 45-6-2.3; sewage charges, G.L. 1956, § 45-14-1 et seq.; water pollution, G.L. 1956, § 46-12-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF WATER SUPPLY RULES AND REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Department of water supply, § 819. 

Sec. 20-16. - General rules. 
(a)  Contract. The department of water supply rules and regulations and all subsequent changes, amendments and additions thereto shall constitute a part of the contract with every water taker. 
(b)  Responsibility of property owner. Every water taker served by the town department of water supply shall be the property owner, and such owner shall be considered to have agreed to be bound by the rules and regulations in this article. 
(c)  Availability of rules and regulations. A copy of the department of water supply rules and regulations shall be available to every water consumer and shall be available at the main office of the department of water supply. 
(d)  Failure to know rules and regulations. Failure to know the rules and regulations will not excuse any water taker from the consequences of neglect of such rules and regulations. 
(e)  Due date of bills; delinquency. All bills for water and charges for labor and materials or other services are due and payable when rendered. If not paid within 90 days from the date of the bill, the town may shut off the water and discontinue the service without further notice. The water will not be turned on until satisfactory arrangements have been made for payment in full of all amounts due, including any bills for repairs and other services, plus a charge as estimated in section 9-4, table XI, for turning on the water and restoring the services. 
(f)  Restoration of service after discontinuance. Whenever the services are ordered discontinued by the town for violation of any rule or regulation, a charge in accordance with section 9-4, table XI, will be made for turning on the water and restoring the schedule. 
(g)  Amendment. The department of water supply rules and regulations shall, from time to time as necessary or desirable, be amended by ordinance of the town council. 
(h)  Violation of restrictions. Any person violating any provision of restrictions placed on use of the water supply by the town manager in accordance with the department of water supply rules and regulations and any amendments thereto shall, in the first instance, receive a written warning from the police department or the department of water supply, which shall contain the details of the violation together with a notice of the penalty for further violations. Any person violating any provision of such restrictions after having received a written warning pursuant to this subsection shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $25.00 for the first such violation and by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a second and any subsequent violation within 30 days of the date of the first violation. 
(i)  Responsibility for injury to system. All injuries to water mains or service pipes, hydrants or other parts of the water system caused by any agency in putting in sewers, drains, pipes or in any other manner shall be chargeable to the owner of the premises for whom such work is done. 
(j)  Boilers requiring pressure. All consumers having boilers on such consumers' premises depending on the pressure in the pipes to keep them supplied are cautioned against danger of a collapse. The town does not recommend the installation of boilers on direct pressure and will not be responsible for accidents or leaks arising from the installation. The town and its agents shall not be held liable for damages, cost or expense for personal or property damages caused by bursting, collapse or leakage of pressure boilers of hot water tanks nor any leakage from pipes, fixtures or other appliances on the premises. 
(k)  Damages resulting from supply stoppage or nonuse. No person shall be entitled to damages or to have any portion of a payment refunded for any stoppage of supply occasioned by accident to any portion of the works, for stoppage for the purpose of additions or repairs or for nonuse occasioned by absence or any other reason. The town shall have the right at all times to shut off the water temporarily without notice for necessary repairs, extensions or other necessary work connected with the distribution system or for causes beyond its control, although it is intended that prior notice will be given when possible. No taker or other person will be entitled to recover any abatement compensation for damages because of shutting off or the limitation of the use of water for nonpayment of bills or for neglect or refusal to comply with the rules and regulations of the department of water supply. 
(l)  Charges for seasonal service. The charge for terminating and restoring seasonal water service shall be made in accordance with section 9-4, table XI. 
(m)  Charges for private contractors under contract with town. Water used by private contractors under contracts with the town for work, other than department of water supply work, will be charged for at the regular schedule rates, and payment of the charges must be made by such contractors and such provision included in all contracts with the town. 
(n)  Charges for town use. All water furnished the town, whether for school or other town uses, shall be charged for and collected at the regular schedule rates. 
(o)  Time of reading meters. Each meter will be read at 90-day intervals, as far as it is practical to do so. 
(p)  Seller's responsibility in property transfer. When a transfer of property is to be made, the seller shall have the meter read and recorded by the water supply department. Readings shall be made within two working days of receipt of notification to the water supply department of the closing date. The charge for obtaining and recording final readings shall be made in accordance with section 9-4, table XI. A closing statement shall be made available for full payment from the water supply department one day prior to the closing date. Any and all charges, either past due or incurred subsequent to the final reading, shall remain collectable in accordance with G.L. 1956, § 44-7-11. 
(q)  New owner's responsibility in property transfer. When a transfer of property is made, the new owner shall immediately make application for service upon notification of that requirement from the water supply department. 
(r)  Unauthorized taking of water. No person shall take water from any hydrant, main, blowoff or other outlet without the express permission of the water supply department. The taking of water is permitted by metered service; bulk water sale as prescribed in section 9-4, table XI; or by special application to the department for metered hydrant. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 2-1-5; Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 15; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(a), 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 92-7, § 1, 3-9-1992; Ord. No. 96-8, § 2, 5-13-1996) 
Sec. 20-17. - Purpose; copies available. 
(a)  The rules and regulations of this article and all subsequent changes, amendments and additions thereto shall constitute a part of the contract with every water taker. Every water taker served by the town department of water supply shall be the property owner, and such owner shall be considered to have agreed to be bound by the rules and regulations of this article. 
(b)  A copy of the rules and regulations is available to every water consumer and can be obtained upon application to the main office of the department, and all persons are requested to read rules and regulations carefully. Failure to know the rules and regulations will not excuse any water taker from the consequences of neglect of such rules and regulations. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 1; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(a), 12-18-1989) 
Sec. 20-18. - Wasting water. 
(a)  Common causes of wasted water are as follows: 
(1)  Defective pipes. 
(2)  Defective ballcocks or valves in water closets and boiler tanks. 
(3)  Leaky faucets and stopcocks. 
(4)  Careless use of hoses. 
(5)  Allowing water to run in the winter to prevent freezing and in the summer for cooling. 
(b)  The amount of water that may be wasted through defective plumbing under a pressure of 80 pounds per square inch is shown to be as follows: 
Size of Stream Waste Per Day 
(gallons) 1/2 inch 38,300 1/4 inch 11,352 1/8 inch  4,080 1/16 inch    888 1/32 inch    384  
(c)  The greater number of leaks occur in water closet tanks through imperfect seating of the ballcocks. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 2) 
Sec. 20-19. - Applications for service. 
    All applications for water service connections and the use of water shall be made at the office of the department of water supply on the form prescribed and shall be signed by the owner of the premises or the owner's duly authorized agent to be supplied, stating fully and truly the various uses to which the water is to be applied. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 4; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(a), 12-18-1989) 
Sec. 20-20. - Service pipe connections. 
(a)  The town will furnish and install water service pipe connections from the main line to the inside of the curbline. The applicant shall be responsible for the payment of all expenses associated with the installation of new service connections within the right-of-way, including but not limited to road cuts, excavations and road repair. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application by the director of water supply, a tap, curbstop and service pipe will be furnished and installed between the water main and the inside of the curbline. For ordinary service, the service pipe will be one-inch diameter. 
(c)  Charge for service pipe connections from the water main to curbstop are set forth in section 9-4, table XI. 
(d)  No new services or service pipes or extensions will be laid during the period from November 1 to March 31, except in the discretion of the director of water supply. To cover additional cost of laying the service when the ground is frozen or because of climate conditions, an extra charge will be made varying with the pipe size and length of the service required. 
(e)  On installations or reinstallations of service lines after July 1, 1996, only one customer will be supplied through one service pipe. Where more than one customer is supplied through one curbstop, any violation of the rules in this article by any of the customers so supplied shall be deemed a violation by all, and the town may take such action as could be taken against a single customer. 
(f)  Service connections made after July 1, 1996, shall be made only from the street which is the legal address of the premises served. Service connections across property boundaries are prohibited without written permission of the director of water supply. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 5; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(b), 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 96-8, § 2, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 99-6, § 1, 5-10-1999) 
Sec. 20-21. - Work inside curbline. 
(a)  All work on the water supply system inside of the curbline shall be done at the expense of the water taker. The town reserves the right to decline to connect with plumbing that has not been examined and approved by the director of water supply or the director's authorized agent. 
(b)  Every water service pipe must be provided with a valve properly located inside the premises on the supply side of the meter. Valves must be easily accessible and fully protected from freezing, and all pipes in such premises must be so arranged that they can be fully drained. An approved backflow device and valve equal in size to the meter shall be supplied on the discharge side of the meter to facilitate meter removal. 
(c)  All pipes laid between the curbstop and stopcock must have at least four feet of earth cover and shall be tested for watertightness before an authorized agent of the director of water supply before being covered. 
(d)  Water main installation and extensions shall only be allowed in the water service areas included on the water service area map (following this section) as indicated in the town comprehensive plan. The extension of water mains in all other areas is prohibited. 
(e)  All repairs to and costs of maintenance of water service pipe from the curbstop to the meter shall be at the expense of the water taker. If such pipes are not repaired promptly following written notice or need of repair, the town reserves the right to discontinue the service without further notice. 
(f)  No part of the water supplied to the premises for which the application for service is made shall be sold or otherwise supplied to other premises or parties except by written permission from the director of water supply. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 6; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(b), 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 96-8, § 2, 5-13-1996) 
Sec. 20-22. - Water distribution mains. 
(a)  The installation or extension of water mains in any public street or way or in any duly approved private street or way may be made only as authorized by the town council and in accordance with and subject to such conditions and requirements as the town council may prescribe. All installations or extensions of water mains proposed to service five or more house lots or the equivalent shall be analyzed using a hydraulic computer model to assess the ability of the system to serve the proposed development. The minimum required fire flow conditions shall be 750 gallons per minute with a minimum system residual pressure of 25 pounds per square inch (psi). 
(b)  No street, sidewalk or other public place shall be opened for any purpose in connection with the water system except by order of the director of water supply, the state or its authorized agents, and tunneling under the street or sidewalk is prohibited unless authorized by special permit of the director of water supply or the state division of roads and bridges. 
(c)  The installation or extension of water mains not already approved by the town council pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be prohibited beyond the boundary of the water service area. Connections to existing water mains located outside of the water service area shall be limited to one inch service connections as provided in subsections 20-20(e) and (f). 
(d)  Water main installation and extensions shall be only be allowed in the water service areas included on the water service area map (following this section) as indicated in the town comprehensive plan. The installation or extension of water mains may also be allowed with town council approval for existing legal lots located in those areas that have access to municipal sewer service as of November 20, 2017. Lots must connect to sewer service and hydraulic modeling must demonstrate that fire flow and residual pressure requirements can be met. The extension of water mains in all other areas is prohibited. 
(e)  The boundaries of the water service area shall be depicted on a map (following this section) approved by the town council and available for inspection at the office of the town clerk and the department of water supply. 
(f)  Water transmission mains may be connected in the nonservice areas as authorized by the town council consistent with the town capital improvement plan for the purpose of improving water system hydraulics. Connections to these transmission mains shall be limited to one inch service connections as provided in subsections 20-20(e) and (f). 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 7; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(b), 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 97-12, § 1, 8-4-1997; Ord. No. 99-6, § 2, 5-10-1999; Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, 2-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-19, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-2007; Ord. No. 14-16, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 17-21, § 1, 11-20-2017) 

Sec. 20-23. - Meters. 
(a)  Every building shall have its own individual service connection made only from the street which is the legal address of the premises served, and all services shall be individually metered. All meters shall be equipped with a remote reading encoder register complete with a weatherproof receptacle mounted to the building serviced by the meter. 
(b)  In certain cases of miscellaneous and temporary uses of water, where the quantity used may be small, the charges for water may be estimated instead of being shown by meter at the discretion of the director of water supply. The estimated usage charge shall not be less than the minimum estimated quarterly billing for a single-family dwelling as shown in section 9-4, table XI. 
(c)  One service connection shall be required for each dwelling fronting on a street or highway regardless of ownership. By special permit from the director of water supply, water may be supplied from the same meter to dwellings in the rear belonging to the water taker and on the same platted lot, if the owner so desires and at the owner's expense, at an additional charge of $10.00 per quarter for each dwelling so supplied. Special permits may also be issued by the director of water supply allowing water takers to install, at the water takers' own expense, branch connections from a dwelling house to supply stores and shops owned and operated by the water taker and located on the same platted lot and adjacent to such dwelling under certain conditions and limitations, at an additional charge of $10.00 per quarter for each building so supplied. The town reserves the right to cancel any such permits at its discretion. 
(d)  The town will furnish, install and maintain individual meters up to one inch in size at the same cost as the cost of the meter to the town. A customer requiring a larger meter than one inch in size will be supplied with an approved meter of the necessary size by the department of water supply and charged for the meter, together with the cost of installation and maintenance. Charges for such meters and installation will be due when the bill is rendered and must be paid before water is turned on. 
(e)  When a meter two inches or larger in size is to be installed, gate valves, the same size as the meter, must be placed on both sides of the meter and suitable backflow shall be placed between the outlet side of the meter and the gate valve. 
(f)  The cost of ordinary care and repair of all meters of less than one inch in size will be borne by the town. The cost of unusual repairs necessitated by freezing, hot water or attributable to any carelessness or neglect on the part of the occupant or owner of the premises shall be charged to the owner of the premises. 
(g)  A suitable location for installing a meter must be provided so that it will be readily accessible for inspection, reading and repairs. Authorized agents of the director of water supply shall have access to the premises supplied at all reasonable hours for the purpose of reading, repairing and replacing meters or to examine pipes and fixtures connected with the water service. 
(h)  Whenever a meter must be set outdoors, the meter shall be set in an approved pit located where it is easily accessible for meter reading and repairs. All costs associated with the installation, repair and maintenance of meter pits shall be the responsibility of the water taker. 
(i)  All meters must be coupled with couplings furnished with the meters. Bypasses around meters shall not be made. All meters shall be set by the director of water supply or the director's authorized agent. All meters shall be the sole property of the town. 
(j)  A charge shall be made for all water passing through and recorded by a meter, whether used or wasted as a result of leaks or neglect, and the property owner shall be liable and charged for the amount of water as recorded by the meter in accordance with department of water supply policy. 
(k)  A meter will be tested upon request of a consumer or if a dispute by the consumer occurs as to the accuracy of a meter. If the meter is found to be within two percent of being correct, a service charge will be made for testing any meter up to three-fourths inch in size. If the error in such meter is greater than two percent, no charge will be made for the test, and an adjustment will be made of the water bill in question based on the average daily consumption. Meters larger than three-fourths inch in size will be tested at the request and expense of the consumer. The charge will be in accordance with the prevailing labor costs. 
(l)  If a meter fails to register properly, the charge for water will be based on the greater of either the minimum estimated quarterly billing for a single-family dwelling or on the average daily consumption prior to the failure of the meter, as determined by the director of water supply. 
(m)  When a dwelling or building to be supplied with water is located more than 150 feet back of the street line, the director of water supply, in the director's discretion, may require the applicant to provide an approved pit in which to set that meter, supplied with a pipe for the curbstop that is satisfactory to the director of water supply. 
(n)  Customers shall maintain the plumbing within the customers' own premises in good repair, free from leaks, and protected from freezing, at the customers' own expense, including but not limited to faucets, shutoff valves, backflows, meter fittings and fixtures. For failure to do so, service may be disconnected. The town shall repair or replace meters of less than one inch which fail as the result of normal usage or age. All repairs and replacements of meters one inch and larger shall be made by the town, but charged to the owner. All meters, regardless of size, shall be the property of the town. 
(o)  Any meter requiring replacement after July 1, 1999, shall be retrofitted to include a backflow prevention device. The installation of the backflow device shall conform to section 20-26. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 8; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(b), 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 96-8, § 2, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 99-7, § 1, 5-10-1999; Ord. No. 07-05, § 2, 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 20-24. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  All public fire hydrants and hydrant connections are installed and maintained by the department of water supply and remain a part of the waterworks system. No connection charge is placed against the installation of public hydrants. 
(b)  No person shall obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by placing or permitting any snow, debris, building material or other obstruction to remain at or about the hydrant so as to interfere in any manner with its immediate use. 
(c)  Public fire hydrants are installed for the sole purpose of fire protection. With the exception of the members of the fire department operating the hydrants for legitimate purposes of such department, no use of such hydrants shall be made without the written consent of the director of water supply or designee. Any person found to be violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-4. 
(d)  Hydrants shall be used for no purposes other than those preapproved in writing by the director of water supply. Any hydrant used by other than fire or water supply department personnel shall be fitted with a meter, backflow and hydrant gate supplied by the town. A deposit covering the cost of the hydrant setup shall be maintained by the department. The deposit shall be refunded after the hydrant setup has been returned to the department and checked for serviceability and the usage charge is paid in full. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 9; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(b), 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 90-20, § 1, 11-13-1990; Ord. No. 96-8, § 2, 5-13-1996) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 5. 
Sec. 20-25. - Fire protection supplies. 
(a)  The town may render a separate water service to private property for private fire protection purposes. 
(b)  Application for such service shall be made by the owner of the property or the owner's authorized agent and will be subject to all the provisions, including the charge for installing the service, as set forth in section 9-4, table XI. 
(c)  The applicant must furnish two complete and correct sets of drawings showing the location of the premises to be supplied, together with the location of all valves, pipes, hydrants, tanks, sprinkler heads and other appurtenances on the premises at the time of making application. The plans will remain the property of the department of water supply. 
(d)  The applicant also agrees to furnish two sets of drawings showing revisions to piping or appurtenances whenever the revisions are made. 
(e)  The annual charge for this service shall be made in accordance with the schedule of fees set forth under section 9-4, table XI. 
(f)  The town expressly reserves the right to determine the necessity for and the advisability of granting any application for fire protection service and the right to determine the size of service pipe which will be installed depending upon the nature and capacity of the fire protection equipment within the building. 
(g)  No connection shall be made at any time between the fire protection system and the regular water supply to the premises. Valves placed on the system shall be of a style that can be sealed by the department of water supply. 
(h)  Only one service of this class will be allowed to any one building or premises unless, in the opinion of the director of water supply, more than one is absolutely necessary for the proper protection of the premises. All fire protection equipment connected to the town supply shall be confined within the building or on the premises named in the application. Where two or more connections are made for one building or premises, they shall be kept separated, unless special permission is obtained from the director of water supply to connect them in a manner to be approved by the director of water supply. 
(i)  No water shall be drawn from the fire protection service pipes for any purpose whatsoever except for the extinguishment of fire. This subsection is not to be construed as prohibiting a reasonable use of water for fire drills, draining of the system to prevent freezing or other reasonable use in connection with proper fire protection. Whenever water is used for this purpose, either by the owner or the insurance inspector making a test, the owner shall be charged the minimum estimated quarterly billing for a single-family dwelling or the actual usage if metered. 
(j)  All fire protection services shall be subject to periodic inspection by the director of water supply or the director's authorized agent. The owner shall provide the town all reasonable facilities for making such inspection and any information concerning the inspection that is required. Care will be taken that inspections will be made with as little inconvenience to the owner as possible. 
(k)  If the owner or occupant of any premises is found to be using water from a fire protection service for other purposes than fire protection, the water shall be shut off from the premises until the offender gives reasonable assurance before the town that the offense will not be repeated. Any water used for purposes other than fire protection shall be charged in accordance with the rate schedule. 
(l)  All fire protection services shall be provided with a backflow prevention device of a size and type approved by the director of water supply. 
(m)  For any violation of the rules governing fire protection services, the town may discontinue the service immediately. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 10; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(a), (b), 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 96-8, § 2, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 99-7, § 2, 5-10-1999) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 5. 
Sec. 20-26. - Cross connections prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall cause a physical connection to be made between the town water system and any other water supply for commercial, domestic, sanitary, fire protection or boiler feed purposes or for any other purpose whatsoever. 
(b)  No water closet, urinal bowl or any other fixture shall be supplied directly from the town water system through a flushometer or other valve unless such valve is set above the water closet or urinal or other fixtures in such a manner as to prevent any possibility of backsiphonage or pollution. 
(c)  No plumbing fixture, device or connection shall be installed which will provide a cross connection between the town water system and a drainage system, soil or waste pipe so as to permit or make possible the backflow of sewage or waste into the water system. Drainoff pipes for drainage sprinkler systems shall not be connected into a drainage system or a submerged pit. 
(d)  If the water from the town water system is delivered to a tank which is also supplied with water from any other source than the water system, such tank shall be open to atmospheric pressure, and the town water shall be supplied above the maximum water level in the tank. The tank shall be equipped with an overflow pipe of ample size to fix definitely the maximum level of water. The invert of the pipe supplied with town water shall be at least six inches above the maximum level and protected by a suitable backflow prevention device. 
(e)  If water from the water system is delivered to a tank in which there are chemicals, dyestuffs or other materials used in processing, the pipe supplied with town water shall not be submerged and shall be protected by a suitable backflow prevention device. There shall be ample clearance between the invert of the pipe and the top of the tank to prevent backsiphonage into the town system. 
(f)  A customer services or meters installed, reinstalled or which constitute a change in use after July 1, 1996, shall be protected with a backflow device commensurate with the degree of potential hazard as determined by the director of water supply. All such devices shall be located immediately after the water meter and shall comply with AWWA C510-92, C511-92 and C512-92 standards. Bypassing of either the meter or a backflow device is prohibited. All costs associated with the installation, maintenance, testing and repair of backflow devices shall be the sole responsibility of the water taker. Backflow devices shall be the property of the owner. 
(g)  All backflow devices shall be classified as either "high" or "low" hazard devices. Every industrial user and any commercial user taking water for other than domestic use shall be deemed to be a high hazard. All residential and domestic only commercial users shall be deemed to be low hazard users unless circumstances warrant otherwise. 
(h)  All high hazard backflow devices shall be inspected and tested by a town-employed certified backflow technician once every calendar year. All costs associated with annual inspection and testing shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(i)  The town, at any time and with just cause, can require a backflow to be tested. If the device proves to be operational, the town shall be responsible for the cost of testing. No other costs associated with the testing, i.e., valve repairs, lost production, etc., shall be paid by the town. 
(j)  The director of water supply or designated representative may at any reasonable time inspect any building, meter pit or structure where a water or fire service enters to determine if a cross connection hazard exists. If, as a result of the inspection, it is determined that a hazard exists, the director of water supply shall require the owner to install a backflow device. Written notice shall be provided to the property owner fully describing the hazard, the type of device required and the time allowed for installation of the device. All costs associated with the required backflow device shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 11; Ord. No. 96-8, § 2, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 99-7, § 3, 5-10-1999; Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 20-27. - Water bills. 
(a)  Water bills are prepared at the water office. 
(b)  Every person shall pay the cost of the water meter at the time of application for water service. All meters shall be the sole property of the town. 
(c)  All water charges are billed quarterly in arrears. All charges, rates and fees shall be applicable on a nonprorated basis, payable quarterly or any part thereof. 
(d)  All charges are due and payable upon presentation of the bill and are considered past due 30 days after the date of the bill. Failure of a customer to receive a water bill shall not relieve the customer of the responsibility of making payment. 
(e)  Payments shall be first applied to any and all charges, including penalties and interest due, deemed to be in arrears. 
(f)  No water service, once discontinued, shall be eligible for service until all outstanding charges, penalties and interest due of the service are paid in full. 
(g)  All charges associated with the installation of the service connection and the cost of the meter, except turn-on fees, shall be paid in full before water is turned on. Turn-on fees shall be charged to the account and payment due in accordance with the quarterly billing cycle. 
(h)  The department of water supply may require a deposit from a consumer to guarantee payment for excess water consumption or to cover anticipated costs with the installation of a service or purchase of a meter. 
(i)  Notice of change of the billing address shall be provided to the department of water supply at the time the change takes place. Failure to receive a bill does not relieve the customer of the obligation of payment or from the consequence of nonpayment. 
(j)  Whenever a taker of water sells or transfers property for which application for water service has been granted, the water taker shall notify the water supply department no less than two working days prior to the transfer to obtain a final meter reading and account closing statement for payment. Any outstanding charges against the account shall remain collectable under G.L. 1956, § 44-7-11. 
(k)  Each water taker shall be required to purchase a water meter and outside encoder of the type and size specified by the director of water supply. The cost charged to the water taker shall be equal to the cost to the town to supply the meter and encoder. 
(l)  Each water taker shall be liable for payment of all charges, including water or services occurring during such water taker's ownership and until such time as the town receives notice of the transfer of the property. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 12; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(a), 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 92-7, § 2, 3-9-1992; Ord. No. 96-8, § 2, 5-13-1996) 
Sec. 20-28. - Fees. 
(a)  A one-time new water service application fee for each new water service connection approved and any charges for town installation of the service connection from the main to the curbstop, including capping of the main, the service pipe, the curbstop and box and pavement repairs, if required, shall be paid for by each property owner whose application for water service is granted. Such fees and charges shall be in accordance with section 9-4, table XI. 
(b)  A quarterly fee shall be charged by the department of water supply for each public fire hydrant for fire protection, payable to the department of water supply in accordance with section 9-4, table XI. 
(c)  For each fire protection service connection from the main, the applicant will be charged in accordance with section 9-4, table XI. 
(d)  All bills for water and charges for labor and materials or other services are due and payable when rendered. If not paid within 30 days from the date of the bill, the town may shut off the water and discontinue the service without further notice. The water will not be turned on until satisfactory arrangements have been made for payment in full of all amounts due, including any bills for repairs and other services, plus a service charge for turning on the water and restoring the service. 
(e)  Whenever a service is ordered discontinued by the town for violation of any rules or regulations in this article, a service charge will be made for turning on the water and restoring the service. 
(f)  A service charge for work done during normal working hours and during other than normal working hours will be charged for specific services rendered by the department of water supply employees, such as turning water on or off, seasonal meter installation or removal or other customer-caused field services, in accordance with section 9-4, table XI. This service charge will not apply to calls which result from malfunctions or leaks in town property or meters or other unusual situations in which the director of water supply determines it would be unfair or unreasonable. 
(g)  All services shall be assessed an infrastructure replacement fee based on consumption as prescribed in section 9-4, table XI. The fee shall be evaluated by the director of water supply on a biannual basis, and all monies collected thereby shall be deposited into the infrastructure replacement fund, which is created in accordance with the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 46-15.6-6. 
(h)  Every nonresidential property serviced by public water and protected by a backflow device as required in section 20-26 shall be assessed an annual inspection and testing fee as prescribed in section 9-4, table XI. 
(Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(a), (b), 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 92-7, § 3, 3-9-1992; Ord. No. 96-8, § 2, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 98-18, § 2, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 99-6, § 3, 5-10-1999; Ord. No. 99-7, § 4, 5-10-1999) 
Sec. 20-29. - Rate schedule. 
    Each meter connection for domestic or commercial water use shall be charged in accordance with section 9-4, table XI. All water supplied through the service connection will be charged to the water taker on a bill rendered quarterly. In certain cases, where it is deemed beneficial to the town as determined by the director of water supply, large volume takers may be billed on a monthly basis. 
(Ord. No. 92-7, § 4, 3-9-1992; Ord. No. 96-8, § 2, 5-13-1996) 
Sec. 20-30. - Imposition of restrictions on use of water supply. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section of the rules and regulations is to provide for a means of conserving the town's supply of potable water and to minimize the risk associated with excess water demand by restricting the use of water on occasions of actual or anticipated shortages and when deemed necessary for the health, welfare or safety of the town residents. 
(b)  Duration of restrictions for lawn and landscape irrigation. Irrigation of lawns and landscaping for properties served by municipal water using irrigation (sprinkler) systems is restricted to two (2) days per week from July 1 through September 1 on an annual basis or until such time that this section is repealed, rescinded or superseded. 
(c)  Schedule for irrigation of lawns and landscaping. Irrigation of lawns and landscaping using irrigation (sprinkler) systems is restricted from July 1 through September 1 in accordance with the following: 
IRRIGATION DISTRICT 1 (USE OF SPRINKLERS FOR LAWNS AND LANDSCAPING ALLOWED ON MONDAY AND THURSDAY ONLY) - All North Kingstown Water customers located to the east of Route 1/Post Road/Tower Hill Road. 
IRRIGATION DISTRICT 2 (USE OF SPRINKLERS FOR LAWNS AND LANDSCAPING ALLOWED ON TUESDAY AND FRIDAY ONLY) - All North Kingstown Water customers located to the west of Route 1/Post Road/Tower Hill Road. 
No sprinkler operation will be permitted in any district between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. or on Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday; however, hand watering of flowers and/or vegetable gardens is permitted at anytime. 
(d)  Imposition of more stringent restrictions. The town manager may, at the town manager's discretion, under subsection (e) of this section, impose water use restrictions that are more stringent than those provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The restrictions as imposed by the town manager shall automatically supersede any seasonal water conservation measures that are less restrictive and in place at the time. The more stringent restrictions shall remain in place until removed as provided for in subsection (g) of this section. At such time, those seasonal water conservation measures previously in place shall again automatically take effect as provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Criteria for imposition and scope of restrictions. Whenever the director of water supply certifies in writing to the town manager, that, in the opinion of the director of water supply, predicated on past, present and predicted weather conditions and patterns of consumption of the town's water supply or any other facts then in the possession of the director of water supply pertaining to the town's water system, the present and anticipated use of the town's potable water supply will be such that either a shortage of potable water or damage to the town's water system may reasonably be anticipated unless restrictions are imposed, [then] the town manager may proclaim a state of emergency and prohibit all or certain outdoor uses of town water by anyone during all or certain hours of all or certain days, including, but only in extreme emergencies: 
(1)  Use of water required for residential vegetable gardens; or 
(2)  Use of water essential for operation of businesses. 
(f)  Notification of restrictions. The town manager shall cause any such proclamation declaring a state of emergency and prohibiting outdoor use of town water, as stated in subsection (e) of this section, to be forthwith posted in at least two locations within the town, to be released to the news media and, to the extent the town manager deems practicable, to be otherwise brought to the attention of persons using town water. 
(g)  Removal of restrictions. While such restrictions are in effect, the director of water supply shall certify daily in writing to the town manager the water consumption of the preceding 24-hour period. When, on the basis of daily pumping records, present and anticipated weather conditions and patterns of consumption and other facts known to the director of water supply shall determine that the danger of shortage of potable water or damage to the Town's water system has ended, the town manager shall forthwith declare the termination of the state of emergency and remove any and all restrictions theretofore placed on the use of town water. Notice of the termination of the state of emergency and the removal of such restrictions shall be published by the town manager in the same manner in which notice of the proclamation and restrictions was given in the first instance. 
(h)  Enforcement. The town manager shall diligently enforce this section (see Charter, article V, sec. 506). The town manager or designee shall, for each and every violation of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section, provide written notice of violation. The notice shall be issued at the time the violation is observed by the town manager or designee. The notice of violation shall be given to the occupant of the property if present or left at the premises if no one is present to receive the notice of violation. The notice shall require the immediate termination of the violation. If a second violation is observed, a written notice of violation shall be sent to the occupant of the property or left at the premises. The notice shall require the immediate termination of the violation and inform the violator that subsequent violations may: constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine, upon conviction, of not to exceed $500.00. Enforcement of violations of this section shall be processed in Municipal Court (see chapter 2, article VI). Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. All fines for violation of this section shall be recovered in accordance with section 1-5. 
(i)  In-ground sprinklers. Use of in-ground sprinklers shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  All connections to the municipal water system for the purpose of irrigation of lawns and landscaping shall be protected by a backflow device as specified in the state building code plumbing regulation SBC-3, dated May 1, 1997, or as revised. 
(2)  Every person making connection to the municipal water system for the purpose of irrigation of a lawn and landscaping installed after May 1, 1998, shall apply for a permit with the town building official as specified in the state building code plumbing regulation SBC-3, dated May 1, 1997, or as revised. 
(3)  All connections to the municipal water system for the purpose of irrigation of lawns and landscaping should have as part of the installation a rain switch device to prevent the initiation of the irrigation sequence in wet weather conditions. 
(4)  All connections to the municipal water system for the purpose of irrigation of lawns and landscaping should have as part of the installation a pressure-reducing valve set to limit the water pressure applied to the irrigation system to at or below 60 psi (per square inch). 
(5)  All connections to the municipal water system for the purpose of irrigation of lawns and landscaping should have as part of the installation sprinkler heads capable of delivering no more than five gallons per minute flow per sprinkler head at 60 psi (per square inch). 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, app. B, § 16; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1(b), 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 92-7, § 5, 3-9-1992; Ord. No. 98-5, § 1, 4-13-1998; Ord. No. 02-9, § 1, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Secs. 20-31-20-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - AUTHORIZATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, adopted March 25, 2013, amended the Code by adding the designation of Division 1 to §§ 20-50-20-71. 

Sec. 20-50. - Town authorized to construct, maintain and operate sewerage works. 
    The town is authorized and empowered in accordance with the provisions of this article, to engineer, lay out, construct, maintain and operate sewerage works within the territory of said town; and to acquire any lands, water rights, rights of way or easement, public or private, in said town necessary for accomplishing any purpose mentioned in this article. Such sewerage works may include sewers and sewer service connections, pumping stations, disposal and filtration plants and other works essential to the proper collection and disposal of the sewage in said town. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-51. - Authority of council as to construction, operation, maintenance and repair of sewerage works. 
(a)  Generally. The construction, operation, maintenance and repair of such sewerage works shall be vested in the town department of public works, through its sewer division. 
(b)  Examination and inspection. Members of the town department of public works and their duly authorized agents may enter upon any premises within the town to examine, inspect or survey the same, whenever necessary for the performance of their duties under this chapter. 
(c)  Contracts. The town council shall have authority to make for and in behalf of the town all necessary contracts for the purchase of property, materials, supplies and equipment and for the construction of the sewerage works. All work, supplies, materials and equipment required by the town in connection with the construction of the sewerage works shall be procured by contract made pursuant to town purchasing ordinance and in the manner required by the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-52. - Authority to issue bonds. 
    The town is hereby authorized and empowered, in addition to authority previously granted, to issue from time to time under its corporate name and seal. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-53. - Execution and sale of bonds; interest; premiums; proceeds. 
    Said bonds shall be signed by the town treasurer and countersigned by the president of the town council and shall be issued and sold at not less than par at such times, in such manner and in such amounts as the town council may determine. Coupons shall bear the facsimile signature of the town treasurer. The premiums, if any, arising from the sale of said bonds shall be applied to the cost of preparing, issuing and marketing them and any balance of such premiums shall be applied to the payment of the principal of said bonds in the order of their maturity. The proceeds arising from the sale of the bonds shall be delivered to the town treasurer and such proceeds, except as provided in respect to the premiums arising from the sale thereof, shall be expended for the purposes of this article (other than maintenance, operation and repair) or in payment of the principal of or interest on temporary notes issued or to replenish general funds. No purchaser of any bonds or notes issued under this article, however, shall be in any way responsible for the proper application of the proceeds derived from the sale thereof. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-54. - Authority to issue temporary notes. 
    The town through its town council is hereby authorized to issue and sell from time to time interest bearing or discounted notes signed by the town treasurer and countersigned by the president of the town council for the purposes specified in section 20-51 of this article or for the purpose of replenishing general funds as provided in section 20-53 of this chapter. Temporary notes issued hereunder shall be payable within three years from their respective dates but the principal and interest on notes issued for a shorter period may be renewed or paid from time to time by the issue of other notes hereunder provided the period from the date of an original note to the maturity or any note issued to renew or pay the same debt or the interest thereon shall not exceed three years. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-55. - Bonds and notes as valid obligation of town; exception from R.I.G.L. § 45-12-2; amortization of bonds. 
    All bonds and all temporary notes issued under the provisions of this article and the debts evidenced thereby shall be obligatory on the town in the same manner and to the same extent as other debts lawfully contracted by it but no pledge of any special funds to their payment is intended by this chapter. The bonds and notes issued hereunder shall be excepted from the operation of R.I.G.L. § 45-12-2, as amended. No such obligation shall at any time be included in the debt of said town for the purpose of ascertaining its borrowing capacity. The town shall annually appropriate a sum sufficient to pay the interest upon bonds and also to pay the principal of any bonds maturing in such year, until said bonds and the interest thereon are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-56. - Bonds and notes not affected by change in town officers. 
    Any bonds or notes issued under the provisions of this article and coupons on any bonds, if properly executed by officers of the town in office on the date of execution, shall be valid and binding according to their terms notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payment therefore, any or all of such officers shall for any reason have ceased to hold office. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-57. - Issuance of bonds or notes requires prior approval of electors. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, no bonds or notes shall be issued hereunder in excess of amounts approved from time to time by vote of a majority of the electors at any special or regularly scheduled election. Upon such vote of approval of an amount of bonds, temporary notes shall be issuable under section 20-54 hereof to the same amount. Pending the issue of bonds so authorized or of the notes, general funds of the town may be used for the purposes of the bonds to the extent of the amount of bonds so voted. The general funds shall be replenished without interest within one year after such use from the proceeds of the bonds or notes. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-58. - Imposition, collection and enforcement of charges for use of sewers. 
(a)  Fees, charges and assessments generally. The town council shall prescribe annual just and equitable charges to be charged all users of the sewerage system, all owners of land abutting upon that portion of any street or highway or right of way in which sewers have been constructed under the provisions of this article, all owners of land abutting upon that portion of any public street, highway or right of way in which sewers have been constructed otherwise than under this chapter and all users of such other sewers. Such annual charges shall be sufficient at all times to pay the cost of and are hereby appropriate to the operation, maintenance and repair of the sewerage works, including sewers constructed in public streets, highways or rights of way otherwise than under this chapter but not including debt service: 
(1)  Where a sewer or main drain is constructed on any street abutting corner lots, the town council upon recommendation of the department of public works abate, postpone, or cancel such assessments levied on one of either of the two sides of such corner lots. 
(2)  Owners of land tied to the sewerage system prior to 2008 shall not pay an assessment; however, such owners will be subject to capital upgrades or other system wide upgrades to the infrastructure. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, the annual charges shall include sums of money for debt service determined as hereinafter provided. The additional annual charges for debt service are hereby appropriated to pay the interest on and principal of those bonds or portions of bonds outstanding under this article. 
(c)  Charges for sewer service shall be based on existing agreements or new agreements between the town and Quonset Development Corporation and shall reflect the cost for treatment and utilization of those facilities involved in collection and transmission of sewerage. 
(d)  Certificate of charges; charges as lien on real estate. Each charge made by the town pursuant to this section shall be a lien upon the lands, buildings and improvements upon which it is made in the same way and manner as taxes assessed on real estate but such lien shall not expire until the charge with all interest, costs and penalties thereon is paid in full and, if the charge is not paid as required, it shall be collected in the same manner that taxes assessed on real estate are by law collected. 
(e)  Time and method of payment. Such annual charges shall be due and payable at the time the regular town taxes are first due and payable and the town treasurer shall certify said charges to the tax collector for collection and said tax collector shall proceed to collect such charges in the same manner and at the same time the regular taxes of the town are first payable, with provision for installments as in the case of the regular taxes. Interest at the rate per annum fixed for nonpayment of town taxes shall be charged and collected upon all overdue charges from the date they become payable until paid. 
(f)  Apportionment after annual certification. If any person becomes a user after such annual certification, the town treasurer will assign a just and equitable charge under this section based upon the portion of the fiscal year remaining after the beginning of such use. A person becoming a user with respect to land as to which such person was not previously a user shall be deemed a new user for the purposes of this paragraph. The town treasurer shall certify the charge to the tax collector for collection and the charge shall be payable when the next installment of regular town taxes is payable but maybe paid in equal installments on the remaining installment payment dates for the regular town taxes for the year in question. In all other respects, the charge under this paragraph shall be subject to the other provisions of this section. 
(g)  Use of general funds pending receipt of charges. Pending the receipt of charges under this section, general funds of the town may be used for the purposes for which the charges are appropriated. The general funds shall be replenished from such receipts without interest within the fiscal year in which such use occurs. 
(h)  Owner regarded as user. Where an occupant of land uses the sewerage system, the owner of the land shall be regarded as the user for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 9-23-2013) 
Sec. 20-59. - Costs of construction of sewerage works and laterals; annual assessments; liens created. 
(a)  Generally. The cost of construction of the sewerage works and the debt service on obligations issued shall be met from the sewer enterprise funds of the town, except as provided in this section and in the preceding section. The cost of construction of each lateral sewer installed after the effective date of this article shall be assessed upon all owners of land abutting upon that portion of any street or highway or right of way in which such lateral sewer is constructed. The town council may provide that assessments may be paid in equal annual installments for a period not exceeding 20 years with interest thereon at a rate determined by the town council not exceeding six percent per annum payable at the time each installment becomes due. Any landowner shall have the privilege, however, of prepaying unpaid installments with interest to the time of prepayment. 
(b)  Rate of assessment. The town council shall from time to time establish the rate of assessment for each lot in a designated sewer district based upon the actual cost of construction. 
(c)  Annual assessments-Lien on real estate. The town council shall annually, on or before the first day of July, certify to the town treasurer all the assessments made by it under the authority of this section. Each assessment made by the town council pursuant to this section shall be a lien upon the lands, buildings and improvements upon which it is made in the same way and a manner as taxes are assessed on real estate, but such lien shall not expire until the assessment with all interest, costs and penalties thereon is paid in full, and if the assessment is not paid as required, it shall be collected in the same manner that taxes assessed on real estate are by law collected. Such assessments shall be due and payable at the time the regular town taxes are first due and payable next after the date of receipt by the town treasurer of the aforesaid certificate of assessments from the town council, except that installment payments shall be due beginning at such time and the town treasurer shall forthwith certify said 
assessments to the tax collector for collection and said tax collector shall proceed to collect such assessments in the same manner and at the same time the regular taxes of the town are first payable, with provision for installments only as provided in this section. Interest at the rate per annum fixed for nonpayment of town taxes shall be charged and collected upon all overdue assessments and installments of principal of and of interest on assessments from the date they become payable until paid. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 9-23-2013) 
Sec. 20-60. - Annual charges may fluctuate; special assessments to meet deficiency in revenue. 
(a)  Excess or deficiency of receipts. If the receipts from the annual charges provided for in section 20-57 or referred to in section of this article amount in any year to more than is required for the purposes thereof, the surplus shall be credited to the sewer enterprise fund's undesignated fund balance for the succeeding year. If said receipts in any year, including any surplus added in any preceding year, amount to less than is required for the aforesaid purposes, the deficiency shall be added to the annual charges of the next succeeding year unless the town council orders a special sewer assessment upon those subject to the annual charges in an amount sufficient to satisfy such deficiency. 
Such special sewer assessment shall be at rates proportionate to the annual charges and in an amount sufficient to satisfy such deficiency. In prescribing annual charges for the next succeeding year, any surplus or deficiency under this paragraph shall be credited or added pro rata among the annual charges for items other than debt service, the annual charges for district one debt service and the annual charges for district two debt service and the surplus or deficiency shall be taken to be in the amount estimated by the town council at the time of such prescription. 
(b)  Certification and collection of special sewer assessments. Each special assessment made by the town council pursuant to this section shall be a lien upon the lands, buildings and improvements upon which it is made in the same way and manner as taxes assessed on real estate but such lien shall not expire until the assessment with all interest, costs and penalties thereon is paid in full, and such special assessments shall be due and payable at the time regular town taxes or installments thereof are first due and payable next after receipt by the town treasurer of said certified copy of said assessment, without provision for installment payment of said assessments. If said assessments are not paid as required by this article, they shall be collected in the same manner that regular taxes assessed on real estate are by law collected. Interest at the rate per annum fixed for nonpayment of the regular town taxes shall be charged and collected upon all overdue assessments from the date they become payable until they are paid. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-61. - Procedures relating to collection, correction and cancellation of charges and assessments. 
(a)  Notice of assessment. The collector, after receiving a list of charges or assessments under sections 20-58, 20-59 or 20-60 hereof, shall send to each person assessed or charged notice of the amount of his assessment or charge. The notice shall substantially identify the person assessed, state the amount of the assessment or charge and refer to the remedy available under G.L. § 44-5-26. The notice shall be mailed postpaid and directed to the last known address of the person assessed. If there are persons whose addresses are unknown, a similar notice covering the assessment against such persons shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town and such published notice may be a single collective notice for all such persons. No irregularity in the notice required by this section shall excuse the non-payment of the assessment or charge or affect its validity or any proceedings for the collection thereof as long as there is substantial compliance with the provisions hereof. No deficiency in the notice to the person assessed shall excuse the non-payment by others of the assessment or charge assessed against them or affects the validity thereof or any proceedings for the collection thereof. 
(b)  Application of General Laws to collection and levy. In proceedings under G.L. § 44-5-26 in connection with a charge or assessment under sections 20-58, 20-59 or 20-60 hereof, G.L. § 44-5-30 shall apply without regard to those provisions of said section dealing with the taxpayer's account. G.L. § 44-5-31 shall not apply. The town council shall be made party to such proceedings in lieu of the assessors. 
(c)  Corrected assessment or charge. In the event an assessment or charge is partially or wholly invalid, the town may make a corrected assessment or charge to replace the invalid assessment, charge or portion and certify the same forthwith to the town treasurer. The corrected assessment or charge shall be due and payable at the time regular town taxes or installments thereof are first due and payable after receipt by the town treasurer of such certificate. If it is a corrected charge under section 20-58 hereof and at least two installment payment dates for the regular town taxes for the year to which the charge relates have not passed, the charge may be paid in equal installments on the remaining installment payment dates. 
If it is a corrected assessment under section 20-59 hereof, the person assessed shall be entitled to pay in installments to the extent permitted by the town council under section 20-59 hereof for the original assessment being corrected, provided the first installment shall be sufficient to compensate without interest for all installments which would have become due then or theretofore in the normal course. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the corrected charge or assessment shall be subject to the same provisions as the original charge or assessment under sections 20-58, 20-59 or 20-60 hereof, as the case may be. 
(d)  Cancellation of assessment by town council. The town council may at any time cancel in whole or in part any charge or assessment under sections 20-58, 20-59 or 20-60 to the extent the town council determines such charge or assessment to have been improperly imposed. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-62. - Apportionment of assessments among joint tenants, and tenants in common. 
    Whenever a joint tenant, or a tenant in common of any land subject to a charge or assessment under this article, shall pay the whole amount of such charge or assessment, he may recover from the other joint tenant or tenant in common, as the case may be, such proportional part of such charge or assessment as the aggregate value of such land bears to the value of his interest therein, by proceedings in the superior court for the county in the nature of an action of account, as provided in G.L. ch. 2 in title 10 and in any acts in amendment thereof or in addition thereto, and such action is hereby made, available for the purposes of this section. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to impair any other right of action which the party paying such assessment or charge may have at law or in equity to secure a contribution from the other parties having an interest in the land subject to such assessment or charge. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-63. - Adjustment of inequitable charges. 
(a)  Upon the petition of the owner of a lot of land of irregular shape or which is unduly above or below grade or which for any other reason is deemed to be inequitably charged or assessed under this article, or on its own initiative, the town council may adjust the charge or assessment on such lot or exempt such lot from such charge or assessment. 
(b)  Where a lot is located at the intersection of two streets; highways or rights of way in which sewers have been constructed the charge or assessment on such lot shall be made only for the sewer in one street, highway or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 20-64. - Acquisition of property necessary for sewage purposes. 
(a)  Means for acquisition; funds for payment of compensation. The town council on behalf of the town may acquire by agreement, purchase or condemnation such land as may be necessary for the purposes of this article. Whenever any property or estate or rights of property shall be taken hereunder by condemnation, the owner thereof, including all persons having property rights therein, shall be paid according to their respective interests by the town. The town, to the extent of funds available to it, shall provide specific funds for such payment of compensation prior to such taking and the use of such funds for such purpose shall be a fixed obligation of the town. 
Any such taking hereunder shall be made in the manner provided by and subject to the provisions of G.L. §§ 39-15-5 through 39-15-10, as the same may have been or may be from time to time amended. 
(b)  Authority of council. The town council shall have general authority to represent the town and to make any agreements for said town under the authority of this section and to do any acts or things necessary or incidental to executing settlements and agreements, and shall have authority to agree with the owner for the price of the land so taken, and the same shall be paid by the town treasurer out of the proceeds of bonds or notes issued hereunder or from general funds as provided in section 20-57 of this article upon vouchers approved by the majority of the town council. 
(c)  Exception for land or right of way of railroad or public service company. Nothing in this article shall authorize the town to condemn any portion of the land or right of way or any railroad or other public service company, except for the purpose of crossing the same below grade and of building and maintaining necessary manholes at such crossing in such manner as not to render unsafe or to impair the usefulness of such land or right of way for railroad purposes or for the purposes of such other public service company. If said town and such railroad or other public service company are unable to agree as to the method of the construction and maintenance of such sewer and manholes at any such crossing, either party may apply to the public utility administrator for a determination thereof, and, after hearing, such sewer and manholes shall be constructed and maintained in such method and manner as may be ordered by said administrator. These proceedings shall be subject to the provision of G.L. chapters 1 and 5 in title 39 and sections 39-4-7 and 39-4-19 through 39-4-24, as the same may have been or may from time to time be amended. 
(d)  The town, by its town council is authorized to contract with the United States of America and with any other city or town in this state or with the state and any other city or town in this state and the state are authorized to contract with the town on such terms as may be mutually agreed upon between them, for the purpose of securing adequate sewer outlets, rights of way and other easements for the town and for the general purposes of construction, maintenance and operation of a sewerage works and the utilization or other disposition of the sewage there from. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 9-23-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-13, adopted September 23, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 20-64, and renumbering former §§ 20-65-20-71 as new §§ 20-64-20-70. Former § 20-64 pertained to exemptions for religious societies and cemeteries, and derived from Ord. No. 08-23, adopted October 20, 2008. 
Sec. 20-65. - Ordinances, etc., relative to use of sewer system and penalties for violation thereof. 
    The town council is authorized from time to time to prescribe rules and orders relative to the use of the sewer system, and by general ordinance to forbid the introduction or depositing into the sewers of any substance injurious or detrimental thereto or to the public use thereof. Any person violating any ordinance, rule or order prescribed by the town council under the authority of this article shall be fined not exceeding $100.00 for each violation, and not exceeding $250.00 for each additional day that any such violation shall continue, as may be prescribed by ordinance of the town council, and shall also be liable in an action on the case for all damages caused to the town or to any person by any such violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 9-23-2013) 
Note- Former § 20-66. See editor's note, § 20-64. 
Sec. 20-66. - Plats of common sewers to be filed with town clerk as public records. 
    Whenever a common sewer is constructed under the provisions of this article, the town council shall cause a plat of the layout of the same and of the estates abutting the same to be filed in the office of the town clerk, which said plats are hereby declared to be public records for description of the estates assessed for such construction of such sewers. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 9-23-2013) 
Note- Former § 20-67. See editor's note, § 20-64. 
Sec. 20-67. - Acceptance by town of federal and state funds. 
    The town council is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to accept and use in connection with the construction of the sewerage works and sewers authorized by this article any funds from the United States of America or from this state or aid in any form under any and all acts and joint resolutions of congress and any and all laws of this state already enacted or which may be enacted and upon such terms and conditions as may be required by the proper federal or state authorities. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 9-23-2013) 
Note- Former § 20-68. See editor's note, § 20-64. 
Sec. 20-68. - Severability clause. 
    If any part, clause, division or section of this article shall be declared unconstitutional, the validity of its remaining provisions shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 9-23-2013) 
Note- Former § 20-69. See editor's note, § 20-64. 
Sec. 20-69. - Article not to affect any other power of town. 
    This article shall not affect any other power which the town may have under any other provisions of law to incur indebtedness. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 9-23-2013) 
Note- Former § 20-70. See editor's note, § 20-64. 
Sec. 20-70. - Validation of prior actions taken and bonds and notes previously issued. 
    Bonds and notes issued and all other action taken under this article as in effect prior to its amendment inserting this section shall be regarded as having been issued or taken as the case may be, under this article as so amended and rules, orders and ordinances adopted under this article prior to such amendment shall continue in effect to the extent that they are not inconsistent with such amendment. The annual charges provided for in this article prior to such amendment for the fiscal year in which such amendment takes effect shall remain in effect. General funds of the town may be used to meet any deficiency in the receipts from such annual charges as compared with the amount required for the purposes thereof, pending the receipt of the charges for the next succeeding year. The general funds shall be replenished without interest from the charges for the next succeeding year on or before the close of such next succeeding year. 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 9-23-2013) 
Note- Former § 20-71. See editor's note, § 20-64. 
Secs. 20-71-20-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL 

Sec. 20-90. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq. 
    Applicant or customer means the owner as defined herein as it applies to building connections and any charges or fees including user fees and may mean the lessee of property when some industrial or commercial use is involved requiring testing, analyses, monitoring, metering or pretreatment and user charges. 
    Assessment means a charge assessed against real estate parcels which directly benefit for all or a portion of the construction of a sewer district project. 
    Authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing, providing the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in above paragraphs (1) through (3) may designate another duly authorized representative if the authorization is submitted to the town in writing. The authorization must specify the individual or position responsible for either the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for the company's environmental matters. 
    Base assessment means that basis upon which calculation is made for the specific sewer district. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil waste, and other sanitary drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the property line where the discharge flows to a sewer lateral. 
    Categorical standards means the national categorical pretreatment standards and pollutant discharge limits as promulgated by EPA which apply to a specific category of industrial users. 
    Categories of commercial/industrial users means: 
(1)  Category 1: Commercial/industrial users discharging or having the potential of discharging conventional (BOD5 and TSS) pollutant concentrations in excess of 250 mg/l. 
(2)  Category 2: Commercial/industrial users discharging production process wastewater or using solvents, toxic chemicals and/or hazardous chemicals that could potentially be discharged into the sewers. 
(3)  Category 3: Commercial/industrial users discharging or having the potential to discharge concentrations of oil and grease and other solids which may cause interference with the collection system or at the treatment facility. 
(4)  Category 4: Commercial/industrial users with only sanitary wastes and/or nontoxic discharges. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the oxygen equivalent consumed by organic matter in a sample during strong chemical oxidation. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage, which is normally disallowed. 
    Commercial unit means each unit of a commercial building separated by vertical walls. 
    Commercial use includes any non-residential use or use defined in this section as multi-family. 
    Commercial user means any commercial business that discharges commercial wastes as defined in this section. 
    Commercial wastes mean the liquid wastes from a commercial trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Council means the town council of the Town of North Kingstown. 
    Director means the public works director of the town, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Domestic wastes means liquid wastes from the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling of food; or containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions. It shall not contain groundwater, stormwater, surface water, cooling water or industrial wastewater. 
    Drainlayer means a person who has a drainlayer's license issued by the state. 
    Enforcement response plan means procedures established as part of the industrial pretreatment program for investigating and responding to industrial user non-compliance. 
    EPA means the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Equivalent dwelling unit for assessment purposes shall be defined as a unit whose wastewater flows are equal to 345 gallons per day of water use. The basis by which projected daily wastewater flows will be determined are based upon current RIDEM published onsite wastewater treatment systems (OWTS), formerly ISDS, values per establishment. For flow wastewater volumes not stated in the OWTS regulations, standard engineering values will be used. 
    Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil when it is property pretreated prior to entry into the sewage facilities and does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial pretreatment program means the program established by the Quonset Development Corporation to regulate commercial and industrial wastewater in accordance with federal regulations and the State of Rhode Island Pretreatment Regulations. 
    Industrial user means a user who discharges or has the capacity to discharge industrial wastes as directly or indirectly into the sewers. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic sanitary sewage. 
    Infectious waste means waste which contains pathogens with sufficient virulence and quantity so that exposure to the waste by a susceptible host could result in disease. Under this definition, the normal microflors of the body are not classified as infections. Categories of waste designated as infectious are as follows: 
(1)  Human blood, body fluids and blood products means all waste human blood, blood products (such as serum, plasma and other blood components) and body fluids (such as suction fluid and wound drainage) which exist in non-absorbed liquid form in more than trace quantities. 
(2)  Contaminated sharps consists of discarded sharps (e.g. hypodermic needles, syringes, Pasteur pipettes, broken glass and scalpel blades) which may come into contact with infectious agents during use in patient care or in medical research, or have been removed from their original sterile container. 
    Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the wastewater treatment facility, its treatment processes operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Causes a violation of any requirement of the wastewater treatment facility's and the Rhode Island Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (RIPDES) permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any State Sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Lateral sewer means the section of pipe that runs from the property line to the main line sewer in the street and has no other common sewer tributary. 
    Lot means either: 
(1)  The basic development unit for determination of lot area, depth and other dimensional regulations; or 
(2)  A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 
    mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
Multi-family  use means a building or combination of buildings containing more than two residential units on one lot. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any source of a discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced after the publication of proposed Categorical Pretreatment Standards under Section 307(c) [33 U.S.C. 1317 (c)] of the Act which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307(c), provided that: 
a.  No other source is located at that site. 
b.  The source completely replaces the process or production equipment of an existing source at the site. 
c.  The new wastewater generating process of the source is substantially independent of an existing source at that site; and the construction of the source creates a new facility rather than modifying an existing source at that site. 
(2)  For purposes of this definition, construction or operation has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities, which is necessary for placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
    Non-buildable land shall be defined as land that contains cemeteries, utility and right-of-way easements, wetlands or waterbodies. For the purpose of identifying non-buildable land, the Town of North Kingstown GIS Mapping shall be used in conjunction with any other pertinent information available. 
    Onsite wastewater treatment systems (OWTS) (formerly individual sewerage disposal systems (ISDS)) means a system approved by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management which provides sanitary sewage disposal by means other than public sewers. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly, has a legal title to any premises, or has control of any premises, such as an agreement to purchase, agent, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee or guardian of the estate or a holder of a legal title. 
    Parcel. See lot definition. 
    Permit means an authorization, license or equivalent control document issued by the town and/or QDC, unless otherwise identified. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, municipality, any other political subdivision of this state, any department or agency of the federal government, or any other legal entity. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. Neutral waste, for example, has a pH value of 7 and hydrogen-ion concentration of 10.7. 
    Pollutant means dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand and cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, agricultural or other pollution-causing agents. 
    Pollution means the man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
    Post Road District is established as a mixed use, economic development center as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, Section 21.94. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a water pollution control facility. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or geological, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment standards means all applicable federal rules and regulations implementing section 403 of the Act, as well as any non-conflicting state or local standards. In cases of conflicting standards or regulations, the more stringent thereof shall be applied. 
    Privately owned wastewater treatment facilities means pump stations, collection systems and/or wastewater treatment facilities privately owned by users, individuals, corporations, associations, or state or federal agencies, with said facilities ultimately being connected to the town's wastewater collection system. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Property line means the edge or limit of the street, highway, public way, or right of way as may be shown or platted on maps of record before entering on private property of the premises. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority. 
    QDC means the Quonset Development Corporation. 
    QDC sewers means a sewer regulated, operated and maintained by the QDC for the purpose of affording sewage collection service to its users. 
    Rhode Island Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (RIPDES) means the Rhode Island system for issuing, modifying, revoking and re-issuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing discharge permits and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements pursuant to Title 46, Chapter 12 of the General Laws of Rhode Island and the Clean Water Act. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage or wastewater and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septage means the wastewater or waste solids from domestic on-site wastewater treatment systems. 
    Sewage or wastewater means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be unintentionally present. 
    Sewage treatment plant (wastewater treatment plant) or (pollution control plant) means any devices, facilities, structures, equipment or works owned or used by the town for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of industrial and domestic wastes, or necessary to recycle or reuse water at the most economical cost over the estimated life of the system, including intercepting sewer, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances, extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clearwell facilities; and any work, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues from such treatment. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater. 
    Sewer commission shall be the North Kingstown town council acting as sewer commission as authorized by Public Laws of 2009, chapters 25 and 37, and Public Laws of 2010, chapters 263 and 291, which sewer commission shall be vested with the powers and authorities granted pursuant to the aforesaid enabling legislation, as may be amended from time to time, including but not limited to the power and authority to plan, acquire, construct, operate, maintain, extend and improve a sewerage disposal system for the town or any part or parts thereof. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and 
(2)  Any other industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the wastewater treatment facility; or 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the wastewater treatment facility; or 
c.  Is designated by the QDC as having a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater treatment facility's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means pipes that carry storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Town means the Town of North Kingstown. 
    Toxic means any substance listed as toxic under Section 307(a)(1) of the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., or listed under Hazardous Substances Right-to-Know Act, G.L. §§ 28-21-1 et seq., or as may otherwise be designated by the QDC or the director from time to time. 
    Two unit lot means, for the purposes of assessment in the Wickford Village Center District, two units on one lot zoned with residential units and/or including residential home occupation. 
    User means the owner of any residential, commercial, or industrial property or any publicly owned building or non-profit institution with a direct or indirect connection to the sewer. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Wickford Village Center District is an economic development center as defined in the zoning ordinance, section 21-93. 
    Wickford Village Center Sewer District encompasses properties on Main Street, West Main Street, Brown Street, Newtown Avenue, Phillips Street, and Intrepid Road and as shown on the plan entitled "Wickford Village Center Sewer District," on file in the engineering department. 
    "Y" connection means the point at which the individual sewer lateral connects into the main sewer line. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013; Ord. No. 13-13, § 4, 9-23-2013; Ord. No. 17-06, § 1, 3-13-2017; Ord. No. 18-16, § 1, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 20-91. - Damaging equipment, structures, etc. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover without authorization, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the drainage system or sewage works. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each violation and for the cost of replacement or repair of any damage. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-92. - Enforcement. 
    Each user shall provide preventative measures to protect and implement emergency responsive actions upon accidental discharge in violation of this article. Users shall notify the town immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this article so that countermeasures can be taken by the town, to minimize damage to the sewerage system and receiving waters. This notification shall be followed, within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the system. If the violation of this article is the proximate cause of any violation of the town's and/or QDC's wastewater discharge permit, the town reserves the right to seek full reimbursement of the fine(s) and any costs incurred in connection with the collection thereof. 
    In order that employees of commercial and industrial users be more fully informed, copies of this article shall be made available to all employees of these users. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the owner's bulletin board advising employees who to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of this article. 
    When the town finds that a discharge of wastes has taken place, or threatens to take place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations of this article, the town may issue an order to cease and desist, and direct that those persons not complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements, or provisions: 
(1)  Comply forthwith; 
(2)  Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the town; or 
(3)  Take appropriate or remedial preventative action in the event of a threatened violation. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-93. - Emergency suspension. 
(a)  Termination of discharge. The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the wastewater treatment facility, or the environment. Informal notice shall consist of a telephone call to the discharging facility's owner or any agent or officer of a corporation. The order to suspend discharging shall become effective notwithstanding the inability to contact the owner. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the wastewater treatment facility, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in this article are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment to the health and welfare of persons shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any further occurrence to the wastewater treatment facility within ten days of the occurrence that lead to the emergency suspension. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-94. - Termination of service. 
    Any user who violates any of the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards required by permit. 
    Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-95. - Civil suit for injunctive relief. 
    When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition the Washington County District Court through the town's solicitor for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
    In addition, violators may also be subject to enforcement and penalties through QDC's regulations. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-96. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a felony, punishable by a fine of not more than $25,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than ten years, or both. (Reference authorizing authority - Clean Water Act, Section 309 - Enforcement 33 USC Sec. 1319 - Enforcement). 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any pollutant or hazardous substance into the wastewater treatment facility which such person knew, or reasonably should have known, could cause personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a felony, punishable by a fine of not more than $25,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than ten years, or both. (Reference authorizing authority - Clean Water Act, Section 309- Enforcement 33 USC Sec. 1319 - Enforcement). 
(c)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the wastewater treatment facility which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a felony, punishable by a fine of not more than $25,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than ten years, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. (Reference authorizing authority - Clean Water Act, Section 309 - Enforcement 33 USC Sec. 1319 - Enforcement). 
(d)  A user who knowingly makes any false statement, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this section, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $25,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than ten years, or both. (Reference authorizing authority - Clean Water Act, Section 309 - Enforcement 33 USC Sec. 1319 - Enforcement). 
(e)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more $25,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than ten years, or both. (Reference authorizing authority - Clean Water Act, Section 309 - Enforcement 33 USC Sec. 1319 - Enforcement). 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-97. - Validity. 
(a)  The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provisions of this article shall not affect the validity of any other part of this article which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. 
(b)  The town may waive any of the requirements of this article whenever they determine that strict compliance therewith is not required in the public interest. 
(c)  If any provisions of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall for any reason be held invalid, the remainder of this article or the application of such provisions to persons or circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby. 
(d)  This article may be added to, modified, or amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-98. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by a sewer assessment against him or her may within 60 days from the date of said assessment, file an appeal with the director. The director shall have 45 days to review the appeal, render a decision, and notify the person aggrieved of the decision. The person aggrieved, if still aggrieved may appeal the decision of the director to the sewer appeals board. Appeals to the sewer appeals board shall be filed not more than 30 days after the director rendered a decision and notified the person aggrieved. The sewer appeals board shall, within 90 days of the filing of the appeal to the sewer appeals board, hear the appeal and render a decision within 30 days of the date in which the hearing was held. 
    Appeals must be in writing on forms provided by the sewer appeals board and shall be filed with the town clerk within the times specified above. 
    The sewer appeals board shall have power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that an assessment, charge or order of the department of public works is unwarranted in whole or in part, and shall annul or modify the same and make such order as justice may require. Otherwise it shall affirm the same. 
    Notice of the sewer appeals board decision shall be sent to the petitioner and a copy of same forwarded to the department of public works. 
    No new petition pertaining to the same premises or subject matter involved in a decision of the sewer appeals board may be heard until the expiration of two years from the date of such decision. 
    On or before September 1, 2023, lot owners for the Wickford Sewer District are required within 30 days of a use change to notify the town clerk of such change of use in writing. A new assessment will correspond to any determined use change. Lot owners may initially appeal such determination within 30 days by a written letter to the director of public works who shall conduct an informal hearing with proper notice to the lot owner. The director of public works shall conduct such an informal hearing and render a written decision within 30 days of the receipt of the written appeal. 
    Thereafter, the lot owner may appeal the director of public works' decision to the sewer appeals board by a written letter mailed no later than ten days following receipt of the director of public works' written decision. The sewer appeals board shall conduct a hearing with proper notice and render a written decision within 60 days of the receipt of the appeal letter. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 5, 9-23-2013; Ord. No. 17-14, § 1, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 18-16, § 2, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 20-99. - Sewer appeals board. 
    The sewer appeals board shall consist of three members and two alternate members, each of whom shall be appointed by the town council from members of the assessment board of review, asset management commission, building code board of appeals, conservation commission, and/or zoning board for a term of three years. In the absence of any regular member of the board, the alternate shall act as a full member of the board. 
(Ord. No. 17-14, § 2, 7-17-2017) 
Secs. 20-100-20-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER FUND, RATES AND ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 20-110. - Sewer system established. 
    A sewer fund shall be established as a depository for all annual charges, fees, assessments, and receipts obtained for the use, service or facilities generated by the sewage works including charges to state agencies or towns served. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-111. - Finance director to issue bills, make collections. 
    The town finance director shall issue bills and make collections for all charges and fees, and receipts as a result of operation of the sewage works in accordance with this article, existing agreements, and established charges and fees of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-112. - Separate account. 
    The town finance director will maintain in a separate account all receipts and disbursements as a result of operation of the sewage fund. Disbursements shall be for the sole purpose of costs for any or all but not limited to the following: administration, operation, maintenance, materials, supplies, equipment, depreciation, interest and principal on bonded debt, and any other annual costs directly related to sewage works and sewage treatment and collection facilities. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-113. - Town customers. 
    Charges for sewer service will be per the summary of fees. 
(1)  The use charge for town customers shall be based on an annual water flow, measured or computed, or the minimum service charge whichever is greater. 
(2)  Water flow measured shall be based on the reading of water meters. 
(3)  Wastewater flow computed, if no meters are available, shall be based on the estimated sewage flows calculated from the minimum design requirements for sewage flow tabulated in Rule 21 of the Rules Establishing Minimum Standards Relating to Location, Design, Construction and Maintenance of Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems January 1, 2008 or as amended, of the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management. 
(4)  Each separate family unit in a multi-family dwelling building (more than one family) and each separate commercial unit in a multi-commercial building shall be liable for their proportional charges set forth in this section. 
(5)  The schedule of user charges is in the "Summary of Fees." 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-114. - Large commercial customers. 
    The annual charge to large commercial customers shall be on the basis of flow, either of water use through water meters to the customer or meters installed in the sewer connection outfall to measure sewage or wastewater entering the sewage system. The commercial customers shall be required to install acceptable flow measuring devices on the wastewater outfall if required by the director. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-115. - Adjustments. 
    If water meters are used to measure flow for industrial or large commercial customers and the amount of sewage flow, in the opinion of the director, does not warrant the installation of a wastewater meter in the opinion of the director and the industrial or commercial customer claims considerable consumption of water in product, process or cooling which is not returned to the wastewater flow, then the director may adjust the flow to a lesser amount if the customer submits sufficient data and evidence to support his claim. In order to claim such reduced flow as a basis of sewer use charge, the customer shall notify the director at least six months prior to any claim for such flow adjustment and follow the directions of the director in maintaining records to justify his claim. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-116. - Assessment of charges. 
    The town council shall, by resolution, designate one or more sewer assessment districts and assess all or such portion of the project cost of the town's sewage facilities against the properties located within each such district as is determined by the town council to provide special rather than general benefit to such parcels. The assessment cost is calculated by establishing the actual total of the project cost, including, but not limited to, design, construction, administration and interim financing. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Sewer assessment roll. At such time as the town council designates any sewer assessment district, the town council and the town tax assessor shall certify to the town finance director a sewer assessment roll of the lots located within such sewer assessment district that are determined by the town council to be subject to assessment. Such sewer assessment roll shall describe each lot, indicate the classification of user occupying each lot, and state the amount of the assessment against each lot. 
b.  Recording and notice. Upon receipt of any sewer assessment roll from the town council and tax assessor, the finance director shall record a copy thereof as a public record and cause notice to be sent to the owner of each lot assessed in the manner set forth in the enabling legislation. 
c.  Collection of assessments; lien. From the date of delivery of the sewer assessment roll to the finance director, the amount of each assessment, including any interest thereon, shall constitute a debt payable to the town by the owner of each lot assessed, on a parity with the lien for town taxes. The finance director shall have the same powers to collect sewer assessments from the owners of lots assessed, whether or not residents of this state, and to enforce such liens against the lots assessed as the finance director has in the case of town taxes assessed against residents of this state. At the time of transfer of title, the balance of the assessments will be transferred to the new property owner. 
d.  Payment. Each sewer assessment shall be payable in equal annual installments over a period determined by the town council. Annual installments of sewer assessments may be paid in incremental payments during the installment year. The unpaid balance of each assessment shall bear interest from the date the assessment roll is delivered to the finance director at a rate determined by the town council; provided, however, that the whole assessment against any lot may be prepaid without interest at any time prior to the due date of the first installment thereof. The unpaid balance of any sewer assessment, together with interest accrued to the date of payment, may be paid at any time. 
e.  Special assessments. All buildings used for the purpose of holding religious services therein, state facilities, municipal facilities and other lots zoned as public (P) shall be assessed as one residential parcel. If the buildings are used for mixed purposes outside of religious services, the building shall be assessed as commercial pursuant to subsection 20-116(2)(b)2.i. 
f.  Deferment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town council shall have discretion to defer a sewer connection for a parcel of land if the owner of such parcel, within five years of the date before the sewer construction began, has installed a new septic system. Such parcel shall be assessed and begin paying the assessments as all other parcels within the district with the exception of those properties which fall under subsection 20-116(2)b.1.i. For a period not more than five years from the date of acceptance, the user fee will be suspended. If the property is sold during the five-year period, the parcel must be connected to the sewers and the user fee will begin upon the sale of the property. 
g.  Grinder pumps. If the town council finds it necessary to install (where proposed low pressure sewer is being created or a dwelling that is located in a low lying area along a gravity sewer system) grinder pumps as part of the project area, the town may provide one grinder pump unit to each developed parcel at no cost to the dwelling owner. The availability of the grinder pump shall remain in effect up to one year of the project completion and acceptance of the project. For an undeveloped parcel, the town will provide a credit to be determined by the town council at the time the parcel is improved. The installation of the grinder pump is the responsibility of the property owner. The operation and maintenance of the grinder pump system shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The owner shall obtain a service contract from a qualified firm to provide operation and maintenance to the system and a copy of the service contract shall be submitted with the permit application in order to receive an approval to connect to the sanitary system. The owner shall provide his own emergency power to the grinder pump system during power outages. The town is not responsible to provide emergency power or to provide maintenance to the grinder pump system(s). The owner will be responsible for the replacement of the pump if the need arises. 
h.  Sewer lot development assessment. 
1.  A sewer development assessment will be assessed against all property owners who request to or who are required to connect to the town's sewer system. 
i.  Discretionary clause. In specific circumstances in which the sewer lot development assessment based on the proscribed formula creates an unfair assessment for the lot owner, the determination of the assessment may deviate from the formula in operation of fairness. 
2.  A parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved, which is located outside of an established sewered district, may connect to the town's sewer system. 
i.  The cost of infrastructure to the nearest sewered district shall be the burden of the parcel owner. 
ii.  The parcel shall be subject to an assessment at the time of connection. If the parcel is included in a future sewer district, the parcel owner shall not be subjected to a future assessment as part of such future sewer district. 
i.  Sewers built by private parties (assessments). Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it is hereby determined that sanitary sewer lines built by and at the expense of a private party and not assessed under subsection e. shall pay the following assessment: 
1.  For each residential/commercial parcel of land which abuts a public highway or a highway which by general use is generally believed to be a public highway or a right-of-way, or a private road in which sanitary sewer lines are installed by a private party and which are connected to the public sanitary system the following assessment shall apply: 
i.  An assessment for a residential parcel shall be adopted by the town council; 
ii.  An assessment for a commercial parcel outside of the Post Road South Sewer District or Wickford Village Center Sewer District shall be based on an equivalent dwelling unit as defined in this article. 
(2)  Designated sewer districts. 
a.  Post Road South Sewer District. There is hereby created the Post Road South Sewer District, which encompasses portions of Camp Ave., Dana Road, Huling Road and Post Road from Route 403 to Map 103/Lot 6 (7769 Post Road). The town council shall assess all or such portions of the project cost of the town's sewage facilities. 
1.  Residential assessments: Assessments accruing to properties as the result of the construction of systems of sewers and/or systems of sewerage and sewage disposal shall be assessed as follows: 
i.  Each residential lot which abuts a public highway or a highway which by use is generally believed to be a public highway or a right-of-way, and in which there has been constructed a public sanitary sewer, shallbe assessed a per lot fee adopted by the town (see schedule of fees) at the time of the assessment. Whenever such a lot contains a building or buildings that are, in the opinion of the town, potential sewer connections, an additional assessment shall be levied. 
ii.  Each residential lot which does not abut to a public highway or right-of-way but which, in the opinion of the town, is a potential sewer connection shall be assessed as described in section 20-116(2)a.1.i. 
iii.  For other residentially zoned lots containing a multi-family use in the Post Road South Sewer District, each lot shall be assessed as commercial under 20-116(2)a.2. 
2.  Commercial assessments: Each commercial property shall be assessed a "per square footage" fee adopted by the town. In no instance shall the fee be less than the assessment fee for a residential parcel for the district. The "square foot" assessment shall be based on the gross buildable square footage. The non-buildable area shall be limited to wetlands, cemeteries, permanent utility and right-of-way easements and waterbodies, as indicated by the town's GIS mapping. 
b.  Wickford Village Center Sewer District. There is hereby created the Wickford Village Center Sewer District, which encompasses the commercial uses on Main Street, West Main Street, Brown Street, Newtown Avenue, Phillips Street and Intrepid Road. This district includes lots zoned Wickford Village Center (WVC), neighborhood business (NB), planned village district (PVD), general business (GB) and village residential (VR) as shown on the plan "Wickford Village Center Sewer District." 
Assessments are based on use of the property and water flow consumption in the following categories: 
Single unit residential-Meaning single family occupancy and public buildings: $18,500.00 
Two unit residential: 
< 345 GPD: $24,667.00 
> or equal to 345 GPD: $30,833.00* 
Two unit mixed use-Meaning owner occupied residential with non-retail use/professional use: 
< 345 GPD: $24,667.00 
> or equal to 345 GPD: $30,833.00* 
Commercial/residential with three or more units: 
< 345 GPD: $56,600.00 
> or equal to 345-690 GPD: $75,466.00** 
691-1035 GPD: $94,332.00** 
>1035 GPD: $113,200.00** 
*Increased assessments on "two unit mixed use" properties that exceed an average daily domestic water consumption of 345 GPD (gallons per day). Water consumption is based on previous two-year water department billing (time of sewer connection) or based on average water consumption for one year following sewer system connection, whichever is more. 
($18,500.00 + ? $18,500.00 = $30,833.00) 
** Increased assessments on "commercial/residential with three or more unit" properties that exceed an average daily domestic water consumption of 345 GPD. Water consumption is based on previous two-year water department billing (time of sewer connection) or based on average water consumption for one year following sewer system connection. Incremental assessments determined as follows: 
345-690 GPD: $56,600.00 + ? $56,600.00 = $75,466.00 
691-1035 GPD: $56,600.00 + ? $56,600.00 = $94,332.00 
>1035 GPD: $56,600.00 (2) = $113,200.00 
1.  Residential assessments: Assessments accruing to properties as a result of the construction of systems of sewers and/or systems of sewerage and sewage disposal shall be assessed as follows: 
i.  Each lot with an existing single-family residential use, whether abutting a public highway or right-of-way, and in which there has been constructed a public sanitary sewer or has the potential to connect to sewers, shall not be assessed, unless the property owner chooses to connect or is compelled by state law or regulation to connect. 
ii.  Each lot containing a multi-family use in the Wickford Village Center Sewer District shall be assessed as commercial under subsection 20-116(2)b.2. 
iii.  Property owners of residential lots that connect to the sewer system shall pay the full assessment fee within 20 years from the date enacted, July 30, 2018, notwithstanding the date of connection. The full assessment fee shall be payable in equal annual installments proportionate to the time period between the date of connection and the end of the 20-year period, July 30, 2038. Each lot containing a multi-family use in the Wickford Village Center Sewer District shall be assessed as commercial under subsection 20-116(2)b.2. 
2.  Commercial assessments: Each lot with an existing commercial use shall be assessed a base assessment in accordance with the sewer assessment fee schedule. Any additional water use for a lot shall be calculated as set forth in chapter 9, article I, section 9-4, table XIII. 
i.  Properties assessed as residential properties that convert to commercial use shall be assessed as commercial upon conversion. 
ii.  Each lot with a mix of uses including but not limited to commercial and residential shall be assessed as commercial. 
3.  Additional water consumption due to change of tenancy will be evaluated and may alter assessments in accordance with section 20-98. 
4.  Sunset provision. Subsection 20-116(2)b.3. shall no longer be effective after September 1, 2023, unless such date of repeal is further extended by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 6, 9-23-2013; Ord. No. 13-17, § 1, 11-25-2013; Ord. No. 17-06, § 2, 3-13-2017; Ord. No. 18-16, § 3, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 20-117. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-118. - Annual sewage system user charges. 
(a)  Sewer connection fee. 
(1)  A sewer connection fee will be imposed by the town for the installation of the building sewer from the public sanitary sewer to the property line. 
(2)  The sewer connection fee shall be paid at the time the permit is obtained. 
(3)  The sewer connection fees are presented in the schedule of fees. 
(4)  Whenever it is determined by the director of public works that the connection of the sewer installation requires additional inspection time, the town shall be empowered to charge a connection fee to cover such additional costs as may be incurred over and above the fee hereinbefore set forth. 
(b)  Sewer user charge. The following annual charges for use of the sewerage system of the Town are hereby established, to be paid by every person, firm or corporation whose particular sewer enters into said system: 
(1)  The cost of operation and maintenance of the complete sewer system shall be financed solely from sewer customer charges. 
(2)  A sewer charge shall be levied to each customer upon connection to the public sewage system. The service charge shall be based upon the quantity of water used at the premises of the customer as measured by the water meter in use thereat, except as otherwise hereinafter provided. 
(3)  For domestic and commercial users, the rates and charges for each billing period shall be determined by each user's annual water use. The rates shall be established from time to time by town council resolution. The town may establish a minimum amount per billing period which all customers must pay for which a minimum contribution of wastewater is allowed. 
(4)  In the event a lot, parcel of land, building or premises discharging sanitary commercial or industrial sewage or other liquids into the town sewage system either directly or indirectly, is not a user of the public water system the property owner shall be responsible to purchase and install a water meter, at their expense. The water meter shall be purchased from the department of public works. 
(5)  In the event two or more lots, parcels of real estate, residences, dwelling units or buildings discharging sanitary sewage water or other liquids into the sanitary sewage system of the town are users of water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then, in each case for billing purposes, the minimum charge for the sewer rates and charges shall be multiplied by the number of lots, parcels or real estate, residences, dwelling units or buildings served through the single water meter. 
(6)  Charges for the sewage disposal service shall be billed and collected by the town. 
(7)  Each charge or service fee levied pursuant to this article is hereby made a lien upon the corresponding lot, land or premises served by the connection to the sanitary sewage system of the town. Failure to pay said charge or service fee within the prescribed period time, such charge or fee shall then be collected as other town taxes are collected. The official record of the town shall constitute notice of penalty and of said lien as herein provided. 
(8)  All money collected under the provisions of this article shall be deposited in a sewer enterprise fund and expenditures from which are to be made only for maintenance, operation, administration, treatment, debt service and other related sewage system expenses. 
(9)  The town, in addition to the other remedies provided by this article may institute legal proceedings to collect overdue sewer service charges. Penalties may be added to the original sewer bill for late payment which penalties shall be set by the town by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 7, 9-23-2013) 
Secs. 20-119-20-129. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, adopted September 15, 2014, amended the Code by repealing former § 20-119 in its entirety. Former § 20-119 pertained to summary of fees, and derived from Ord. No. 13-01, adopted March 25, 2013; and Ord. No. 13-13, adopted September 23, 2013. Similar provisions can be found in § 9-4, table XIII. 
DIVISION 4. - MAIN AND BUILDING CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 20-130. - Connection to public sewer required. 
(a)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the town, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet wastewater facilities therein, and connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within six months after date of official notice to do so, except when a public sewer is greater than 250 feet from the structure and a subsurface sewage disposal facility is approved by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management, there is a permanent, physical impediment or the property is served by a new OWTS constructed after January 1, 2010 to the most recent state and local standards and requirements. In the case of the new OWTS installed after January 1, 2010, an exemption shall be granted for a period to July 1, 2020 or until the property title is transferred. 
    In the Wickford Village Sewer District, an exemption shall be granted in the case of the new OWTS installed after January 1, 2010 for a period to July 1, 2025 or until the property title is transferred. Single family residential lots in the Wickford Village Center Sewer District are exempt from mandatory connection until such time that the property is compelled to connect according to the most recent state and local standards and requirements. 
(b)  Where sewers are available, all new construction must connect into the sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013; Ord. No. 13-13, § 9, 9-23-2013; Ord. No. 17-06, § 3, 3-13-2017; Ord. No. 18-16, § 4, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 20-131. - Privies, cesspools, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, cesspool, septic tank or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except that it is in conformance with RIDEM regulations and Town ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-132. - Sewers to meet town standards. 
    All sewer construction shall be in compliance with standard sanitary sewer requirements of the town. All sewers meeting the standards of the town in public or private streets connected to a public sewer shall be public sewers within the meaning of this article and be subject to all the requirements of this article and of the director. All existing sewers and/or building sewers connected to public sewers shall be subject to all the requirements of this article and the director. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-133. - By private parties, developers, etc. 
    Sewers and appurtenances may be extended or constructed as stipulated in section 20-116 by developers, property owners, or groups of property owners at their own cost, providing the plans, design, materials or construction and size and other required information are prepared by a licensed professional engineer and filed with the Public Works Department for final approval by the director. Construction methods and tests must meet the approval of the director and must be in accordance with the standards described in section 20-132. It is further provided, if so determined by the director in his final approval, that the developer, property owner or group of property owners, by written agreement, shall deed such sewers and appurtenances to the town without qualification in which case, the town council may vote to accept the same. All easements for such main sewers and appurtenances shall be obtained by the applicant at no cost to the town, and shall in turn be dedicated to the town in a form approved by the town solicitor, in which case the town council may vote to accept the same. Before final approval is granted, payment of all town fees, including but not limited to, engineering review fee and cost of construction inspection, is required of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013; Ord. No. 13-17, § 2, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-134. - Connection policy. 
    The town hereby establishes the following policy relative to future connections to the sewer system: 
(1)  Property within the existing and/or future sewer service area. Any parcel of land located within the existing and/or future sewer service area as defined in figure 6.2, entitled, "Sewer Service Areas" of the town wastewater facility plan dated April 16, 2012 and approved by RIDEM April 27, 2012, must connect to the sanitary sewer system. The property owner agrees to abide by all conditions, restrictions, standards, specifications, design criteria, and to pay all fees which may be established by the town. The property owner shall also pay any cost(s) associated with sewer service connection and/or sewer main extensions. 
(2)  Properties abutting or beyond the future sewer service area. Any applicant requesting sanitary sewers for property(s) either abutting or beyond the future sewer service area which meets the criteria delineated for such extensions in the comprehensive plan may be permitted. The applicant for said extension shall submit an application to the town clerk for amendment to the future sewer service area map of the wastewater facility plan in accordance with the procedure set forth in G.L. ch. 45-22.2, the Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation Act. 
(3)  Appeals. Appeals contrary to the director's decision regarding sanitary sewer connection shall be made to the town council. 
(4)  Expiration of final approval. The final approval for sewer connections or extensions shall expire 12 months from the date of its granting if the permission granted is not utilized as evidenced by the commencement of significant sewer construction. Reapplication shall then be required and handled as a new case. 
(5)  Construction of sewers and connections. 
a.  Applicability. All construction procedures, materials and specifications shall conform with the "Standard Sanitary Sewer Requirements of the Town of North Kingstown" and all applicable federal, state and town building and plumbing codes. Any deviations from these prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
b.  Location plans. Accompanying each application for permit shall be a location plan showing the lot lines and dimensions, location of water pipes, gas lines, buried cable, location of permanent buildings and location of building sewers, storm drains and the water authority meter number and initial reading. The plans must be approved and stamped by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor. 
c.  Costs. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner, including but not limited to, costs of extending the public sewer system to the nearest town main to service private facilities. The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
d.  Size, slope, alignment, etc. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the town including the standard sanitary sewer requirements. All connections are to be made gastight and watertight. 
e.  Elevation. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
f.  Lint traps. Commercial laundries shall be equipped with an interceptor having a wire basket or similar device, removable for cleaning, that will prevent passage into the drainage system of solids 1/2 inch (13 mm) or larger in size, string, rags, buttons, or other materials detrimental to the public sewage system. 
g.  Testing. The director shall apply appropriate tests to the pipes, and the drainlayer and contractor, at their own expense, shall furnish all necessary tools, labor, materials, and assistance for such tests and shall remove or repair any defective materials when so ordered by the director. 
h.  Guarding of excavation, restoration of streets and sidewalks. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town. 
i.  Crossing roads, driveways, etc. The contractor shall not block any driveway, street, road or railroad at any time without permission of the superintendent, director of public works or other controlling agencies. Every effort shall be made to permit the movement of vehicular traffic at all times. Whenever it becomes necessary to cross or interfere with roads, walks or drives, whether public or private, the contractor shall maintain, at his own expense, and subject to the approval of the superintendent, safe bridges or other means of egress. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-135. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Authority. In accordance with federal regulation 40 CFR 403 and the state pretreatment regulations, the Quonset Development Corporation (QDC) shall operate, maintain and enforce a pretreatment program. The purpose of the program shall be to implement national pretreatment standards or locally, generating site specific limits, in order to control pollutants which pass through or interfere with the treatment processes of the QDC's wastewater treatment facility, or which may contaminate sewage sludge and/or compost. 
(b)  Pretreatment. Industry shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article set forth by the QDC and shall achieve compliance with pretreatment requirements and/or limitations mandated by those requirements. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the QDC shall submit detailed plans, showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures to the town for their review and comment prior to the construction of the facilities. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the QDC prior to implementation. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Secs. 20-136-20-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-150. - Permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, repair, disconnect, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof and/or building sewers without first obtaining a written permit from the town. Said permit shall be valid for 60 calendar days from date of issue. All building sewer installation work is to be performed by a drainlayer who is licensed in the town or a master plumber licensed in the state. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  Residential services. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial services, comprising of all classifications other than residential services. 
(c)  The owner of any house, building or property wishing to obtain a sewer permit shall complete an application on the prescribed forms furnished by the town. The owner shall also submit any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the town. The appropriate sewer permit fees shall be paid to the town at the time of application. Separate permit applications are required for main sanitary sewer extensions, and for each individual building sewer or connection line proposed. Additional permits as described within this section of this article may apply prior to the actual use of any main or building sewer by any user. In addition, commercial and industrial users must also receive approval from the QDC, as required. 
(d)  Accompanying each application for a permit required by this section shall be a location plan showing the lot lines and dimensions, location of water pipes and other underground utilities or structures, location of permanent buildings and location of building sewers and storm drains, and other information as required. Any work within the town right of way requires an excavation permit from the public works department engineering office. 
(e)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes, the owner must complete an application on a special form furnished by the Quonset Development Corporation, according to the Quonset Business Park Development Package, Quonset Davisville Port and Commerce Park Sewer Treatment System User Regulations 7.4.2. 
(f)  Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the volume or character of wastewater being discharged into the system shall notify the town and QDC at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection. 
(g)  Any person applying for a new connection of large volume or unusual character of pollutants, or any persons proposing a substantial change in volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the director and QDC. 
(h)  No licensed drainlayer or Master Plumber shall have more than five permits outstanding at any time. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013; Ord. No. 18-16, § 5, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 20-151. - Drainlayers. 
(a)  Building sewers and connections shall be made only by drainlayers or master plumbers licensed to perform such work by the state. 
(b)  Failure to comply with any provisions of this article by the drainlayer or master plumber, as determined by the director, may result in the forfeiture of the right, as determined by the director, to perform building or main sewer work within the town. The town also reserves the right to withhold the issuance of any sewer permits to any drainlayer or master plumber found in violation of any provisions of this article. 
(c)  Drainlayers shall only install building sewers during the normal working hours of the sewer department. Emergency working hours shall be approved by the director. 
(d)  Excavation and repaving. No person shall open any road, street or highway in the town for the purpose of installing sewer lines without first receiving a permit and complying with all of the criteria required by the Code of Ordinances of the town and/or the state department of transportation. Failure to comply with these rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this Code. Any person or persons guilty of said violation shall be liable for a fine as specified in section 20-97, criminal prosecution. 
(e)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the town, but in no event shall the diameter be less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall not be less than 1/4 inch per foot. 
(f)  Town's responsibilities. The town shall be responsible for all repair and maintenance of all main sewer lines up to the "Y" connection for a building lateral. The property owner shall, at their expense, be responsible for the repair and maintenance of the building lateral pipe, from the building to the "Y" connection. 
(g)  All plumbing outlets in any building served by a public sewer shall discharge to the building sewer. 
(h)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no branch is available, a connection may be made by tapping the existing sewer by an approved method, then inserting an approved "Y" or "T" saddle, all encased in concrete. 
(i)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. No such connection shall be made, nor any discharge to the public sewer system be made until approval is granted by the director. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director. 
(j)  Any variation from this article shall receive the approval of the director before implementation. 
(k)  The requirements of the town plumbing and drainage code shall be observed with respect to piping and fixtures inside or within five feet of buildings and within the areas of jurisdiction of said Code. In the event of conflict between said Code and any sections of this article, the requirements of this article shall apply. 
(l)  Within 90 days of the public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall connect to the public sewer. All existing cesspools or septic tanks shall be emptied into licensed septage disposal vehicles only and disposed of at a site approved as a septage receiving station. Cesspool or septic tank is then filled with crushed stone or gravel by a drainlayer immediately upon sewer service being placed into active service. No contents of septic tanks or cesspools shall be discharged to the public sewer by any person or septage disposal vehicle owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013; Ord. No. 18-16, § 6, 7-30-2018) 
Sec. 20-152. - Costs and expenses of installation for building sewers. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection and subsequent operation and maintenance of the building sewer, including any costs related to the existence or location of any sewer, shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage including, but not limited to, any loss or damage to any sewer or public sewer that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation, connection, operation and/or maintenance of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-153. - Separate sewers for each building and exceptions. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another or at an interior landlocked lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, then the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, subject to the approval of the director. The owner of such rear or interior lot shall obtain a sewer easement from the front lot owner and shall record the same in the land evidence records of the town prior to the Town's issuance of a permit. The Town does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damages caused by or resulting from any such single connection. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-154. - Cleanouts. 
    Cleanouts shall be installed when directed by the town, where the distance from the building to the property line is greater than 100 feet, or where bends greater than 221/2 degrees are used in the building sewer, and at each property line. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-155. - Backflow preventers. 
    All residential connections shall have backflow preventers installed at the owner's expense and to be maintained by the owner. The type of backflow preventer required for commercial and industrial facilities shall be approved by the director and QDC. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-156. - Standard requirements. 
    The town shall establish standard requirements or specifications to regulate the sizes, materials, methods and workmanship to be used in the construction of sewers, house connections, and other similar work and appurtenances, thereto connected or intended to be connected or to discharge, directly or indirectly into any public sewer of the town. All construction procedures, materials and specifications shall conform to the standard sanitary sewer requirements of the town and all applicable federal, state and town building and plumbing codes. Any deviations from these prescribed procedures and material must be approved by the director before installation. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-157. - Connection of roof downspouts, floor drains, sump pumps, areaway drains, etc. 
    No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-158. - Oil, grease and solids interceptors. 
    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and QDC and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Restaurants, cafeterias, institution kitchens and any other kitchen serving large numbers of people shall provide a grease interceptor meeting the approval of the director and QDC before entry to the sewer and the owner shall periodically remove grease therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-159. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the town to meet all requirements of this division. The costs of any such tests or examinations shall be borne by the applicant. Existing building sewers that are to be replaced or abandoned by virtue of a permit issued under this division shall be cut and capped, and the line either removed or filled with suitable material, as approved by the town. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-160. - Privately-owned wastewater treatment facilities. 
    Privately owned and operated pump stations and collection systems connected to the wastewater system must adhere to the following: 
(1)  Owners of privately-owned wastewater treatment facilities shall maintain the system in good working order. Proper operation and maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, effective performance based on facility design, adequate operator staffing and training, and adequate laboratory and process controls, including quality assurance procedures as determined to be appropriate by the Town and backup or auxiliary facilities or similar systems to assure compliance or effective performance. Proper operation and maintenance must include emergency procedures and reporting requirements in case of power outages, natural disaster, labor shortage (whether the result of intentional work stoppages or epidemic), equipment failure, acts of terrorism/vandalism or sanitary sewer overflow. Reporting requirements shall include verbal notification to the director and the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM) as soon as possible, but not exceeding 24 hours of discovery of the event; and a written report must be submitted to the director and RIDEM not more than five business days of the event's ending. 
(2)  The owner shall submit, for review and approval by the director, an operations and maintenance manual describing standards and procedures by which the wastewater treatment facilities, pump station(s) and/or collection system(s) will be staffed, operated and maintained during normal and emergency conditions. Should development of the plan include the practice of engineering, the plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer (registered in the State of Rhode Island). 
a.  Owners of existing privately owned pump stations shall submit an operations and maintenance manual within one year of passage of this article and pay all associated fees as presented in the summary of fees. 
b.  For newly constructed privately owned pump stations, the operations and maintenance manual must be submitted prior to the director issuing a sewer permit. The fee shall be submitted at the time of the submittal as presented in the summary of fees. 
c.  The contents of the operations and maintenance manual shall be as outlined in the standard sanitary sewer requirements of the town and QDC. 
(3)  Provide all required easements that will allow the town access to the site for unannounced periodic inspections. 
(4)  The owner shall pay an annual permit fee for the operation of the facilities. The fee shall be adopted by the town from time to time. 
(5)  The owner is required to conduct (at a minimum) monthly inspections of the pump station. The inspection reports shall be forwarded to the director within three business days after the inspection. At a minimum, the inspection report shall provide the name of the individual or firm performing the inspection, hours of operation for each pump, generator run time, summary of alarms, any maintenance undertaken during that month, condition of the station, and recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-161. - Installation standards and requirements. 
    The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building or main sewer and the methods to be used in excavation, placing of pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the Quonset Davisville Port and Commerce Park Sewer Treatment System User Regulations, the Rhode Island State Building Code, the "Guides for the Design of Wastewater Treatment Works", (TR-16; latest version), as promulgated by the New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission or other applicable town standards and regulations. 
    The provisions and any specifications and construction installation procedures promulgated by the engineering department shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-162. - Inspections on private property; powers and authority of the director. 
(a)  Authorized employees to be admitted. The director and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the town holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(b)  Monitoring by industry. Any industry discharging into the public sewer shall perform such monitoring of its discharge as the QDC may require, including the installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment and methods, shall keep records of the results of such monitoring and shall report the results of such monitoring to the QDC. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-163. - Validity. 
(a)  The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provisions of this article shall not affect the validity of any other part of this article which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. 
(b)  The town may waive any of the requirements of this article whenever they determine that strict compliance therewith is not required in the public interest. 
(c)  If any provisions of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall for any reason be held invalid, the remainder of this article or the application of such provisions to persons or circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby. 
(d)  This article may be added to, modified, or amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 20-164. - Schedule of fees. 
    A schedule of fees and penalties shall be adopted by the town from time to time as part of the budget adoption process. Division 3, section 20-119 states the summary of fees. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-25-2013) 
Chapter 21 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Zoning regulations, § 111; planning commission, §§ 802-806; zoning board of review, §§ 808-810. 
Cross reference- Any zoning map amendment or land use, rezoning or zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-9(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; location and licensing of solid waste facility, § 6-31; location and licensing of recycling facility, § 6-81; harbors, wharves and public waters, ch. 7; mobile and manufactured home parks, ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; house numbering, § 17-21 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Comprehensive planning and land use regulation act, RIGL 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq.; zoning, RIGL 1956, § 45-24-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSES AND ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 21-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as North Kingstown Zoning Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Sec. 21-2. - Adoption of ordinances, districts and map; compliance. 
    Zoning ordinances and districts as set forth in this chapter are approved and established. The zoning map, which is kept on file in the office of the town clerk, is declared to be a part of this chapter. No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be erected, moved or structurally altered, except in conformity with the ordinances described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Sec. 21-3. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  The town council finds that: 
(1)  Based on the requirement of RIGL 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq., Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Act, the town adopted a comprehensive plan in August of 1992; 
(2)  Pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq., the zoning ordinances must be consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
(3)  RIGL 1956, § 45-24-1 et seq., Rhode Island Zoning Act of 1991, requires local zoning ordinances to be in conformance with RIGL 1956, § 45-24-1 et seq.; 
(4)  Town zoning ordinances were adopted in 1947 and last comprehensively amended in 1974; 
(5)  The character of land development and related public and private services has changed substantially in intervening years; 
(6)  It is necessary to provide for innovative land development practices to adequately regulate the use of land and employ modern land development practices; and 
(7)  A substantial updating and revision of the zoning ordinances is required to meet these changed conditions. 
(b)  It is, therefore, found that the adoption of updated and revised zoning ordinances is necessary to address the findings and needs identified in this section; protect the public health, safety and general welfare; allow the town to carry out its duty to provide for the conservation of natural resources within the town; adopt all means necessary and proper by law for the preservation, regeneration, and restoration of the natural environment of the town; promote good planning practice; and provide for sustainable economic growth in the town. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Sec. 21-4. - General purposes. 
    The zoning ordinances have been prepared, adopted and as may be amended in accordance with the comprehensive plan and have been designed to address the purposes in this section. The town recognizes the following purposes, each with equal priority, and are numbered for reference purposes only: 
(1)  Promoting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Providing for a range of uses and intensities of use appropriate to the character of the town and reflecting current and expected future needs. 
(3)  Providing for orderly growth and development which recognizes the following: 
a.  The goals, objectives and patterns of land use contained in the town comprehensive plan. 
b.  The natural characteristics of the land, including its suitability for use based on soil characteristics, topography and susceptibility to surface water or groundwater pollution. 
c.  The values and dynamic nature of coastal and freshwater ponds, the shoreline, and freshwater and coastal wetlands. 
d.  The values of unique or valuable natural resources and features. 
e.  The availability and capacity of existing and planned public and/or private services and facilities. 
f.  The need to shape and balance urban and rural development. 
g.  The use of innovative development regulations and techniques. 
(4)  Providing for the control, protection and/or abatement of air, water, groundwater and noise pollution and soil erosion and sedimentation. 
(5)  Providing for the protection of the natural, historic, cultural and scenic character of the town. 
(6)  Providing for the preservation and promotion of agricultural production, forest, silviculture, aquaculture, timber resources and open space. 
(7)  Providing for the protection of public investment in transportation, water, stormwater management systems, sewage treatment and disposal, solid waste treatment and disposal, schools, recreation, public facilities, open space and other public requirements. 
(8)  Promoting a balance of housing choices, for all income levels and groups, to ensure the health, safety and welfare of all citizens and citizens' rights to affordable, accessible, safe and sanitary housing. 
(9)  Providing opportunities for the establishment of low- and moderate-income housing. 
(10)  Promoting safety from fire, flood and other natural or humanmade disasters. 
(11)  Promoting a high level of quality in design in the development of private and public facilities. 
(12)  Promoting implementation of the comprehensive plan. 
(13)  Providing for coordination of land uses with contiguous municipalities, other municipalities, the state and other agencies, as appropriate, to ensure that the land uses are consistent with the town's comprehensive plan, especially with regard to resources and facilities that extend beyond municipal boundaries or that have a direct impact on the town. 
(14)  Providing for efficient review of development proposals, to clarify and expedite the zoning review process. 
(15)  Providing for procedures for the administration of this chapter, including but not limited to variances, special use permits, special permits, special exceptions and modifications. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Sec. 21-5. - Maintenance of ordinances, chapter and map. 
(a)  The town clerk shall be the custodian of the zoning ordinances and the zoning map created under this chapter. 
(b)  The town clerk shall be responsible for the maintenance and update of the text and zoning map comprising the zoning ordinance and this chapter. Changes to the zoning map shall be depicted on the map within 90 days of the authorized change. 
(c)  The department of planning and development shall be responsible for review of the zoning ordinance and this chapter at reasonable intervals and whenever changes are made to the comprehensive plan, for the identification of any changes necessary and for the forwarding of these changes to the town council upon recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Sec. 21-6. - Consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    The zoning ordinances in this chapter are designed, adopted and as may be amended to be consistent with the comprehensive plan. If there is uncertainty in the construction or application of any section of the zoning ordinances in this chapter, this chapter shall be construed in a manner that will further the implementation of, and not be contrary to, the goals and objectives and applicable elements of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Sec. 21-7. - Use exemptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, the following uses, as defined in section 21-22, shall be permitted uses within all residential zoning use districts and all industrial and commercial use districts, except where residential use is prohibited for public health or safety reasons: 
(1)  Community residences. 
(2)  Family day care. 
(3)  Households. 
(b)  Any application for development under this chapter, such as but not limited to an application for a special use permit, special permit and variance, shall be considered vested when the submitted application is certified to be substantially complete by the proper administrator and/or official designated to receive such applications. Substantially complete shall mean that all submittal requirements have been met. Development projects subject to subdivision review and/or development plan review by the planning commission, including but not limited to residential compound or cluster developments, shall be deemed vested when the planning commission grants master plan approval. If an application for development under this chapter is approved, the applicant shall initiate and substantially complete development of the property within the time limit established for each of these actions in the appropriate section of this chapter. Failure to initiate development of the property prior to the time limit established at approval shall render the approval null and void. Any development of the property proposed after the lapse of the time limit established at approval shall require a resubmission of development plans by the applicant subject to the regulations in the appropriate sections of this chapter. An application shall include all required forms, plans supporting documents and required fees. Any application considered by the town under this section shall be reviewed according to the regulations applicable in this chapter in force at the time the application is deemed substantially complete. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-8. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this chapter or of any rule, regulation or determination made thereunder or the application thereof to any person, agency or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter, rule, regulation or determination and the application of the provisions to other persons, agencies or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Sec. 21-9. - Districts generally. 
(a)  Division of town into zoning districts. For the purposes of this chapter, the town is divided into the following primary districts based on type of land use and intensity of use: 
(1)  Residential districts: rural, neighborhood, village, multifamily, Pojac Point, planned village district, very low density and low density. 
(2)  Planned unit development. 
(3)  Business districts: neighborhood, waterfront, general, heavy and planned business development, and Wickford Village Center. 
(4)  Industrial district: Waterfront and general light. 
(5)  Corporate compound. 
(6)  Open space district and public district. 
(7)  Development district. 
(b)  Overlay districts. The following supplemental overlay districts are established: very severe limitations, severe limitations, steep slope, groundwater recharge and wellhead and groundwater reservoir, special flood hazard, scenic, historic, residential compound development and cluster development. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 01-1, § 2, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 02-20, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 21-10. - Administration and enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  Administration. The administration of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the director of planning and development, referred to as the "director," or the director's designee. The director shall be charged with the following duties in the administration of this chapter: 
(1)  Issuing any required zoning certificates. 
(2)  Staff assistance and administrative duties for the zoning board of review. 
(3)  Issuance of modification permits. 
(4)  Performing such other duties and taking such actions as may be required. 
(b)  Enforcement. The enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the building official, referred to as the "zoning enforcement officer," or the officer's duly authorized designee. The zoning enforcement officer shall be charged with the following duties in the enforcement of this chapter: 
(1)  Issuing any required permits. 
(2)  Keeping records showing the compliance of uses of land. 
(3)  Authorizing the commencement of uses or development under this chapter. 
(4)  Inspection of suspected violations. 
(5)  Issuance of violation notices with required correction action. 
(6)  Collection of fines for violations. 
(7)  Performing such other duties and taking such actions as may be assigned in this chapter. 
(c)  Zoning certificates. In order to provide guidance or clarification, the director or the director's designee shall, upon written request, issue a zoning certificate or provide information to the requesting party as to the determination of zoning applicability within 15 days of the written request. If no written response is provided within that time, the requesting party shall have the right to appeal to the zoning board of review for its determination. 
(d)  Minimum qualifications. The zoning enforcement officer shall meet the minimum qualifications as established in RIGL 1956, § 23-27.3-107.1.1 for a building inspector. The director shall meet the minimum qualifications established in section 2-141 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 21-11. - Zoning board of review. 
(a)  Established, membership and procedures. A zoning board of review is established, which consists of five members and two alternates to be appointed by the town council. The board shall elect a chair from among its members. 
(1)  Alternates. The town council shall appoint two alternate members to the zoning board of review, who shall be designated alternate no. 1 and alternate no. 2. These alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in hearings. In the absence of any member of the board, alternate no. 1 shall act as a full member of the board. If a second member is absent, alternate no. 2 shall act as a full member of the board. In the absence of alternate no. 1, the second alternate member shall serve in the position of alternate no. 1. If any matter before the zoning board of review is likely to be continued for more than one hearing, the chair may request that alternate no. 1 and/or alternate no. 2 participate at such hearings, and the alternate shall be authorized to vote on the matter when and if an active member becomes unable to serve at such hearings. No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the board unless the member has attended all hearings concerning that matter. 
(2)  Term of office. Zoning board of review members shall be appointed for a term of three years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the town council for the unexpired term. 
(3)  Assistance. The zoning board of review may engage legal, technical or clerical assistance to aid in the discharge of its duties with the approval of the town council. 
(4)  Rules of procedure. The zoning board of review shall prepare and adopt rules of procedure. 
(5)  Records. All zoning board of review records shall be filed in the office of planning and development. All minutes and decisions shall be filed in the office of the town clerk. 
(6)  Correspondence. All correspondence and appeals shall be sent to the zoning board of review, at the current town hall address. 
(7)  Administration of oaths and witnesses. The chair or, in the absence of the chair, the acting chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by the issuance of subpoenas. 
(8)  Reimbursement and compensation. Reimbursement to and compensation for expenses to the zoning board of review shall be provided. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The zoning board of review shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals in a timely manner where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer or agency in the enforcement or interpretation of this chapter. 
(2)  Hear and decide appeals from a party aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission, pursuant to section 21-338. 
(3)  Hear and decide appeals where the zoning board of review is appointed as the board of appeals for airport zoning regulation pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 1-3-19. 
(4)  Authorize, upon application, in specific cases of hardship, variances in the application of the terms of this chapter pursuant to section 21-14. 
(5)  Authorize, upon application, in specific cases, special use permits, pursuant to section 21-15, where the zoning board of review is designated as a permit authority for special use permits. 
(6)  Refer matters to the planning commission, or other boards or agencies in the town, as the zoning board of review may deem appropriate, for findings and recommendations. 
(7)  Provide for issuance of conditional zoning approvals where a proposed application would otherwise be approved except when one or more state or federal agency approvals which are necessary are pending. A conditional zoning approval shall be revoked when any necessary state or federal agency approvals are not received within a specified period of time. 
(8)  Hear and decide such other matters, according to the terms of this chapter or other statutes, and upon which the board may be authorized to pass under this chapter or other statutes. 
(c)  Voting procedures. The zoning board of review shall be required to vote as follows: 
(1)  Five active members shall be necessary to conduct a hearing. As soon as a conflict occurs for a member, that member shall be recused, shall not sit as an active member, and shall take no part in the conduct of the hearing. Only five active members shall be entitled to vote on any one issue. 
(2)  The concurring vote of three of the five members of the zoning board of review sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any zoning administration officer or agency from whom an appeal was taken. 
(3)  The concurring vote of four of the five members of the zoning board of review sitting at a hearing shall be required to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter within the discretion of the board upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, including variances, special permits and special use permits. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 06-05, § 1, 4-10-2006) 
Charter reference- Zoning board of review, §§ 808-810. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-216 et seq. 
Sec. 21-12. - Planning commission. 
(a)  Established; membership; assistance; records and correspondence. A planning commission is established in the town Charter and shall consist of six members appointed by the town manager with the approval of the town council. The commission shall elect a chair and vice-chair from among its members. 
(1)  Term of office. Planning commission members shall be appointed for a term of six years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the town council for the unexpired term. 
(2)  Assistance. The planning commission may engage legal, technical or clerical assistance to aid in the discharge of its duties. The department of planning and development shall provide staff and secretarial duties of the commission. 
(3)  Records. All planning commission records shall be filed in the office of planning and development. All minutes and decisions shall be filed in the office of the town clerk. 
(4)  Correspondence. All correspondence shall be sent to the planning commission, at the current town hall address. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The commission shall have the power and duty within this chapter to: 
(1)  Review and make recommendations on proposed zoning ordinance and zoning map amendments in accordance with section 21-19 of this chapter; 
(2)  Hear and decide on applications for site plan approval where planning commission approval is required; 
(3)  Authorize upon application the following: planned business district site plan, site plan, multifamily development, planned village district development, planned unit development, cluster development and residential compound development; and 
(4)  Review and make recommendations on zoning board applications of special use permits and variances upon request from the director or the zoning board of review. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 4-10-2006) 
Charter reference- Planning commission, §§ 802-806. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-216 et seq. 
Sec. 21-13. - Zoning board of review procedures for variances, special use permits and special permits. 
(a)  Filing procedure. An application, together with all required submission items and data set forth in subsection (d) of this section, for a variance, special permit or a special use permit shall be filed with the department of planning and development. Applications may be made by any person, group, agency or corporation in accordance with the definition of applicant set forth in section 21-22. The department of planning and development shall immediately transmit a copy of each application to the planning commission. 
(b)  Request for findings and recommendations from planning commission. For any variance, special use permit, or special permit pertaining to a commercial or mixed use project, the planning commission shall report its recommendations. For all other applications, the staff may report findings or recommendations, but at the request of the planning director or the zoning board of review, staff shall report findings or recommendations of the planning commission. All findings and recommendations shall include a statement on the general consistency of the application with the goals and purposes of the comprehensive plan. The planning commission and/or staff shall render such findings and recommendations to the zoning board of review within 30 days of receipt of the application from the zoning board of review. 
(c)  Public hearing and notice requirements. The zoning board of review shall hold a public hearing on any application for a variance, special use permit and special permit, in an expeditious manner, after receipt, in proper form, of the application and all required submission items and data. The zoning board of review shall give notice of the public hearing at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. Notice of the hearing shall be sent first class mail to the applicant, and to at least all those who require notice under subsection 21-19(c). The notice shall include the street address of the subject property. The cost of notification shall be borne by the applicant. 
(d)  Application procedures. The zoning board of review shall prepare and adopt rules of procedure. The board's rules of procedure shall, at a minimum, include application forms for each type of relief sought. 
(e)  Decisions and records. Following a public hearing, the zoning board of review shall render a decision within a reasonable period of time. The zoning board of review shall include in its decision all findings of fact and conditions, showing the vote of each member participating thereon, and the absence of a member or a member's failure to vote. Decisions shall be recorded and filed in office of the town clerk within 30 working days from the date when the decision was rendered and shall be a public record. The zoning board of review shall keep written minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, findings of fact and other official actions, all of which shall be recorded and filed in the office of the town clerk in an expeditious manner upon completion of the proceeding. For any proceeding in which the right of appeal lies to the superior court or supreme court, the zoning board of review shall have the minutes taken either by a competent stenographer or recorded by a sound recording device. Any decision by the zoning board of review, including any special conditions attached thereto, shall be mailed to the applicant and/or property owner, to the zoning enforcement officer, and to the associate director of the division of planning of the state department of administration. Any decision evidencing the granting of a variance, modification, special use permit, special permit or special exception shall also be recorded in the town's land evidence records and the cost of such recording shall be paid by the applicant. The decision shall be posted in a location visible to the public in the town hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the decision. 
(f)  Special conditions. In granting a variance, special permit or special use permit or in making any determination upon which it is required to pass after a public hearing under this chapter, the zoning board of review or other zoning enforcement agency may apply such special conditions that may, in the opinion of the board or agency, be required to promote the intent and purposes of the comprehensive plan and this chapter. Failure to abide by any special conditions attached to a grant shall constitute a zoning violation. Those special conditions shall be based on competent credible evidence on the record, shall be incorporated into the decision, and may include but are not limited to provisions for the following: 
(1)  Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon other land, including the type, intensity, design and performance of activities; 
(2)  Controlling the sequence of development, including when it must be commenced and completed; 
(3)  Controlling the duration of the use or development and the time within which any temporary structure must be removed; 
(4)  Ensuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required public improvements; 
(5)  Designating the exact location and nature of development; and 
(6)  Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats or specifications. 
(g)  Appeals of decisions. Procedures for appeals of zoning board of review decisions are as follows: 
(1)  An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the zoning board of review on an application for a variance, special permit or special use permit to the county superior court by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of appeal within 20 days after the decision has been recorded and posted in the office of the town clerk. The zoning board of review shall file the original documents acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed from or certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the clerk of the court within 30 days after being served with a copy of the complaint. When the complaint is filed by someone other than the original applicant or appellant, the original applicant or appellant and the members of the zoning board of review shall be made parties to the proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
(2)  If, before the date set for hearing in the superior court, an application is made to the court for leave to present additional evidence before the zoning board of review and it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the additional evidence is material and that there were good reasons for the failure to present it at the hearing before the zoning board of review, the court may order that the additional evidence be taken before the zoning board of review upon conditions determined by the court. The zoning board of review may modify its findings and decision because of the additional evidence and shall file that evidence and any new findings or decisions with the superior court. 
(3)  The review shall be conducted by the superior court without a jury. The court shall consider the record of the hearing before the zoning board of review and, if it shall appear to the court that additional evidence is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may allow any party to the appeal to present that evidence in open court, which evidence, along with the report, shall constitute the record upon which the determination of the court shall be made. 
(4)  The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the zoning board of review as to the weight of the evidence on the questions of fact. The court may affirm the decision of the zoning board of review or remand the case for further proceedings or may reverse or modify the decision if substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because of the following findings, inferences, conclusions or decisions: 
a.  In violation of constitutional, statutory or ordinance provisions; 
b.  In excess of the authority granted to the zoning board of review by statute or ordinance; 
c.  Made upon unlawful procedure; 
d.  Affected by other error of law; 
e.  Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative and substantial evidence of the whole record; and 
f.  Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. 
(5)  Upon the entry of any case or proceedings brought under this section, including pending appeals and appeals taken to the court, the court shall, at the request of either party, advance the case, so that the matter shall be afforded precedence on the calendar and shall thereupon be heard with as little delay as possible. 
(h)  Expiration of variance, special permit, and special use permit. A variance, special permit, or special use permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of the filing of the decision of the zoning board of review and the receipt of all required local and state approvals which have been granted, during which time a building permit must be applied for. The zoning board of review may grant additional time as a condition of approval. Unless otherwise specified by the zoning board of review, the project for which a variance, special permit or special use permit is granted must be completed within two years from the date of the filing of the decision of the zoning board of review and the receipt of all required local and state approvals have been granted. Under no circumstances shall a variance, special permit, or special use permit be valid for a period longer than three years from the date of the filing of the decision of the zoning board of review. 
In the event that an applicant is unable to exercise the permission granted or apply for a building permit within one year from the date of the granting of the special use permit or variance, then said applicant may apply for an extension of time with the zoning board of review; provided, however, that said application for extension of time, for cause, is submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of the special use permit or variance. The zoning board of review may grant only one extension of time for an application for a period not exceeding one year from the expiration date of the special use permit or variance. The granting of such an extension is entirely within the discretion of the zoning board of review and the zoning board of review may require that an applicant demonstrate through testimony or other evidence that cause exists, that the effect of the special use permit or variance on neighboring properties has not substantially changed since the original application and that the granting of the extension of time would not be inimical to the health, safety and welfare of the public generally. 
Written notice of such application for extension shall be sent, at the applicant's expense, to all remonstrants of record as determined by the record of the original hearing on the original petition for a special use permit or variance. No other notice shall be required. 
(i)  Reapplication. If a variance, special permit or special use permit has been denied, a new application for the same request as was denied may not be made for a period of one year from the date of the recording of the decision unless substantially new evidence can be provided to the zoning board of review. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 01-1, § 3, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-10, § 1, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 12-13, § 1, 10-22-2012; Ord. No. 18-22, § 1, 10-29-2018) 
Sec. 21-14. - Additional procedures for variances. 
(a)  Criteria for grant of variance. In granting a variance to this chapter, the zoning board of review shall require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
(1)  The hardship from which the applicant seeks relief is due to the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure and not the general characteristics of the surrounding area, and is not due to a physical or economic disability of the applicant. 
(2)  The hardship is not the result of any prior action of the applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the applicant to realize greater financial gain. 
(3)  The granting of the requested variance will not alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or purpose of this chapter or the comprehensive plan upon which this chapter is based. 
(4)  The relief to be granted is the least relief necessary. 
(b)  Evidence required for grant of variance. The zoning board of review shall, in addition to the standards in subsection (a) of this section, require that evidence be entered into the record of the proceedings showing that: 
(1)  In granting a use variance, the subject land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is required to conform to the land use sections of this chapter. Nonconforming use of neighboring land or structures in the same district and permitted use of lands or structures in an adjacent district shall not be considered in granting a use variance; and 
(2)  In granting a dimensional variance, the hardship suffered by the owner of the subject property if the dimensional variance is not granted amounts to more than a mere inconvenience. The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 02-14, § 1, 10-7-2002) 
Sec. 21-15. - Additional procedures for special use permits and special permits. 
(a)  In granting a special use permit or special permit under this chapter, the zoning board of review shall require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
(1)  The requested special use permit will not alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or purpose of this chapter or the comprehensive plan upon which this chapter is based. 
(2)  The special use permit is reasonably necessary to serve the public convenience and welfare. 
(3)  The granting of a special use permit will not pose a threat to the drinking water supply. 
(4)  The use will not disrupt the neighborhood or the privacy of abutting landowners by excessive noise, light, glare or air pollutants. 
(5)  Sewage and waste disposal into the ground and the surface water drainage from the proposed use will be adequately handled on site. 
(6)  The traffic generated by the proposed use will not cause undue congestion or introduce a traffic hazard to the circulation pattern of the area. 
(7)  Accessory signs, off-street parking and loading area and outdoor lighting are designed and located in a manner which complements the character of the neighborhood. 
(8)  In addition to the criteria in subsections (1) through (7) of this section, in the case of a special permit, the board shall require evidence that the requested use will have a lesser undesirable impact upon the surrounding area than the preceding nonconforming use. 
(b)  Special use permits and dimensional variances. The zoning board of review may issue a dimensional variance in conjunction with a special use. If the special use could not exist without the dimensional variance, the zoning board of review shall consider the special use permit and the dimensional variance together to determine if granting the special use is appropriate based on both the special use criteria and the dimensional variance evidentiary standards. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 02-14, § 2, 10-7-2002) 
Sec. 21-16. - Comprehensive permit for low and moderate income housing. 
(a)  Generally. All applications for comprehensive permits to build low and moderate income housing shall be reviewed in accordance with the applicable provisions of RIGL tit. 45, ch. 53, as amended, the Low and Moderate Income Housing Act. The planning commission shall have the authority to issue a comprehensive permit for a low and moderate income housing project pursuant to the applicable provisions of RIGL tit. 45, ch. 53. 
(b)  Application fees. The application fee for a comprehensive permit application shall be equal to the fee for the most analogous fee required in chapter 9 of the Revised Ordinances of the town as determined by the director of planning and development. 
(c)  Limitation on applications. Pursuant to RIGL § 45-53-4(4)(xii) as the town has an approved affordable housing plan and at such time as the town is meeting housing needs as that term is defined in RIGL § 44-53-3(10), as amended, the annual number of dwelling units in comprehensive permit applications from for-profit developers may be limited to an aggregate of one percent of the total number of year-round housing units in the town, as recognized in the affordable housing plan and notwithstanding the timetables set forth elsewhere in this section, the planning commission shall have the authority to consider comprehensive permit applications from for-profit developers, which are made pursuant to this paragraph, sequentially in the order in which they are submitted. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 3, 4-10-2006) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-05, § 3, adopted April 10, 2006, amended the Code by repealing former § 21-16 in its entirety, and adding a new § 21-16. Former § 21-16 pertained to administrative procedures for special exceptions for low- and moderate-income housing; and derived from Ord. No. 94-12, adopted June 27, 1994; and Ord. No. 03-13, adopted September 8, 2003. 
Sec. 21-17. - Administrative procedures for appeals to zoning board of review. 
(a)  Filing procedure. An appeal to the zoning board of review from a decision of the zoning enforcement agent, zoning administrator, historic district commission and the planning commission may be taken by an aggrieved party. The appeal shall be taken within 20 days of the issuance of a violation notice or zoning certificate by filing with the department of planning and development an appeal application. The department of planning and development shall send a copy of the appeal application to the officer or agency from whom the appeal is filed and to the planning commission. The officer or agency shall transmit to the zoning board of review all papers constituting the record upon which the action was appealed. 
(b)  Public hearing and notice requirements. The zoning board of review shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal. Public notice shall be provided in accordance with subsection 21-19(c). Notice shall also be provided to the parties of interest. Upon the hearing, any person may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne by the applicant. Participation in a zoning hearing or other proceeding by a party shall not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not in good faith; intentional misconduct; a knowing violation of law; transactions where there is an improper personal benefit; or malicious, wanton or willful misconduct. 
(c)  Application procedure for appeals. The zoning board of review shall prepare and adopt rules of procedure. The board's rules of procedure shall, at a minimum, include application forms for appeals which shall state the grounds for appeal. The following submission requirements shall accompany each application: 
(1)  A completed application signed by the property owner and appellant. 
(2)  Application fees as established by the town council and fees for advertising. 
(3)  A list of property owners within 200 feet of the subject site including plat and lot numbers, owners' names and mailing addresses as shown on the latest tax maps. 
Upon submittal of the requirements in this subsection, the department of planning and development shall schedule a hearing before the zoning board of review. 
(d)  Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning enforcement officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the zoning board of review, after the appeal shall have been duly filed, that because of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the officer's or agency's opinion, cause imminent peril of life or property. In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction on application thereof and upon notice to the officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken on due cause shown. 
(e)  Decisions and records of zoning board of review. In exercising its powers, the zoning board of review may, in conformity with this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or partly and may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such orders, requirements, decisions or determinations as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken. All decisions and records of the zoning board of review respecting appeals shall conform to subsection 21-13(e). 
(f)  Appeal of zoning board of review decision. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the zoning board of review in accordance with subsection 21-13(g). 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 03-8, § 1, 6-9-2003) 
Sec. 21-18. - Administrative procedures for modification permit. 
(a)  Established. The director or the director's designee shall be authorized to grant modification permits under this chapter. Modification permits may be sought for dimensional variances, which do not exceed 25 percent for the applicable building setbacks. 
(b)  Application procedure. An application for a modification permit shall follow the same procedures as set forth in subsection 21-13(d). 
(c)  Determination by director. Within ten days of receipt of an application for a modification permit, the director shall make a decision as to the suitability of the requested modification based on the following determinations: 
(1)  The modification requested is reasonably necessary for the full enjoyment of the permitted use; 
(2)  If the modification is granted, neighboring property will neither be substantially injured nor its appropriate use substantially impaired; 
(3)  The modification requested is in harmony with the purposes and intent of the comprehensive plan and this chapter; and 
(4)  The modification requested does not require a variance from a flood hazard requirement. 
(d)  Denial by director. Upon a negative determination, the director shall forward all records of the modification permit to the zoning board of review. The zoning board of review will consider the application a request for a variance that may only be issued following standard procedures for a variance. 
(e)  Notice of modification. Upon an affirmative determination, the director shall notify, by certified mail, all property owners within 200 feet of the subject property and shall indicate the street address of the subject property in the notice and shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the town that the modification will be granted unless written objection is received within 30 days of the public notice. The costs of any notice required under this section shall be borne by the applicant requesting the modification. 
(f)  Denial of modification based on written objection. If written objection is received within 30 days, the request for a modification will be denied. Upon a denial, the director shall forward all records of the modification permit to the zoning board of review. The zoning board of review will consider the application a request for a variance that may only be issued by the zoning board of review following standard procedures for a variance. 
(g)  Approval of modification. If no written objections are received within 30 days, the director shall grant the modification permit. The director may apply such special conditions to the permit as may, in the opinion of the officer, be required to conform to the intent and purposes of this chapter. The director shall keep public records of all requests for modifications and of findings, determinations, special conditions and any objections received. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 01-1, § 4, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, § 2, 2-5-2007) 
Sec. 21-19. - Administrative procedures for zoning ordinance, chapter and zoning map amendment. 
(a)  Receipt of application. An application to adopt, amend or repeal a zoning ordinance or zoning map or this chapter shall be submitted to the town clerk. Immediately upon receipt of the proposal, the town clerk shall refer the proposal to the town council and to the planning commission for study and recommendation. The planning commission shall, in turn, notify and seek the advice of the department of planning and development and shall report to the town council within 45 days after receipt of the proposal giving its findings and recommendations as prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. Where a proposal for adoption, amendment or repeal of a zoning ordinance or zoning map or section of this chapter is made by the planning commission, the requirements for study by the commission may be waived, provided that the proposal by the planning commission includes its findings and recommendations pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. The town council shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of receipt of a proposal, giving proper notice as prescribed in subsection (c) of this section. The town council shall render a decision on any proposal within 45 days after the date of completion of the public hearing. Unless otherwise conditioned, the amendment of the zoning ordinance, this chapter or zoning map shall become effective upon passage by the town council. The subsections of this section pertaining to deadlines shall not be construed to apply to any extension consented to by an applicant. 
(b)  Review by planning commission. Among its findings and recommendations to the town council with respect to a proposal for adoption, amendment or repeal of a zoning ordinance, section of this chapter or zoning map, the planning commission shall: 
(1)  Include a statement on the general consistency of the proposal with the comprehensive plan, including the goals and policies statement, the implementation program, and all other applicable elements of the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  Include a demonstration of recognition and consideration of each of the applicable general purposes of zoning, as presented in section 21-4. 
(c)  Notice and hearing requirements. Requirements for notice and hearing shall be as follows: 
(1)  No zoning ordinance or section of this chapter shall be adopted, repealed or amended until after a public hearing has been held upon the question before the town council. The town council shall first give notice of the public hearing by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least once each week for three successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing, which may include the week in which the hearing is to be held, at which hearing opportunity shall be given to all persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed ordinance. Written notice, which may be a copy of the newspaper notice, shall be mailed to the associate director of the division of planning of the state department of administration and, where applicable, to the parties specified in subsections (c)(2) through (c)(5) of this section at least two weeks prior to the hearing. The newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall: 
a.  Specify the place of the hearing and the date and time of its commencement; 
b.  Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of a zoning ordinance is under consideration; 
c.  Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the ordinance that may be printed once in its entirety or that summarizes and describes the matter under consideration; 
d.  Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under consideration may be obtained or examined and copied; and 
e.  State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or amended prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising, as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing. Any alteration or amendment must be presented for comment in the course of the hearing. 
(2)  Where a proposed general amendment to an existing zoning ordinance includes changes in an existing zoning map, public notice shall be given as required by subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Where a proposed amendment to an existing ordinance includes a specific change in a zoning district map, but does not affect districts generally, public notice shall be given as required by subsection (c)(1) of this section, with the additional requirements that: 
a.  Notice shall include a map showing the existing and proposed zoning district boundaries, existing streets and roads and their names, and the town boundaries where appropriate; and 
b.  Written notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing and the nature and purpose thereof shall be sent to all owners of real property whose property is located in or within not less than 200 feet of the perimeter of the area proposed for change, whether within the town or within an adjacent city or town. The notice shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address of each owner, as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records of the town. 
(4)  Notice of a public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the city or town council of any city or town to which one or more of the following pertain: 
a.  Which is located in or within not less than 200 feet of the boundary of the area proposed for change; or 
b.  Where there is a public or quasipublic water source or private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, within 2,000 feet of any real property that is the subject of a proposed zoning change, regardless of municipal boundaries. 
(5)  Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district or private water company that has riparian rights to a groundwater or surface water resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source and that is within 2,000 feet of any real property which is the subject of a proposed zoning change; provided, however, that the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district or private water company has filed with the building inspector in the town a map survey, which shall be kept as a public record, showing areas of surface water resources and/or watersheds and parcels of land within 2,000 feet thereof. 
(6)  No defeat in the form of any notice under this section shall render any ordinance or amendment invalid, unless the defect is found to be intentional or misleading. 
(7)  Costs of any notice required under this section shall be borne by the applicant. 
(8)  In granting a zoning ordinance amendment, notwithstanding the provisions of permitted uses in each zoning district, the town council may limit the change to one of the permitted uses in the zone to which the subject land is rezoned and impose such limitations, conditions and restrictions, including, without limitation, the following: 
a.  Requiring the petitioner to obtain a permit or approval from any and all state or local governmental agencies or instrumentalities having jurisdiction over the land and use which are the subject of the zoning change; 
b.  Those relating to the effectiveness or continued effectiveness of the zoning change; and/or 
c.  Those relating to the use of the land as it deems necessary. 
The town clerk shall cause the limitations and conditions so imposed to be clearly noted on the zoning map and recorded in the land evidence records; provided, however, for a conditional zone change, the limitations, restrictions and conditions shall not be noted on the zoning map until the zone change has become effective. If the permitted use for which the land has been rezoned is abandoned or if the land is not used for the requested purpose for a period of two years or more after the zone change becomes effective, the town council may, after a public hearing as set forth in this section, change the land to its original zoning use before the petition was filed. If any limitation, condition or restriction in an ordinance is held to be invalid by a court in any action, that holding shall not cause the remainder of the ordinance to be invalid. 
The requirements of this subsection are to be construed as minimum requirements. 
(d)  Appeals of town council decision. Procedures for appeals of town council decisions are as follows: 
(1)  An appeal of an enactment of or an amendment to a zoning ordinance may be taken to the county superior court by filing a complaint, as set forth in this section, within 30 days after the enactment or amendment has become effective. The appeal may be taken by an aggrieved party or by a legal resident or landowner of the town or by any association of residents or landowners of the town. The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of the zoning ordinance, as enacted or amended, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
(2)  The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area in which the enactment or amendment does not conform with the comprehensive plan and/or the manner in which it constitutes to taking of private property without just compensation. 
(3)  The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury. The court shall first consider whether the enactment or amendment of the zoning ordinance is in conformance with the comprehensive plan. If the enactment or amendment is not in conformance with the comprehensive plan, the court shall invalidate the enactment or the amendment or those parts of the amendment that are not in conformance with the comprehensive plan. The court shall not revise the ordinance to conform with the comprehensive plan, but may suggest appropriate language as part of the court decision. 
(4)  If there is an aggrieved party, where the court has found that the enactment or amendment of the zoning ordinance is in conformance with the comprehensive plan, the court shall next determine whether the enactment or amendment works as a taking of property from the aggrieved party. If the court determines that there has been a taking, the court shall remand the case to the town council, with its findings that a taking has occurred, and order the town to either provide just compensation or rescind the enactment or amendment within 30 days. 
(5)  The superior court shall retain jurisdiction, if the aggrieved party and the town do not agree on the amount of compensation, in which case the superior court shall hold further hearings to determine and to award compensation. Furthermore, the superior court shall retain jurisdiction to determine the amount of an award of compensation for any temporary taking, if that taking shall exist. 
(6)  The court may, in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its own motion, award reasonable attorney's fees to any party to an appeal, as set forth in this section, including the town. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, 10-17-1994; Ord. No. 01-1, § 5, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, § 3, 2-5-2007) 
Sec. 21-20. - Site plan approval. 
    Where development plan approval is required by this chapter, unless specifically designated to another town official, the planning commission will have the administrative duty to review the development plan and other submission material for the proposed development to ensure compliance with the intent and requirements of this chapter. The building official shall not grant a building permit until the planning commission has approved the development plan. Such building permit must be requested within one year of the date of approval unless the approving agency grants additional time as a condition of approval. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 07-02, § 4, 2-5-2007) 
Sec. 21-21. - Interpretation of chapter. 
(a)  In interpreting and applying the sections of this chapter, such sections shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of health, safety, comfort, convenience or the general welfare. 
(b)  The lot, open space or yard areas required by this chapter for a particular building shall not be diminished and shall not be included as part of the required lot, open space or yard areas of any other building. If the lot, open space or yard areas required by this chapter for a particular building are diminished, the continued existence of such building shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. The lot, open space or yard areas of buildings existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall not be diminished below the requirements provided in this chapter for buildings erected, and such required areas shall not be included as part of the required areas of any buildings erected after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(c)  This chapter shall not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance or any rules or regulations previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger lots or yards than are imposed or required by such existing provisions or regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall be in force. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Sec. 21-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abutter means one whose property abuts, that is adjoins at a border, boundary or point with no intervening land. 
    Accessory dwelling unit means a second dwelling unit subordinate in size to a principal dwelling unit on an owner-occupied lot, located in either the principal dwelling or an existing accessory structure on the same premises, having separate cooking and sanitary facilities and its own legal means of ingress and egress. Any new accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed so as to maintain the appearance and essential character of a single-family dwelling and any existing accessory structures. For required lot area, maximum density, and other zoning purposes, accessory dwelling units shall not be considered to be "dwelling units" unless explicitly stated otherwise in this chapter. 
    Accessory use means a use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building. An accessory use shall be restricted to the same lot as the principal use. An accessory use shall not be permitted without the principal use to which it is related. 
    Adaptive apartment means a rental dwelling unit created from an existing unpermitted dwelling unit pursuant to section 21-325(16). 
    Administrative officer means the director of planning and development. 
    Affordable housing means housing that has a sales price or rental amount that is within means of a household that is moderate income or less, as specified in RIGL 42-128-8.1(d)(1). Only that affordable housing which qualifies as "low or moderate income housing" (see definition below) is credited towards meeting the ten percent goal of the Low and Moderate Income Act. 
    Aggrieved party means: 
(1)  Any person who can demonstrate that the person's property will be injured by a decision of any town officer or agency responsible for administering this chapter; or 
(2)  Anyone requiring notice pursuant to this chapter. 
    Agricultural land means land suitable for agriculture because of suitability of soil or other natural characteristics or past use for agricultural purposes. Agricultural land includes that defined as prime agricultural land or additional farmland of statewide importance for this state by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
    Agricultural lands (TDR) means those lands preserved for agricultural use as part of a sending area land development project. The development rights associated with those lands shall be vested in certificates of development rights and are potentially transferable to receiving area zoning districts. 
    Airport hazard area means any areas of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in RIGL 1956, § 1-3-1 et seq. 
    Animal hospital means an establishment of a licensed practitioner primarily engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine, dentistry or surgery for pets such as horses, rabbits, dogs, cats, and birds and other pets with overnight keeping of pets which require continued medical attention. 
    Animal kennel and/or animal board kennel means an establishment primarily engaged in overnight boarding of pets such as dogs and cats, without performing veterinary services and including an animal shelter operated by a nonprofit organization. 
    Applicant means an owner or authorized agent of the owner submitting an application or appealing an action of any official, board or agency. 
    Application means the completed form and all accompanying documents, exhibits and fees required of an applicant by an approving authority for development review, approval or permitting purposes. 
    Area median income (AMI) means the median household income as determined by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) as of the date of marketing of the housing unit for the designated statistical area where the unit is to be located, adjusted for household size by HUD and by RI Housing. 
    Automobile service station means any premises used for supplying gasoline and oil, tires, accessories and services for automobiles at retail direct to the motorist consumer, including the making of minor repairs, but not including such major repairs as provided by an automobile repair establishment, such as: 
(1)  Spray painting. 
(2)  Body, fender, clutch, transmission, differential axle, spring and frame repairs. 
(3)  Major overhauling of engines requiring removal therefrom of the cylinder head or of the crankcase pan. 
(4)  Repairs of the radiator requiring removal thereof. 
(5)  Complete recapping and retreading of tires. 
    Automobile services means any service station, storage garage, repair and auto body service or carwash. 
    Barbershop means any structure where the act of barbering, as defined in RIGL 1956, § 5-27-a, as amended, is carried on. 
    Bed and breakfast means an owner-occupied building designed, used and occupied as a single-family residence managed by the property's owner and having, as an accessory use, bedroom accommodations and breakfast provisions for those accommodated as paying guests. 
    Bedroom, for the purpose of establishing a yield plan, means any room in a residential structure that is used to calculate wastewater design flow pursuant to the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management's (RIDEM) most recent version of Rules Establishing Minimum Standards Relating to Location, Design, Construction and Maintenance of Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems. 
    Billboard means any off-premises sign exceeding 15 square feet in area. 
    Buffer means land which is maintained in either a natural or landscaped state, and which is used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on surrounding areas, properties or rights-of-way. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use of occupancy. 
    Building envelope means the three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by regulations governing building setbacks, maximum height and bulk, by other regulations, and/or any combination thereof. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from the average pre-development grade of the adjacent ground to the top of the structure of the highest roof beams of a flat roof, the deck of a mansard roof, or the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip roof (see diagram below.) Spires, chimneys, flagpoles and other like features may be excluded from this measurement. The use of the average pre-development grade as the reference point for measuring height may be changed to another elevation through the development plan review, land development or subdivision process by the director of the department of planning or the planning commission as applicable. However, the elevation reference point for measuring height from ground level shall not exceed the average finished grade of the proposed structure. Pitched roof tops shall not exceed a 12 in 12 pitch unless an adjustment is granted through the development plan review, land development or subdivision process by the director of the department of planning or the planning commission as applicable. 

    Building story means the portion of a building which is between one floor level and the next higher floor level. Such space shall be designed with adequate dimensions to reasonably accommodate daily use in the case of a non-residential use or habitation in the case of a residential use. Attic or subsurface spaces shall not qualify as a story. If a mezzanine floor area exceeds one-third of the area of the floor immediately below it, the mezzanine shall be deemed to be a story. 
    Business incubator means a manufacturing or office facility designed to support and encourage the growth of small start-up businesses by providing business support services, opportunities for shared equipment and technology information, sources of financing or other services. Activities may include assembly of manufactured products, research and development, and other activities associated with manufacturing. 
    Capacity and land capacity mean the suitability of the land, as defined by geology, soil conditions, topography and water resources, to support its development for uses such as residential, commercial, industrial, open space or recreation. 
    Capital improvement program means a proposed schedule of all future projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. 
    Cardholder means a person who has been registered or licensed with the department of health or the department of business regulation pursuant to this chapter and possesses a valid registry identification card or license. 
    Caregiver cultivation means marijuana cultivation for medical use only by a single registered caregiver cardholder, as defined in RIGL 1956, § 21-28.6. 
    Carryout restaurant means an establishment whose business is the preparation and sale of food, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state and whose design or method of operation is such that food or beverages are served in disposable containers, and no provision is made for consuming the items on the premises. 
    Certificate of completeness means a notice issued by the administrative officer informing an applicant that the application is complete and meets the requirements of the town's regulations, and that the applicant may proceed with the approval process. 
    Certificate of development rights means a document issued and maintained by the director of planning that serves as the official record for quantification, ownership, sale or extinguishing of transferable development rights associated with land in the sending area overlay district. 
    Certificate of retained development rights means a document issued and maintained by the director of planning that serves as the official record for quantification, ownership, sale or extinguishing of non-transferable development rights associated with land in the sending area overlay district. 
    Clinical veterinary office means an establishment of a licensed practitioner primarily engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine for pets such as horses, rabbits, dogs, cats, and birds and other pets without overnight boarding. 
    Club or lodge, private, means any building and facility owned or operated by a corporation, association or person for a social, educational or recreational purpose. 
    Cluster means a site planning technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and/or preservation of environmentally, historically, culturally or other sensitive features and/or structures. The techniques used to concentrate buildings shall be specified in the ordinances and may include, but are not limited to, reduction in lot areas, setback requirements, and/or bulk requirements, with the resultant open land being devoted by deed restrictions for one or more uses. Under cluster development, there is no increase in the number of lots that would be permitted under conventional development except where provisions include incentive bonuses for certain types or conditions of development. 
    Coastal features means coastal features as defined in RIGL 1956, § 46-23-1 et seq. 
    Commercial greenhouse means a structure utilized for seed germination, plant propagation, hardening-off of, forcing or maintenance of a controlled climate to sustain plant growth otherwise not possible in natural out-of-door surroundings. 
    Commercial laundering means any plant or equipment conducted or operated as a laundry for profit and for which business is solicited. 
    Commercial salvage yard means an establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated or used for salvaging, storing and selling parts from wrecked vehicles, machinery and structures. 
    Common ownership means either: 
(1)  Ownership by one or more individuals or entities in any form of ownership of two or more contiguous lots; or 
(2)  Ownership by any association (such ownership may also include a municipality) of one or more lots under specific development techniques. 
    Community residence means a home or residential facility where children and/or adults reside in a family setting and who may or may not receive supervised care. This shall not include halfway houses or substance abuse treatment facilities. This shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Whenever six or fewer retarded children or adults reside in any type of residence in the community, as licensed by the state pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 40.1-24-1 et seq. All requirements pertaining to local zoning are waived for these community residences. 
(2)  A group home providing care or supervision, or both, to not more than eight mentally disabled or mentally handicapped or physically handicapped persons, and licensed by the state pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 40.1-24-1 et seq. 
(3)  A residence for children providing care or supervision, or both, to not more than eight children, including those of the caregiver, and licensed by the state pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 42-72.1-1 et seq. 
(4)  A community transitional residence providing care or assistance, or both, to no more than six persons or no more than three families, not to exceed a total of eight persons, requiring temporary financial assistance, and/or to persons who are victims of crimes, abuse, or neglect and who are expected to reside in that residence not less than 60 days and not more than two years. Residents will have access to and use of all common areas, including eating areas and living rooms, and will receive appropriate social services for the purpose of fostering independence, self-sufficiency and eventual transition to a permanent living situation. 
    Compact village development (CVD) means a land development project that is authorized pursuant to section 21-95 of this chapter and incorporates a mix of residential and nonresidential uses in a compact, walkable environment. 
    Compassion center means a not-for-profit corporation, subject to the provisions of RIGL 1956, tit. 7, ch. 6, and registered under RIGL 1956, § 21-28.6-12, that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies, or dispenses medical marijuana, and/or related supplies and educational materials, to patient cardholders and/or their registered caregiver cardholder or authorized purchaser. 
    Compassion center cardholder means a principal officer, board member, employee, volunteer, or agent of a compassion center who has registered with the department of health or the department of business regulation and has been issued and possesses a valid, registry identification card. 
    Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan adopted and approved pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq., and to which any zoning adopted pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 45-24-1 et seq. shall be in compliance. 
    Conservation development means a type of land development project which utilizes certain site planning techniques as set forth in the subdivision and land development regulations in order to conserve open land, protect site features and provide flexibility in the siting of structures, services and infrastructure. 
    Conservation lands (TDR) means those lands preserved in a natural state and/or for those uses allowable by the planning commission as part of a sending area land development project. The development rights associated with those lands shall be vested in certificates of development rights and are potentially transferable to receiving area zoning districts. 
    Convalescent home means an establishment which provides full-time convalescent or chronic care for the aged or infirm. No intensive care treatment commonly provided in hospitals shall be provided in such a home. 
    Conventional subdivision. A subdivision in which all lots meet the minimum requirements of the appropriate zoning district and all land being subdivided is dedicated to either development lots or street right-of-way with no common open space. Not a cluster or conservation development. 
    Day care means as follows: 
(1)  Day care center means any other day care center that is not a family day care home. 
(2)  Family day care home means any home other than the individual's home in which day care in lieu of parental care or supervision is offered at the same time to six or less individuals who are not relatives of the caregiver, but may not contain more than a total of eight individuals receiving day care. 
(3)  Group family day care home means a residence occupied by an individual of at least 21 years of age who provides care for not less than nine and not more than 12 children, with the assistance of one or more approved adults for any part of a 24-hour day. The maximum of 12 children shall include children under six years of age who are living in the home, schoolage children under the age of 12 years whether they are living in the home or are received for care, and children related to the provider who are received for care. 
    Days means calendar days. 
    Denial of a special exception for low- and moderate-income housing means the zoning board of review: 
(1)  Refuses to grant a comprehensive permit; or 
(2)  Extends the hearing without reasonable cause. 
    Density, residential, means the number of dwelling units per unit of land. 
    Development means the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; and any change of use or alteration or extension of the use of land. 
    Development plan means the development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and/or the proposed conditions of the lot. 
    Development plan review means the process whereby authorized local officials review the site plans, maps and other documentation of a development to determine the compliance with the stated purposes and standards of this chapter. 
    Development rights. In the context of transfer of development rights, the right to develop the maximum number of detached single family dwelling units or the maximum amount of office space that can reasonably be permitted on a designated sending area parcel under the applicable local, state and federal regulations (see also "yield plan"). 
    Director means the director of planning and development. 
    Display means any items, materials or inventory that is/are assembled and ready for immediate sale to customers in a retail area, and also including samples of items available for sale. 
    District. See Zoning use district. 
    Drainage system means a system for the removal of water from land by drains, grading or other appropriate means. These techniques may include runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development, the means for preserving surface waters and groundwaters, and the prevention and/or alleviation of flooding. 
    Drive-in establishment means any business, the major operation of which is over-the-counter service, generating a high turnover of customers and a large volume of traffic. 
    Duplex means a single building containing two dwelling units. 
    Dwelling means a building containing one or more dwelling units and no other principal uses. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a dwelling containing two dwelling units, neither of which complies with the requirements of section 21-325(7) of this chapter for an accessory dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling unit means a structure or portion thereof providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and containing a separate means of ingress and egress. 
    Educational and training center means a facility operated and maintained by an entity wherein the employees of that entity are provided training to assist such employees in performing employment duties with the entity; or, alternatively, a facility operated by a government or nonprofit entity for the purpose of providing job skills and employment training. 
    Establishment means an enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee or licensee. 
    Extraction industry means the extraction of minerals including solids such as coals and ores, liquids such as crude petroleum, and gases such as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation; milling such as crushing, screening, washing and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the extraction site or as a part of the extractive activity. 
    Family means a person related by blood, marriage or other legal means. See also Household. 
    Farmers' market means an occasional or periodic market, with goods offered for sale to the general public by individual sellers from open-air or semi-enclosed facilities or temporary structures. The market is composed of three or more vendors with outdoor stalls, stands or spaces used for the purpose of display and sale of merchandise, which is limited to home produced or locally grown farm produce, food, and agricultural crafts. 
    Fast-food restaurant means an establishment whose business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either on the premises or off the premises and whose design or method of operation is such that food or beverages are served in disposable containers. 
    Federally insured or assisted housing means: 
(1)  Low-income housing units insured or assisted under sections 221(d)(3) and 236 of the National Housing Act (12 USC 1701 et seq.); 
(2)  Low-income housing units produced with assistance under section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (42 USC 1401 et seq.); and 
(3)  Rural low-income housing financed under section 515 of the Housing Act of 1949 (12 USC 1715Z). 
    Floating zone means an unmapped zoning district adopted within this chapter which is established on the zoning map only when an application for development, meeting the zone requirements, is approved. 
    Floodplain and flood hazard area mean an area that has a one-percent or greater chance of inundation in any given year, as delineated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, pursuant to The National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended (PL 90-448) (42 USC 4011 et seq.). 
    Freestanding accessory solar energy system means a freestanding solar energy system that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use(s) of a parcel. 
    Freestanding solar energy system means a solar energy system that is not attached to a structure and is ground mounted. 
    Gross floor area means the total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage. 
    Groundwater and associated terms mean as defined in RIGL 1956, § 46-13.1-3. 
    Hairdresser and cosmetician mean any person who arranges, dresses, curls, cuts, waves, singes, bleaches or colors the hair or treats the scalp, manicures the nails of any person, either with or without compensation, or who by the use of the hands or appliances or of cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions, creams, powders, oils, clays engages, with or without compensation, in massaging, cleaning, stimulating, manipulating, exercising or beautifying or in doing similar work upon the neck, face or arms or who removes superfluous hair from the body of any person. 
    Halfway house means a residential facility for adults or children who have been institutionalized for criminal conduct and who require a group setting to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society. 
    Hardship. See subsection 21-11(b), zoning board of review powers and duties. 
    Hazardous materials and toxic materials mean any substance or combination or substances which, because of quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to water supplies or to human health. Any substance considered a hazardous or toxic waste under section 3001 of the Resource Conservation Recovery Act of 1976, 40 CFR 26; as defined under RIGL 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq., as amended; as defined by 40 CFR 116 pursuant to section 311 of the Federal Clean Water Act and subsequent amendments thereto; or as defined by section 101(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1989 (42 USC 9605), as amended, shall also be considered hazardous for the use of this chapter. 
    Health and fitness facility means a facility maintained by an entity which may or may not include saunas, steam baths and Jacuzzis, or other such similar equipment, where the employees of the entity are offered or provided facilities for and instruction in general health, physical fitness, and exercises such as weightlifting, calisthenics and aerobics. 
    Helistop means a landing area used for the landing and taking off of a helicopter for the purposes of picking up and discharging of passengers or cargo. 
    Historic district means one or more historic sites and intervening or surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and character of the historic site and which has been registered or is deemed eligible to be included on the state register of historic places pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 45-45-5. See also the definition of the term "historic district" in section 21-333. 
    Historic site means any real property, humanmade structure, natural object or configuration or any portion or group of such property, object or configuration which has been registered or is deemed eligible to be included on the state register of historic places pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 45-5-5. 
    Home improvement stores means retail establishments selling a variety of home and building related items including, but not limited to, plumbing supplies and fixtures, electrical supplies and fixtures, paint, hardware, power tools, flooring, appliances, garden and nursery products and equipment. 
    Home occupation means any activity customarily carried out for gain by a resident, conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
    Hotel means a building, group of buildings or a portion thereof used or offered for residential occupancy for any period less than one month, with or without meals, and in which such building or portion thereof may be certain public rooms or halls for the service of food and drink. 
    Household means one or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit. The term "household unit" shall be synonymous with the term "dwelling unit" for determining the number of such units allowed within any structure on any lot in a zoning district. An individual household shall consist of any one of the following: 
(1)  A family, which may also include servants and employees living with the family; or 
(2)  A person or group of unrelated persons living together. 
    Housing unit. See Dwelling unit. 
    Incentive zoning means the process whereby the local authority may grant additional development capacity in exchange for the developer's provision of a public benefit or amenity as specified in this chapter. 
    Inclusionary unit means a low or moderate income housing unit (see definition below) that meets the affordability level, unit type, and other requirements of article XXII, enabling it to be counted towards the requirements of that section. 
    Indoor commercial recreation means a recreational activity, carried out for profit, conducted entirely within a building or substantial structure such as bowling alleys, billiard and pool halls, exercise facilities, skating rinks and the like, which may include accessory uses such as retail, food service, personal convenience service and office activities. 
    Infrastructure means facilities and services needed to sustain residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and other activities. 
    Junkyard and salvage yard mean any place where two or more motor vehicles not in running condition or parts thereof are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation; or any land, building or structure, used for wrecking or restoring of motor vehicles or farm machinery or parts thereof stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition. 
    Land development project means a project in which one or more lots, tracts or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex of uses, units or structures, including but not limited to planned development and/or cluster development for residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open space and/or mixed uses as provided for in this chapter. 
    Land unsuitable for development means land which has severe or very severe limitations for development. When creating new lots for development, land unsuitable for development shall not be counted towards the minimum lot area required. The following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  When calculating the basic maximum number of dwelling units permitted in any residential subdivision or land development project, land included in all of the following categories shall be considered unsuitable for development and shall be deducted from the minimum building acreage of the parcel: 
a.  Freshwater wetlands, except that area of perimeter wetland within 50 feet of the edge of any bog, marsh, swamp, pond or special aquatic site, and also excluding any riverbank, as defined by RIGL § 2-1-20 (1987), as amended, and any definitions contained in the rules and regulations governing the Administration and Enforcement of the Freshwater Wetlands Act, adopted pursuant to RIGL § 2-1-20.1., as amended. 
b.  Water bodies. 
c.  Coastal high hazard areas indicated as V and V 1-30 zones on the latest flood insurance rate map for the town. 
d.  The following types of coastal features as defined in the RI Coastal Resources Management Program, as amended: 
CRMP Section Type of Coastal Feature 210.1 Coastal Beaches 210.2 Barrier Islands and Spits, undeveloped 210.3 Coastal Wetlands 210.4 Coastal Headlands, Bluffs and Cliffs 210.5 Rocky Shores 210.6 Manmade Shorelines 210.7 Dunes  
e.  The area within the easement right-of-way of an above or below-ground high voltage electrical transmission lines, generally 69 KV or higher; also including subtransmission lines 23 KV or greater, and located on a separate right-of-way other than a public street. 
f.  Any area of the tract proposed to be developed as a public or private street right-of-way. 
g.  Any area of ledge and/or rock outcrops visible at the land surface. 
h.  High Water Table limitation districts and Flood Hazard limitation districts as defined in Article 14 of Subdivision and Land Development Regulations. 
(2)  Land described in subsections (1)a.-h. above, may be included as part of any lot in any residential subdivision or land development project; provided, however, that land unsuitable for development shall not be counted toward the minimum lot area required in Article IV of the zoning ordinance. This provision shall not apply to any non-residential subdivision or development. 
    Landing development rights means the process by which a developer or property owner may apply development rights previously established in the sending area overlay district to parcel(s) in the receiving area for the purposes of increasing density as may be allowed in the zoning ordinance or Subdivisions and Land Development Rules and Regulations. This process involves an application for a major subdivision or land development project as applicable to the planning commission. 
    Licensed cultivator means a person, as identified in RIGL 1956, § 43-3-6, who has been licensed by the department of business regulation to cultivate marijuana pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 21-28.6-16. 
    Limited access highway means a freeway or expressway providing for through traffic. Owners or occupants of abutting property on lands and other persons have no legal right to access, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the highway. 
    Limited equity housing cooperative means a cooperative housing association or corporation organized and operated primarily for the benefit of low- and moderate-income persons, having articles of incorporation and whose equity after allowance for maximum transfer value of its stock is permanently dedicated to providing housing to persons of low- and moderate income or to a charitable purpose. 
    Local board means the zoning board of review, planning commission, platting board of review, building official, building code board of appeal, town council or any other board or commission having authority to supervise the construction of a building or the power of enforcing municipal building, subdivision or zoning ordinances. 
    Lot means either: 
(1)  The basic development unit for determination of lot area, depth and other dimensional regulations; or 
(2)  A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 
    Lot area means the total area within the boundaries of a lot, excluding any street right-of-way, usually reported in acres or square feet. 
    Lot building coverage means that portion of the lot that is or may be covered by buildings and accessory buildings. 
    Lot depth means the distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth is an average of the depth. In the case of through lots the lot depth shall be determined by the average distance between the two front lot lines of the parcel in question. 
    Lot frontage means that portion of a lot abutting a street. Noncontiguous frontage shall not be considered with regard to meeting the minimum frontage requirement. 
    Lot line means a line of record, bounding a lot, which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public or private space, and including the following: 
(1)  Front means the lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. On a corner lot or a through lot, both lot lines which separate the street right-of-way from the lot are considered front lot lines; 
(2)  Rear means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front line, or, for triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, an assumed line at least ten feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line; and 
(3)  Side means any lot line other than a front lot line or rear lot line. 
In the case of through lots or corner lots such lots shall be deemed to have no rear lot line and only front and side lot lines as described above. 
    Lot, through, means a lot that fronts upon two parallel streets, or that fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the sidelines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum front setback line. 
    Low and moderate-income housing means affordable housing (as defined above) which is subsidized by a federal, state or municipal government subsidy to assist its construction or affordability, has that affordability assured for at least 30 years through a land lease and/or deed restriction, and complies with certain other requirements as specified in RIGL 45-53-3(5). All low and moderate income housing units are "affordable housing" as herein defined, but only those low and moderate income housing units which meet the further requirements of article XXII of this chapter are credited towards satisfying the obligations of a development under this chapter to provide for inclusionary units. 
    Marijuana has the meaning given that term in RIGL 1956, § 21-28-1.02(26). 
    Marijuana store means any retail establishment at which the sale or use of marijuana, medical or otherwise, takes place. This shall not include a compassion center regulated and licensed by the State of Rhode Island, as defined herein. 
    Marina means any dock, pier, wharf, float, floating business or combination of such facilities that serves five or more recreational boats as a commercial enterprise or in association with a club. 
    Master plan means an overall plan for a proposed project site outlining general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic parameters of a major development proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. 
    Maximum groundwater table elevation means that level observed when the groundwater is at its highest level during the year or the highest level observed in past years when such information is available. 
    Medical clinic means a building used for diagnosis and treatment of ill, infirm or injured persons but which does not provide board, room or inpatient hospital care. 
    Medical marijuana cultivation center means any entity that, under state law, may acquire, possess, cultivate, manufacture, deliver, transfer, transport, or supply medical marijuana, to a registered compassion center, or other entity authorized to dispense medical marijuana. 
    Mere inconvenience. See section 21-11, zoning board of review powers and duties. 
    Mixed use means the inclusion of more than one general type of land use within a single structure or site development as they are grouped in the land use table under article III. For the purposes of this ordinance, all mixed use projects shall include a residential component that is fully integrated into the site or structure in a way that enables residents to easily access non-residential amenities. 
    Mobile home means a structure that is transported in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    Mobile home dwelling unit lot means the area within a mobile home park upon which a mobile home dwelling unit is located including the area taken up by the footprint of the mobile home dwelling unit as well as the area surrounding the mobile home dwelling unit as specified in section 21-325(14)c, or: 
(1)  Such reduced area as may have been occupied by a mobile home dwelling unit prior to May 7, 2001; or 
(2)  Such reduced area as may have been created by a license issued pursuant to chapter 10 of this Code prior to May 7, 2001, regardless of the existence of a mobile home dwelling unit on such mobile home dwelling unit lot. 
    Modification means permission granted and administered by the town zoning administrator and pursuant to this chapter to grant a dimensional variance from the minimum setback requirements of this chapter to a limited degree as determined by this chapter, but not to exceed 25 percent of each of the applicable dimensional requirements. 
    Motel. See Hotel. 
    Multifamily dwelling means a building with three or more dwelling units, including but not limited to a townhouse. 
    New motor vehicle dealership an establishment primarily engaged in the business of selling, offering for sale, leasing, renting, servicing, repairing and outside storage of new motor vehicles. A new motor vehicle is a vehicle which has not been used for other than demonstration purposes and for which the original title has not been transferred from a licensed motor vehicle dealer. Any motor vehicle which is not a new motor vehicle shall be deemed to be a used motor vehicle. The sale, offering to sell, lease, rental servicing, repair and outside storage of used vehicles may be allowed only when accessory to the new motor vehicle dealership. 
    Nonconformance means a building, structure or parcel of land or use thereof lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or the amendment of this chapter and not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter or amendment. Nonconformance shall be of only two types as follows: 
(1)  Nonconforming by use means a lawfully established use of land, building or structure which is not a permitted use in that zoning district. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of this chapter shall be nonconforming by use; or 
(2)  Nonconforming by dimension means a building, structure or parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of this chapter. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of this chapter, other than those pertaining to the permitted uses. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of this chapter shall be nonconforming by use; a building or structure containing a permitted number of dwelling units by the use regulations of this chapter, but not meeting the lot area per dwelling unit regulations, shall be nonconforming by dimension. 
    Nonprofit organization means a nonprofit corporation which has tax-exempt status as determined by the United States Internal Revenue Service. 
    Non-residential cooperative cultivation means a use of land located in a nonresidential zone, or of a building, or a portion thereof, located in a nonresidential zone, by two or more cardholders who cooperatively cultivate medical marijuana, as defined in RIGL 1956, § 21-28.6. 
    Nursery products means any living tree, plant or other flora, whether or not grown on site, and any products or materials ordinarily and necessarily associated with the growing of said tree, plant or other flora, including, but not limited to, soil, mulch, fertilizer, growing containers and water delivery systems, but not including machinery, or equipment such as tractors or lawn mowers and not including decorative materials such as paving stones, fences and garden sheds. 
    Nursery school (municipal or commercial) means an establishment providing formal or informal education to preschool children and duly licensed by the state for that purpose. 
    Open air market means any outdoor area used for sales. 
    Open space means any land that is primarily undeveloped, including public and semipublic open lands, and private development requiring little or no construction. The purpose of this land is to provide park, recreational, historic and scenic uses, and to provide for the conservation of land and other natural resources. The following uses are considered to be in character with the concepts of this definition: farming, conservation, historic area, hunting preserves, state and local parks, parkways, playfields, playgrounds, reforestation areas and wood lots, reservations, watersheds and water supply lands, wildlife refuges, nature centers, day and overnight camps for children, golf and country clubs, and sports clubs. 
    Outdoor commercial recreation means a recreational activity, carried out for profit, conducted primarily outside of an enclosed building such as tennis courts, athletic fields, swimming pools and the like, which may include indoor and outdoor accessory uses such as retail, food service, personal convenience service and office activities. 
    Outdoor display, small-scale means the showing of goods associated with a non-residential use outside of the primary enclosed structure along the side of the building in a manner that is designed to attract customers. Said display is generally deemed incidental to the operation of the business and display areas are not necessarily a formal element of site design. Small scale display shall not occur in front of the structure. Where the front a structure is not directed towards the roadway, the display shall not occur between the structure and the roadway, but shall occur along the side or rear of the structure. Said goods shall be returned to the inside of the structure while the business is not in operation. The display area shall not exceed five percent of the total retail floor area of the ground floor non-residential use. 
    Outdoor storage/display, large-scale means the keeping of goods associated with a non-residential use outside of the primary enclosed structure. Said storage or display is generally deemed integral to the operation of the business. Large scale storage or display shall occur along the side or rear of the structure. 
    Overlay district means a district established in this chapter that is superimposed on one or more districts or parts of districts and that imposes specified requirements in addition to, but not less than, those applicable for the underlying zone. 
    Paper street means a preexisting undeveloped street which was designated for public purposes and recorded with the town clerk prior to September 1946, but which does not conform with the definition of a street as defined in this section. Any lot line bordering along a paper street shall not be considered in calculating the minimum required frontage under this chapter. 
    Parking area means an off-street area containing three or more parking spaces, with passageways and driveways appurtenant to such spaces and giving access thereto. 
    Parking area aisles means a portion of the vehicle accommodation area consisting of lanes providing access to parking spaces. 
    Parking space means a portion of the vehicle accommodation area set aside for the parking of one vehicle. 
    Patient marijuana cultivation means medical marijuana cultivation by a single registered cardholder, as defined in RIGL 1956, § 21-28.6, within his or her residential dwelling for medical use only. This use shall only be permitted as an accessory use to a lawfully permitted residential use. In a mixed-use building that contains residential and nonresidential uses, this use shall be contained within the residential dwelling unit only. 
    Performance standards means a set of criteria or limits relating to elements which a particular use or process either must meet or may not exceed. 
    Permitted use means a use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
    Personal convenience service means activities such as barbershops or beauty shops, clothes cleaning pickup or pressing, dressmaking or tailoring, self-service laundry or dry cleaning, shoe repair, and home appliance repair shops. 
    Petroleum product means crude oil or any product derived from or produced as a residual to the petroleum refining process including but not limited to gasoline, fuel oil (Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6), waste oil, gasohol and diesel oil (No. 1 and No. 2-D). 
    Planned development means a land development project, as defined in this section, and developed according to plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures and/or uses with appurtenant common areas. 
    Planning commission means the official town planning agency. 
    Plant agriculture means the growing of plants for food or fiber, to sell or consume. 
    Preapplication conference means a review meeting of a proposed development held between applicants and reviewing agencies as permitted by law and municipal ordinance, before formal submission of an application for a permit or for development approval. 
    Premises means a building or structure, or piece or tract of land or real estate, whether vacant or otherwise. 
    Primary caregiver means a natural person who is at least 21 years old. A primary caregiver may assist no more than five qualifying patients with their medical use of marijuana. 
    Principal use means the main or primary purpose for which a building, other structure and/or lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which they may be used, occupied or maintained under this chapter. 
    Private right-of-way means deeded rights-of-way to lots without frontage on a street. 
    Professional offices means operations designed to attract and serve customers or clients on the premises with low-volume customer traffic such as lawyer, doctor, dentist, architect, engineer, realtor, accountant, travel agency, stockbroker, insurance agency, computer processing services and the like. 
    Public agency means any state, municipal or other governmental entity or public body or its agency or instrumentality. 
    Rated nameplate capacity means the maximum power production capacity of the equipment, which shall be indicated by the manufacturer on a weatherproof label with a "nameplate" affixed to the equipment. 
    Receiving area zoning district (receiving area) means a zoning overlay district eligible to receive development rights through a major land development project review. 
    Rehabilitation means substantial upgrade or modification of the interior or exterior of the structure, correction of substantial conditions and/or replacement of major housing systems in danger of failure, but excluding repairs of owner-occupied units and privately owned rental units unless the units remain as low- or moderate-income housing for a period of not less than 30 years from initial occupancy after rehabilitation as cited in subsection 21-16(b)(2) and meet the definition of low and moderate income as defined in this section. 
    Research and development facility means a building for research and design of new products or ideas. 
    Residence, two-family, means a residential use consisting of a building containing two dwelling units. 
    Residential cooperative cultivation means two or more cardholders who cooperatively cultivate medical marijuana in residential locations subject to restrictions set forth in RIGL 1956, § 21-28.6. 
    Restaurant means a business enterprise engaged in serving and preparing food and beverages selected from a menu by patrons seated at a table or counter, served by a waitress or waiter and consumed on the premises. 
    Retail stores means retail establishments, the business of which is conducted entirely within a building such as general merchandise, food, dry goods and appliances, drugs, specialty items, machinery and building material. 
    Retained development rights. In the sending area overlay district, those development rights for a parcel(s) of land that may still be applied to said parcel(s) in the form of future residential or commercial development subject to planning commission approval. 
    Roof mounted solar energy system means a solar energy system mounted on the roof of a structure, including a principal or accessory structure. 
    Rotor diameter means the diameter of the circle defined by the moving rotor blades. 
    Scenic road means a road so designated in accordance with this chapter and/or in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 45-24.6-1 et seq. 
    Sending area overlay district (sending area) means a zoning overlay district eligible for establishing development rights that may eventually be transferred to a receiving area. 
    Septage means any human or animal excremental liquid or substance, and putrescible animal or vegetable matter, garbage and filth, including the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks, dishwashers and the contents of septic tanks, cesspools and privies. 
    Setback line means a line parallel to a lot line at the minimum distance of the required setback for the zoning district in which the lot is located that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. 
    Shadow flicker means the visible flicker effect when rotating blades of the wind energy system cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing a repeating pattern of light and shadow. 
    Sharrow means a sign placed (usually painted) on the pavement of a travel lane or shoulder depicting a bicycle in tandem with an arrow pointing in the direction of traffic flow thereby indicating that the travel lane is to be shared by motorists and bicyclists. 
    Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments, planned, developed and owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property; or any group of commercial establishments with common walls or a series of two or more separately owned establishments which share a common parking lot with spaces for at least ten cars. 
    Sign means any device, whether freestanding or attached to a building or structure, or that is erected, painted, represented or reproduced upon or in (to the extent provided in this chapter) any building or structure, which displays, reproduces or includes any letter, work, name, number, model, insignia, design, device or representation used for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  To identify the premises or occupant or owner of the premises; 
(2)  To advertise the sale or rental or use of all or part of any premises, including that upon which it is displayed; 
(3)  To direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic other than state or municipal highway and roadway markers; and 
(4)  Including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or any representation used to advertise or intended to advertise or promote the interest of any person or corporation. 
    Site control means evidence that the developer has control of the property in question; a copy of a properly executed deed, purchase and sale agreement, option agreement or lease agreement indicating the term of the lease. 
    Site plan means the development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and/or the proposed conditions of the lot. 
    Solar energy system means a device to provide for the collection, conversion, storage and distribution of energy derived from solar radiation for space heating or cooling, electricity generation, or water heating. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse and other discarded solid material generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and agricultural sources, but not including solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or sludge, nor does it include hazardous waste as defined in the Hazardous Waste Management Act, RIGL 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq. For the purpose of this chapter, solid waste also includes asphalt; nonhazardous liquid; and semisolid, containerized gaseous waste subject to any special conditions contained in the state solid waste rules. 
    Solid waste management facility means any plant, structure, equipment and other property, real or personal or mixed, or the modification or replacement of any of such property for the receipt, storage, treatment, utilization, processing, transporting or final disposition of or recovery of resources from solid waste other than segregated solid waste; any facility which disposes of solid waste by reconstituting, concerting or otherwise recycling it into material which is not waste; any property or system to be used in whole or in part for any of such purposes, whether or not another purpose is also served by it; any other property or system incidental to or which has to do with the end purpose of which is any of the foregoing; or combinations of two or more of the foregoing. 
    Special exception or comprehensive permit means a single application for a special exception to build low- and moderate-income housing in lieu of separate applications to applicable boards. 
    Special permit means: 
(1)  The reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming use wholly or partly destroyed by fire, the public enemy, or the act of God, such reconstruction not to exceed the original floor area of the building unless the use is changed to a conforming use. 
(2)  The extension of a nonconforming use or building upon the lot occupied by such use or building on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, such extension not to exceed 25 percent of the floor area of the building unless the use of such building is changed to a conforming use. 
    Special use permit means a regulated use which is permitted pursuant to a special use permit issued by the authorized governmental entity, pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 45-24-42. 
    State housing appeals board means the board which hears appeals of denials or conditioned approvals from applicants filing an application for a comprehensive permit to construct or rehabilitate low- or moderate-income housing under the provisions of RIGL 1956, § 45-53-1 et seq. 
    Storage means any items, materials or inventory that is/are unassembled and not ready or intended for immediate sale and not readily accessible to customers. Outdoor storage shall only occur on the side or rear of the main structure but shall not be located within any building set-back. Outside storage does not include areas in a permanent, approved structure attached to the main structure. 
    Street means: 
(1)  A public road, excepting a limited access highway; or 
(2)  Within the Pojac Point Fire District, as established by the general assembly in Public Laws of 1950, ch. 2056, § 1: 
a.  That part of a private road which on May 29, 1979, was in actual existence and provided the primary means of access to and egress from three or more lots then existing and recorded as such; or 
b.  That part of a private road approved by the planning commission, as specifically provided for in the residential compound and conservation development ordinances, in accordance with the subdivision regulations. 
    Street classification means a method of roadway organization which identifies a street hierarchy according to function within a road system, that is, types of vehicles served and anticipated volumes, for the purposes of promoting safety, efficient land use and the design character of neighborhoods and districts. The following are the town's roadway categories: 
(1)  Arterial means a major public street that serves as an avenue for the circulation of traffic into, out of, or around the town and that carries high volumes of traffic, and provides for high levels of mobility. 
(2)  Collector means a public street whose principal function is to carry traffic between local streets and arterial streets but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties. 
(3)  Local means a street whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties. There are three types of local streets: 
a.  Local access (double-loaded). Public streets whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties on both sides of the street. Parking may be allowed on these streets. 
b.  Local access (single-loaded). Public streets whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties on one side of the street only. Parking should be discouraged on these streets. 
c.  Local private. Private streets whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties. Streets within residential compounds serving up to seven (7) dwelling units on a private street fall within this classification. 
(4)  Limited access highway means as defined in this section. 
    Street, cul-de-sac, means a local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate vehicular turnaround, either temporary or permanent, at the closed end. 
    Structure means a combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. 
    Subdivision means the division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. Any adjustment to existing lot lines of a recorded lot by any means shall be considered a subdivision. All resubdivision activity shall be considered a subdivision. The division of property for purposes of financing constitutes a subdivision. 
    Subsidized housing means housing which receives any direct or indirect state or federal financial assistance that reduces the cost of the development and results in the creation of affordable housing units for low- and moderate-income families. 
    Substandard lot of record means any lot lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or any amendment to this chapter and not in conformance with the dimensional and/or area provisions of this chapter. 
    Suitable land for development means all land without severe or very severe limitations for development and not included in the definition of land unsuitable for development. Also referred to as land suitable for development. 
    TDR-parcel means the portion of any tract of land in a sending area overlay district for which a certificate of development has been applied for or obtained or for which a certificate of retained development rights has been applied for or obtained. 
    TDR sending area land development project means the permitting process by which development rights are established for land in the sending area. TDR sending area land development project shall be considered a major land development project. 
    Theater means a building devoted to showing motion pictures on one or more screens, or to stage a production within the building. A theater shall constitute one use, notwithstanding that the use may include more than one screen or auditorium within the building. 
    Townhouse means single-family dwelling units constructed in a series or group including three or more units with common walls. 
    Trade school means any school teaching manual skills. 
    Transferable development rights means development rights for a parcel(s) of land in the sending area overlay district that have been recorded on a certificate of development rights and may only be developed once they are successfully landed in a receiving area. 
    Turbine setback means the distance from the tower base to the point from which the applicable setback is measured. 
    Underground storage tank means any one or combination of tanks, including underground pipes connected thereto, which is used to contain an accumulation of material and the volume of which, including the volume of the underground pipes connected thereto, is ten percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
    Variance means permission to depart from the literal requirements of this chapter; an authorization for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure or for the establishment or maintenance of a use of land which is prohibited by this chapter. There shall be only two categories of variance, a use variance or a dimensional variance, as follows: 
(1)  Use variance means permission to depart from the use requirements of this chapter where the applicant for the requested variance has shown, by evidence upon the record, that the subject land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is to conform to the land use provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Dimensional variance means permission to depart from the dimensional requirements of this chapter where the applicant for the requested relief has shown, by evidence upon the record, that there is no other reasonable alternative way to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of the subject property unless granted the requested relief from the dimensional regulations. However, the fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief. 
    Vested right means the right to initiate or continue the development of an approved project for a specified period of time, under the regulations that were in effect at the time of approval, even if, after the approval, the regulations change prior to the completion of the project. 
    Veterinary office means any structure where the practice of veterinary medicine, as defined in RIGL 1956, § 5-25-7, as amended, is carried on. 
    Waters means all surface waters including all waters of the territorial sea; tidewaters; all inland waters of any river, stream, brook, pond, lake and wetlands; as defined in RIGL 1956, § 46-12-1(b). 
    Wetland, coastal, means a salt marsh bordering on the tidal waters of the town and contiguous uplands extending no more than 50 yards inland therefrom. 
    Wetland, freshwater, means, as defined in RIGL 1956, § 2-1-20, a marsh, swamp, bog, pond, river, river or stream floodplain or bank, subject to flooding or storm flowage; emergent or submergent plant community in any body of freshwater; or area within 50 feet of the edge of a bog, marsh, swamp or pond, as defined in RIGL 1956, § 2-1-20. 
    Wholesale means any sale for resale but not for direct consumption. 
    Wind energy system (WES) means a device that converts wind energy into electrical energy. A WES typically consists of a tower, nacelle body and a rotor with two or more blades. A WES includes all equipment, machinery, and structures utilized in connection with the conversion of wind to electricity, and includes, but is not limited to, transmission, storage, collection and supply equipment, substations, transformers, service and access roads, and wind monitoring and meteorological towers. 
    Wind energy system height means the height measured from pre-development grade to the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point, the blade-tip height, or any other highest point during operation. 
    Wind monitoring or meteorological tower means a temporary tower equipped with devices to measure wind speeds and direction used to determine how much wind power a site can be expected to generate (referred to as "met tower"). This includes but is not limited to SoDAR and LiDAR. 
    Yard means any open, unoccupied space between buildings and the building lot line. The width of the required yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the lot line toward the nearest part of the main building. 
    Yield plan a plan of a conventional subdivision or land development project (as opposed to a conservation development) that depicts the maximum number of building lots or dwelling units that could reasonably be built on a parcel of land under current zoning, taking into account physical constraints to development, such as wetlands, steep slopes, etc. and not including land unsuitable for development towards the minimum lot area required in the appropriate zoning district. 
    Zoning means the reservation of certain specified areas within the town for building and structures or use of land, for certain purposes with other limitations such as height, lot coverage, and other stipulated requirements. 
    Zoning certificate means a document signed by the zoning administrator, as required in this chapter, which acknowledges that a use, structure, building or lot either complies with or is legally nonconforming to this chapter or is an authorized variance or modification therefrom. 
    Zoning map means the maps which are a part of this chapter and which delineate the boundaries of all mapped zoning districts within the physical boundary of the town. 
    Zoning ordinance means an ordinance enacted by the town council pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 45-24-1 et seq., and in the manner providing for the adoption of ordinances in the town home rule Charter, which sets forth regulations and standards relating to the nature and extent of uses of land and structures, which is consistent with the comprehensive plan as defined in RIGL 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq. which includes a zoning map, and which complies with the provisions of RIGL 1956, § 45-24-1 et seq. 
    Zoning use district means the basic unit in zoning, either mapped or unmapped, to which a uniform set of regulations applies, or a uniform set of regulations for a specified use. The districts include but are not limited to agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional, open space and residential. Each district may include subdistricts. Districts may be combined. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 98-13, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 00-9, § 1, 3-13-2000; Ord. No. 01-1, § 6, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-7, § 1, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 06-05, §§ 4-7, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 06-06, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 07-02, §§ 5, 6, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 07-12, § 2, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-21, §§ 1, 2, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 07-22, § 1, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 07-23, §§ 1-3, 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-18, § 1, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-19, § 1, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 2-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-13, § 1, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 11-18, § 1, 6-27-2011; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 2-27-2012; Ord. No. 13-19, § 1, 12-9-2013; Ord. No. 13-21, § 1, 12-9-2013; Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 17-18, § 1, 9-25-2017; Ord. No. 18-02, § 1, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 18-11, § 1, 5-7-2018) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-23. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the sections of this chapter or who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements of this chapter or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be liable to a fine in accordance with section 1-4. The owner of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Secs. 21-24-21-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-08, § 1, adopted June 9, 2008, amended the Code by renumbering former §§ 21-24 and 21-25 as new §§ 21-328 and 21-329. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, adopted May 8, 1995, consolidated zoning district classifications previously contained in former articles II-V as a new article II. Provisions which have been included in this article without amendment or renumbering have retained their prior history notes with the addition of the reference to Ord. No. 95-3. Sections amended, renumbered or added by Ord. No. 95-3 are followed by a history note referring to this ordinance. 

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 21-34. - Very low density rural/VLDR 200. 
    The very low density rural residential district is established for areas of the community where a very low density of development is expected or anticipated. This district includes areas with environmental resources such as habitat areas, wetlands and aquifer areas; areas where public water is not available or not anticipated; or areas where a transportation network is undeveloped and unlikely to develop based on environmental constraints such as wetland complexes and rivers and streams. The district is intended to protect the rural character of portions of the community and minimize the costs associated with the expansion of infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-35. - Low density rural/LDR120. 
    The low density rural residential district is intended to ensure very low density development to protect sensitive environmental areas, such as groundwater reservoir areas, or where public water is not available and is not anticipated and where the area relies on individual septic disposal systems, or where the transportation network is undeveloped. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-36. - Rural/RR80. 
    The rural residential district is intended for low density residential development in sensitive environmental areas of the town, such as groundwater overlay districts, and areas which rely on individual septic disposal systems for sewerage disposal. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-37. - Pojac Point. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The Pojac Point residential district is that geographical area located within the boundaries of the Pojac Point Fire District as established by the general assembly in Public Laws of 1950, ch. 2506, § 1, with the exception of lot 12 on assessor's plat 172. This residential district is established to protect the rural landscape, conserve natural resources and promote low-density growth because of the absence of public roads within the district. 
(b)  General provisions. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building on any lot located within the Pojac Point residential district until it has been established to the satisfaction of the building inspector that the lot has the frontage required by table 2A of article IV, chapter 21 of the Code measured along that portion of a private road that: 
(1)  Was in actual existence on May 29, 1979, and which provided on such date primary means of access to and egress from three or more existing lots then recorded as such; or 
(2)  Has been approved by the planning commission in accordance with section 17-112 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 03-03, § 1, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 04-12, § 1, 6-7-2004) 
Sec. 21-38. - Neighborhood/NR40. 
    The neighborhood residential district is established to promote moderate density residential growth in areas with natural limitations for development or which have town water service but no public sanitary sewers. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-39. - Village/VR20. 
    The village residential district is established to protect and promote the convenience and character of compact village settlements, designed to complement the natural features of the land. The village residential district is also intended for areas that have town water service, that are generally located close to major circulation facilities and commercial and/or industrial uses and that have direct access to town services and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-40. - Multifamily. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. A multifamily residential district is intended to promote the orderly development of multifamily dwellings in appropriate locations and to promote suitable placement of buildings and related facilities in relation to the site and surrounding areas. It is further intended to require adequate open space, living space and recreation areas; to avoid overcrowding of land; to encourage good design, avoid overburdening town services and facilities; and to ensure compatibility of multifamily dwellings with the immediate neighborhood and with the natural environment. 
(b)  General requirements. General requirements for multifamily districts are as follows: 
(1)  A multifamily dwelling project shall be located on a single lot and shall be planned, developed and managed as a unit, with required open spaces, recreation areas, off-street parking and accessory uses designed as a part of the entire project. 
(2)  All structures, facilities and accessory uses which are part of a multifamily dwelling project shall be for the exclusive use of residents of the project and the residents' guests. 
(3)  No building shall be erected in a multifamily district until a site plan has been approved by the planning commission. All multifamily proposals shall be brought before the planning commission in accordance with the procedures established by the subdivision regulations. The site plan shall be approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the town clerk prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
(4)  For each multifamily dwelling project, the developer shall be required to provide recreational facilities for the use of the residents. These facilities shall be shown on the site plan and are subject to approval by the planning commission. 
(5)  Any change in an approved site plan in a multifamily district must be approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the town clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Townhouses. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(4)  Public or private park, conservation or recreation area. 
(5)  Municipal facility. 
(6)  Accessory uses, which are as follows: 
a.  Laundry facilities. 
b.  Storage facilities. 
c.  Recreation facilities. 
d.  Day care center. 
e.  Nursery school. 
(d)  Minimum requirements. Minimum requirements are as follows: 
(1)  The maximum density for multifamily dwellings shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each 15,000 square feet of land area; provided, however, for those properties served by a public sewer system that are connected to and utilize the sewer treatment plant of the Quonset Business Park (QBP), (the Quonset Point Sewer System), the maximum density for multifamily dwellings containing no more than one dwelling unit for each 2,500 square feet of suitable land for development; provided, however, for those properties served by a public sewer system that are connected to and utilize the Quonset Point Sewer System, the maximum density for the multifamily dwelling containing more than one bedroom shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each 15,000 square feet of land area unless a special use permit is obtained from the zoning board of review. For the purpose of determining suitable land for development for the computation of the maximum number of dwelling units for land served by the Quonset Point Sewer System, flood plains and freshwater wetlands shall be excluded, however, any area within 50 feet of the edge of a bog, marsh, swamp or pond shall be included within such calculation notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein. In order to preserve and maintain structures of historic significance, however, the allowable density in the conversion of existing nondwelling use structures entered on or considered eligible for the state or national register of historic places, as determined by the state Historic Preservation Commission, may be calculated upon floor area. Density calculated upon floor area shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each 1,250 square feet of floor area, and shall be based only upon nondwelling use structures in place on the first day of January, 1983. No such additional density shall apply to new construction, and all conversion shall conform with the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's standards for historic rehabilitation. 
(2)  District dimensions are as follows: 
Lot Area Frontage Maximum Lot 
Coverage by 
Structures Yards 5 acres 300 feet 20% 65 feet  
(3)  There shall be a landscaped buffer strip at least ten feet in width along all side and rear lot lines. 
(4)  At least ten percent of the total lot area, exclusive of driveways, parking and loading areas, shall be designated as usable open space for the benefit of the residents of the development. The site plan shall include suitable plans for the use of this open space. Water areas, wetland, area with slopes of more than 15 percent, and easement areas may be used to satisfy the usable open space requirement if permitted by the planning commission, but in no case shall more than 25 percent of such areas be counted as satisfying the minimum open spaces requirement. 
(5)  Parking areas shall be conveniently located, adequately lighted and landscaped. 
(6)  Driveways shall be designated for safe ingress and egress and shall be adequately lighted. 
(7)  No multifamily dwelling shall be more than three stories of livable area with additional allowance for the roof structure, which may house mechanical appurtenances. 
(e)  Criteria for planning commission approval. Before approving a site plan in a multifamily district, the planning commission shall determine that: 
(1)  Sewage and waste disposal will be adequately handled by either a municipal sewer system or an adequate on-site sewage system; 
(2)  Public water is or will be available to and adequate for the proposed development; 
(3)  The size and scale of the proposed development is harmonious with the development and proposed development of adjacent and nearby areas and will not disrupt the neighborhood or the privacy of abutting landowners by excessive noise, light or glare; 
(4)  The traffic which will be generated by the proposed development will be adequately provided for and will not cause undue congestion or introduce a traffic hazard to the circulation pattern of the area; 
(5)  The proposed development will not cause an undue burden on town facilities or services; and 
(6)  The recreational facilities to be developed as part of the project are conveniently located and are appropriate for the types of dwelling units which are proposed. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-2-4; Ord. No. 83-4, § 1, 3-14-1983; Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-10-2011) 
Secs. 21-41-21-60. - Reserved. 
PLANNED VILLAGE DISTRICT 

Sec. 21-61. - Purpose. 
    The planned village district is established to encourage development of harmonious, efficient and environmentally sound neighborhoods by promoting variety in land use, residential density and site design through the grouping or other configuration of buildings and preservation of unique features of the site; it may include compatible residential and recreation uses. It shall be serviced by an approved central sewer facility and public water. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-3-1; Ord. No. 85-18, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 93-17, § 1, 10-4-1993; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-62. - Minimum parcel size; plan approval process. 
(a)  The minimum parcel size for development proposals in the planned village district shall be ten acres. 
(b)  No building shall be erected in a planned village district until a final subdivision plan has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the land evidence records. All development proposals shall follow the procedures for approval of a subdivision in accordance with article 3.0 of the subdivision and land development regulations. All plans must be in conformance with articles 1.0-4.0 of the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(c)  Any change in an approved development plan in a planned village district must be approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the town clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-3-2; Ord. No. 93-17, § 1, 10-4-1993; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-63. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the planned village district shall include the following: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Townhouses. 
(3)  Public or private parks, conservation areas or recreation areas. 
(4)  Municipal facilities. 
(5)  Residential compounds, as defined in section 21-426. 
(6)  Accessory uses, which are as follows: 
a.  Garages and storage space. 
b.  Temporary sales office or temporary storage of building supplies as accessories to real estate subdivisions or developments. 
c.  Customary home occupations, such as physicians, engineers, insurance agents, lawyers, real estate brokers, beauty parlors or other professional persons, provided that the person resides in the house and employs no more than two persons. 
d.  Not more than two rooms rented or table-board furnished incidental to a private residence use. 
e.  Any uses or buildings clearly accessory to authorized uses. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-3-3; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-64. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  Residential density. The total number of units allowed in the planned village district shall be calculated on the amount of land suitable for development. Residential density shall be a maximum of four dwelling units per acre of suitable land. 
(b)  Minimum lot area and frontage requirements. For a planned village district consisting, all or in part, of separate lots for residential and accessory use purposes, each such lot shall contain at least 8,000 square feet of land, which shall not be deemed to be a nonconforming lot size under section 21-308, and shall have a minimum frontage of at least 50 feet. 
(c)  Single-family detached dwellings. Single-family detached dwellings shall meet the following minimum dimensional requirements: 
(1)  The minimum front yard shall be ten feet for each single-family dwelling. 
(2)  The minimum side yard shall be ten feet for each single-family dwelling. 
(3)  The minimum side yard and rear yard for accessory structures shall be seven feet six inches. 
(4)  The minimum rear yard shall be 15 feet for each single-family dwelling. 
(d)  Townhouses. Criteria for townhouses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Not more than four contiguous townhouses shall be built in a row with the same or approximately the same front line, and not more than eight townhouses shall be contiguous. 
(2)  Each townhouse unit shall have its own yard, containing not less than 400 square feet, reasonably secluded from view from the streets or from neighboring property. Such yards shall not be used for off-street parking or for any accessory building. 
(3)  The minimum yard width shall be 20 feet per unit. 
(4)  The minimum distance between any two rows of townhouse buildings, substantially parallel to each other, shall be 60 feet. 
(5)  The minimum distance between two abutting ends of townhouse buildings in the same general plane or row shall be 50 feet, provided that such walls shall contain no windows to serve habitable rooms. 
(e)  Applicability of section 21-306. Section 21-306 shall not apply to a planned village district. 
(f)  Open spaces. Open space criteria and ownership shall be as follows: 
(1)  Within a development no less than 25 percent of the total land, exclusive of land set aside for road area and accessory uses, shall be devoted to common open space for recreational or conservation purposes. 
(2)  Provisions shall be made to ensure that no more than 20 percent of the open space will be devoted to paved areas and structures devoted to open space uses or uses accessory to permitted uses. 
(3)  Use of the open space as permitted in subsection (f)(7) of this section shall be subject to site plan review by the planning commission. All structural improvements shall be a part of the final submission plans approved by the commission, or may be included by amendment at any time prior to the conveyance of the first lot. Following the conveyance of at least 51 percent of the lots, such additional improvements may be permitted by the commission with the written concurrence of at least two-thirds of the homeowners' association membership. No structure on the open space may be located within 50 feet of the residential property abutting the development. 
(4)  Strips of common land shall be permitted only as usable access paths between residences, streets, open space, as drainage areas and as buffers. 
(5)  Access area to the open space shall be clearly marked with appropriate materials to distinguish commonly owned open space area from private property. 
(6)  Open space may be one or more parcels, the size, location, shape and character of which must be suitable for the designated uses. 
(7)  Open space may be used for active recreation, passive recreation, conservation, forestry agriculture, natural buffers, open space, and structures accessory to approved uses, including garages and utilities owned and operated by the homeowners' association for its own use including septic systems and package sewage treatment facilities. 
(8)  Land which has been environmentally damaged prior to final approval of the development by the planning commission as a result of soil and earth removal operations, harvesting of trees or other natural features or refuse disposal or other causes shall not be accepted as common open space unless and until the land is restored to a condition which the planning commission determines to be reasonable and appropriate to effect the purpose of this article. The planning commission may grant final approval for a development subject to such restoration of the common open space, provided an appropriate performance bond is posted. 
(9)  Ownership of the common open space shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  Ownership by the individual lot owners by tenants in common. The deed to each lot shall include a proportionate share of the common open space. Each lot owner shall be required to be a member of a homeowners' association, which shall be formed prior to conveyance of the first lot. 
b.  All or part of the open space area used as a basis for calculation to determine density, if used for active recreation purposes prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection derives by lot or unit owners and others, may be owned by a separate entity. In such case, the area shall be impressed with an open space easement as defined in subsection (f)(10) of this section, running to the lot or unit owners, in addition to the open space easement which shall be given to the town. 
(10)  Open space shall be protected against building development and environmental damage by conveying to the town an open space easement restricting the area against any future building and against the removal of soil, trees and other natural features, except as is consistent with conservation, recreation or agricultural uses accessory to permitted uses. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-3-4; Ord. No. 85-18, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 93-17, § 1, 10-4-1993; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 07-02, § 7, 2-5-2007) 
Sec. 21-65. - Criteria for planning commission approval. 
    Before approving a planned village district proposal, the planning commission shall determine that: 
(1)  Sewage and waste disposal will be adequately handled by an approved central sewage facility. 
(2)  Public water is or will be available to and adequate for the proposed plan. 
(3)  The size and scale of the proposed plan and uses are harmonious with the development and anticipated development of adjacent and nearby areas and will not disrupt the neighborhood or the privacy of abutting landowners by excessive noise, light, glare or air pollutants. 
(4)  The traffic which will be generated by the proposed plan and uses will be adequately provided for and will not cause undue congestion or introduce a traffic hazard to the circulation pattern of the area. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-3-5; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-66. - Buffer areas. 
    A vegetated buffer will be required between new development in a planned village district and existing streets, neighborhoods, vacant land, active farmland, adjacent park or conservation land, or other surrounding uses. The buffer will be designed to provide a visual and/or audio screen, and may be required to provide environmental and public use benefits. Its appearance shall fit with and improve upon the neighborhood context. The required buffer will be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  A permanent buffer along the perimeter of the planned village district shall be established and maintained, providing for the preservation of existing trees or other vegetation or for the planting of new vegetation having adequate density, height, and type of vegetation in order to provide an all-season visual and audio screen between the planned village district and adjacent land uses. 
(2)  The buffer may be provided in either of the following alternative forms, to be determined by the planning commission: 
a.  A separate open space lot or lots; 
b.  A permanent easement along the rear and side property lines of the perimeter lots of the planned village district, which are being developed. Said easement shall run in favor of the town and shall be for conservation or open space purposes only. Where such easements are located on privately owned lots, they shall not be counted toward the minimum required open space. 
(3)  The width of the required perimeter buffer shall be at least 50 feet. 
(4)  In the review and approval of buffer areas, the planning commission, or the zoning board of review where a reduction in buffer width is requested, shall consider the following factors in making a determination: 
a.  The nature of adjacent land uses; 
b.  The nature of proposed or projected future land uses on adjacent property; 
c.  The nature of the ownership of adjacent property (private, public, conservation, etc.); 
d.  The physical characteristics of adjacent property (wetlands, slopes, stone walls, etc.); 
e.  The zoning of adjacent property; 
f.  The land use classification of adjacent property as shown on the town comprehensive plan land use map; 
g.  Height of buildings in the Planned Village District and adjacent parcels; 
h.  Type of buffer as it relates to whether the buffer is intended to be an extension of existing forested areas or landscaped screening. 
(5)  Supplemental plantings and replanting shall consist of a combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs or a combination thereof, native to the region. All trees planted shall be a minimum of ten feet in height at time of planting and the buffer shall contain a mixture of canopy and understory trees. All shrubs planted shall be a large growing species, shall be a minimum of three feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least 10 feet at maturity. 
(6)  All material shall conform to the guidelines established by the current American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
(7)  Nonvegetative materials may be used to satisfy the screening requirements where the planning commission determines such materials are acceptable for the areas in which they are to be located. These materials may be used in addition to the use of existing vegetation and/or supplemental plantings, and may consist of walls, fences, earthen berms or any combination thereof. 
(8)  A certified landscape plan and other materials that demonstrate that the design of the buffer will achieve the desired effect must be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. 
(9)  Buffer areas may be used for passive recreation, such as pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails, provided that no plant material is eliminated; the total width of the buffer is maintained; and all other requirements of this section are met. Buffer areas may not be used for playfields, stables, swimming pools, tennis courts, accessory buildings, septic systems, parking facilities or trash dumpster locations. 
(10)  Buffer areas may be crossed by roadways and utilities to allow connections between adjacent parcels or developments. 
(11)  Application and construction documents must include a plan for preserving existing vegetation where possible. 
(12)  All new plantings must receive two to three inches of mulch at planting and be maintained until they are established. Any losses of plant material within the first two years must be replaced and similarly guaranteed. Long-term maintenance of the buffers shall be the responsibility of the tenants in common. The buffers shall be maintained to accomplish the intended effects promised in the application plans in a safe and effective manner. 
(13)  The zoning occupancy permit for the uses in a planned village district shall not be issued until such time as the landscaping requirements and buffer areas are either actually installed in full compliance with the approved plan or, in the event that the season is not appropriate for completing the planting, a performance guarantee of 125 percent of the cost shall be deposited with the town finance department. Such guarantee shall be in a form acceptable to the town and the depositor shall agree in making the deposit that, if performance is not completed within the time specified by the planning commission, the town may complete the requirements and charge the cost against the deposit; otherwise, the deposit shall be returned in full after satisfactory completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 04-23, § 1, 11-8-2004) 
Secs. 21-67-21-85. - Reserved. 
BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 21-86. - General requirements. 
(a)  It is the intent of separate business districting to group businesses according to size, land use and intensity of activities in order to anticipate the impact of business development on the circulation system and on the pattern of development in different areas. 
(b)  In areas where commercial activities are likely to concentrate, either in a traditional shopping center or individually, it shall be required that these businesses be designed and constructed as a group or cluster in a planned business district. 
(c)  Any business use which abuts a residential district shall maintain the same building setback from side or rear lot lines as proscribed in that residential district; however, in no case shall the building setback be less than 30 feet. No off-street parking and loading spaces shall be located within this area. 
(d)  Between the period of Thanksgiving through December 26 in any year, the outdoor storage and display for sale of Christmas trees and wreaths shall be a permitted use in any business district. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-87. - Neighborhood business district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the neighborhood business district is to encourage the continued growth and vitality of town villages. Development in this district should meet the following objectives: 
(1)  Provide areas within and adjacent to residential neighborhoods where groups of businesses may be located to: 
a.  Serve the frequent commercial and service needs of residents within convenient traveling distances. 
b.  Serve as a transitional zone between more intensive business areas and residential neighborhoods. 
c.  Provide a district for business activities which do not generate the traffic, noise, glare or large parking areas associated with large-scale business uses. 
(2)  Encourage traditional development design and mixed use development appropriate to village centers. 
(3)  Serve the traffic-carrying capacity of the town's road system by concentrating certain uses within village centers, thereby reducing the overall traffic burden. 
(4)  Preserve the residential, rural, agricultural and historic characteristics of the community by encouraging new development to its village centers. 
(5)  Strengthen the role of the neighborhood as a support for the village retail center and in turn to keep each village center to a scale that services its neighborhood without an undue dependence on automobile-borne customers. 
(6)  Provide for a visual center for each village. 
(7)  Promote unified physical, visual and spatial characteristics that are compatible with each village's traditional development pattern. 
(b)  General requirements. General requirements are as follows: 
(1)  On-site parking shall be located to the rear of the principal structure, but not in the required minimum rear or side setback or required buffer area. 
(2)  The front yard setback shall be the average of the existing setbacks on the same side of the street as the subject site for a distance of 500 feet on both sides. Principal buildings shall front at this setback or no more than five feet behind it. If the latter, the area between the building and the street line shall be landscaped with appropriate material (e.g., bricks, concrete, stone pavers, but not asphalt) and appropriately planted, signed and lit. Properties in the neighborhood business district shall be exempt from subsection 21-306(a). 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Sec. 21-88. - Waterfront business district. 
    The purpose of the waterfront business district is to provide a location for maritime-related activities and recreational uses of the waterfront in an attractive environment which supports the historic character of the town and the traditional values associated with a working waterfront. The intent is to provide for water-related business without adversely impacting adjacent residential areas and the public enjoyment of the waterfront by preservation of views, continuance of existing public access areas and creation of new public access areas where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Sec. 21-89. - General business district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The general business district is created to provide areas for intensive commercial activities that primarily depend upon a great volume of vehicular traffic and serve the daily shopping needs of the community. 
(b)  General requirements. General requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  On-site parking shall, unless otherwise permitted as provided in this subsection, be located to the side and/or rear of the principal structure but not in the required minimum side yard or rear yard or required buffer area. On-site parking may be located to the front of the principal structure if the applicant demonstrates that, with use of landscaping and buffering, the applicant can minimize the visual impacts of the parking. 
(2)  Properties in the general business district shall be exempt from subsection 21-306(a). 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Sec. 21-90. - Heavy business district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The heavy business district is established to provide areas for intensive business activities, the merchandise and operations of which generally require outdoor storage and activity. 
(b)  General requirements. Properties in the heavy business district shall be exempt from subsection 21-306(a). 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Sec. 21-91. - Planned business district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the planned business district is to: 
(1)  Encourage the master planning of commercial development to ensure compatibility with the purposes, objectives and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Provide flexibility in the use and design of commercial property. 
(3)  Provide development that is appropriate for the site, the surrounding areas and the ability of the town to support such development. 
(b)  Master plan review and site plan. General requirements for the master plan review and site plan are as follows: 
(1)  Master plan review. Procedures for master plan review are as follows: 
a.  Application. The applicant shall submit an application in accordance with the subdivision and development regulations, article IV H, for master plan approval by the planning commission. All required items must be submitted in order for the application to be considered complete prior to scheduling a master plan hearing with the planning commission. 
b.  Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed master plan. Property owners within 200 feet of the site shall be notified by first class mail, return receipt requested, and the hearing advertised in a newspaper of local circulation at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. The cost of advertising and notification shall be borne by the applicant. The master plan shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied within 45 days of the close of the public hearing. The planning commission may grant an extension to the time period required for action at the request of the applicant. 
c.  Master plan conditions. As a condition of approval, the planning commission may require such changes in the proposed master plan and may impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to meet the purposes of this section. 
d.  Criteria for planning commission decision. The planning commission shall consider master plan approval based on the following criteria: 
1.  The approximate location, size and number of business structures. 
2.  The mix of business uses. 
3.  The compatibility of the proposed development with adjacent land uses. 
4.  The proposed use can be adequately served by town and state utilities and services. 
5.  The design of the development including location of parking areas, open space, pedestrian and vehicular circulation within and adjacent to the site. 
6.  Consistency with the comprehensive plan and the purpose and intent of this district. 
e.  Approval period. Master plan approval shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of planning commission approval. 
f.  Modifications. Modifications may be approved as follows: 
1.  Minor modification of master plan. Amendments to the approved master plan which do not substantially change the concept of the master plan may be approved by the planning director. The developer shall request such amendments in writing, clearly setting forth the reasons for such changes. If the change is approved, the master plan shall be so amended. Appeal from the decision of the planning director may be taken to the planning commission. 
2.  Major modification of master plan. Amendments to the approved master plan which the planning department determines to be substantial deviations from the concept of the approved planned business development shall require application to and review by the planning commission. A public hearing and notification, in accordance with subsection (b)(1)b of this section, shall be required. 
g.  Appeal. Appeal from the decision of the planning commission shall be in accordance with applicable statutes concerning appeals from any decision of a planning commission. 
(2)  Site plan. Procedures for site plans are as follows: 
a.  Site plan review. Following master plan approval, the applicant may file for site plan approval by the director of planning and development. 
b.  Project phasing. If the developer anticipates a phased development, a proposed phasing plan and schedule must be submitted to the director for the director's approval at the time of site plan submission. The phasing schedule, upon approval by the director, may be amended from time to time. Amendment to the phasing schedule shall not be considered an amendment to the site plan. 
c.  Modifications. Any modification to the approved site plan shall be approved by the director of planning and development. 
(3)  Multifamily dwellings. The requirements of section 21-40 of this article shall be applicable to multifamily dwellings in the planned business district. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 02-7, § 2, 7-8-2002) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Sec. 21-92. - Institutional/office district. 
    The purpose of the institutional/office zoning district is to provide opportunity for the location of governmental, business and professional offices; research facilities; institutional uses; and support services. These types of areas are intended to also serve as a transition from more intense to less intense uses. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Sec. 21-93. - Wickford Village Center district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this zoning district is to encourage small-scale business and residential uses consistent with the historic and pedestrian-scale characteristics that exist and are desired to be retained and which are unique to Wickford Village. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  In the Wickford Village district any use or structure in excess of 4,000 square feet gross floor area shall require a special use permit, and no structure shall have a footprint exceeding 7,000 square feet. 
(2)  Outdoor displays of merchandise or goods are permitted subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The total area of such displays shall not exceed five percent of the total floor area of the business establishment; 
b.  The outdoor display must be on the same lot as the establishment and behind the front face of the building; 
c.  No outdoor displays are permitted in the public right-of-way; 
d.  All outdoor displays must be brought inside by the end of each business day, with the exception of plants and landscaping materials; 
e.  Outdoor displays shall not obstruct building exits or fire lanes. 
(3)  Subsections (2)a. and (2)b. above shall not apply during special village-wide festivals or events during specified times of the year, when designated as such by the town council. 
(4)  Any vending machine or other mechanical device for the distribution of goods directly to a consumer without the intervention of any cashier or other employee outside or visible from outside the building is prohibited. 
(5)  Properties located within the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Overlay District, as identified in sections 21-362 and 21-363, shall adhere to the provisions contained in section 21-191, entitled, "Wickford Village Design Guidelines Overlay District." 
(Ord. No. 02-20, § 2, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 18-29, § 1, 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 21-94. - Post Road district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The Post Road district (PR) is established as a mixed use, economic development center. Because of the available infrastructure within the district, development shall be designed to provide a mix of commercial and residential uses at higher densities than what is permitted in most of the other zoning districts in the town. Density bonuses shall be made available to encourage environmentally friendly and pedestrian-oriented site design practices and the incorporation of affordable housing into mixed use environments. Better site design practices and two-story buildings are encouraged in the district to facilitate the development of pedestrian friendly environments, to leverage environmental improvements, to increase property values, to promote commercial development, and to improve the general aesthetic appeal of the area. 
(b)  General requirements. 
(1)  Ground floor uses. Ground floor uses in the PR district shall be restricted according to the following provisions: 
a.  Ground floor uses in any structures located within 400 feet of arterial and collector roads shall be limited to non-residential uses, with the exception of the following: 
i.  Ground floor uses within 400 feet of collector or arterial roads may include up to 25 percent of the gross floor area as residential use as long as such housing is restricted to households above the age of 55. 
b.  Ground floor uses on local roads or other small private ways internal to developed areas may include any of the uses allowed in the PR district in accordance with the use table (article III). 
c.  The distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the residential ground floor use in question to the nearest point of the road right-of-way. The Planning Commission may reduce this restriction to 200 feet where the residential ground floor uses are not visible to pedestrians from Post Road and are part of a large coordinated development proposal with multiple primary buildings sited in a manner that is consistent with the goals of the district. 
(2)  Nutrient loading limitations. New development in the PR District that also lies within the groundwater recharge and wellhead protection overlay district shall not discharge nitrogen to groundwater at an average site-wide concentration beyond 5 mg/L. Nitrogen loading calculations shall incorporate those standards listed in Section 21-186(g)(5) of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  Stormwater recharge for new development. In new development, loss of annual recharge to groundwater shall be eliminated or minimized through the use of infiltration measures including environmentally sensitive site design, low impact development techniques, stormwater best management practices, and good operation and maintenance. At a minimum, the annual recharge from the post-development site shall approximate the annual recharge from pre-development conditions based on soil type. The applicant shall demonstrate that post-development recharge rates approximate pre-development conditions by following the calculation and design process described below. The NRCS classifies soils into four hydrologic groups, A through D, indicative of the minimum infiltration obtained for a soil after prolonged wetting. Group A soils have the lowest runoff potential and the highest infiltration rates, while group D soils have the highest runoff potential and the lowest infiltration rates. Each of these soils can be expected to infiltrate up to a certain amount of rainfall for any given rain event regardless of the size of the storm. Studies of rainfall data and soil recharge rates illustrate that the four hydrologic soil groups will recharge up to the following amounts for any given rain event: 
Hydrologic Soil Group Potential Rate of Recharge 
("event" based) A 0.60 inches of recharge B 0.35 inches of recharge C 0.25 inches of recharge D 0.10 inches of recharge  
Therefore, runoff from impervious cover must be recharged in accordance with the soil type that will be covered by that impervious cover. The required recharge volume from impervious surfaces for any given storm (the stormwater volume that must be infiltrated) shall be determined by multiplying these recharge coefficients by the amount of impervious cover that lies above a particular hydrologic soil group. An applicant must demonstrate to the planning commission that the stormwater management practices selected adequately captures, treats and infiltrates the total required recharge resulting from these calculations. 
For stormwater management strategies that recharge water through the root zone (within the first 12 inches of soil), it will be assumed that 50 percent of the captured runoff is lost to evapotranspiration. The applicant shall therefore need to compensate for this loss in his/her recharge volume estimates. Where recharge occurs below the root zone, it shall be assumed that all captured runoff will reach the water table. 
Sample calculation for stormwater recharge. 
In the sample calculations provided below, stormwater recharge facilities on the site must be capable of recharging at least 12,124 gallons of runoff from impervious surfaces for any given storm event. 
Square Feet of Impervious Cover Required Recharge 25,000 over A soils 0.6 in × 25,000 sq ft = 9,350 gallons 12,000 over B soils 0.35 in × 12,000 sq ft = 2,618 gallons 1,000 over C soils 0.25 in × 1,000 sq ft = 156 gallons 0 over D soils 0 Total required potential recharge 12,124 gallons Square feet of impervious cover Required recharge  
(4)  Stormwater recharge for redevelopment or constrained sites. The town recognizes the difficulties associated with recharging groundwater on sites with certain unique constraints. These constraints may include previously developed sites with considerable amounts of poor quality fill, sites comprised entirely of hydrologic group C or D soils, or sites with contaminated soils. In these situations, the recharge standards listed under section 21-94(b)(3) above shall be met to the maximum extent practicable. For the purposes of determining compliance with this standard, the planning commission shall require the applicant to demonstrate that: 
a.  A complete evaluation was performed of all feasible infiltration measures, including environmentally sensitive site design that minimizes land disturbance and impervious surfaces, low impact development techniques, reduced parking requirements, and structural stormwater best management practices; and 
b.  If the post-development recharge does not at least approximate the annual recharge from pre-development conditions, the applicant has demonstrated that he/she is implementing the highest practicable method for infiltrating stormwater. 
(5)  Non-conformity. Pre-existing non-conforming land or structures shall be governed by those provisions listed in article XII of the zoning ordinance. In addition to those requirements, the following shall apply: 
a.  The relocation or replacement of any building that may be allowed pursuant to article XII shall require compliance with all PR district design guidelines listed in the subdivision and land development regulations. 
b.  Where a building is non-conforming by dimension, and any addition, enlargement, expansion or change of use is proposed, such activity shall require conformance with the PR district design guidelines listed in the subdivisions and land development regulations that apply to the construction/renovation activities being performed unless specifically waived by the town. 
c.  All pre-existing non-conforming land or structures that are being developed or redeveloped shall include sidewalks, landscaping and lighting, meeting the ordinance requirements. 
(c)  Specific requirements. 
(1)  Intensity of residential use. 
a.  In a mixed use district, four units of residential use shall be allowed for each acre of buildable land. 
b.  For projects in which not less than 20 percent of all housing units shall be reserved as affordable as defined in section 21-22, definitions, the planning commission may increase the allowable residential density up to ten total units per buildable acre. 
c.  For projects in which not less than 15 percent of all housing units shall be reserved as affordable as defined in section 21-22, definitions, and also utilize transfer of development rights as described in article XXIII of this chapter, the planning commission may increase the allowable residential density to 30 total units per buildable acre. 
d.  The average bedroom count per unit for any residential development in the PR district shall not exceed 2.25. 
(2)  Intensity of commercial use. The intensity of commercial uses allowed in the PR district is subject to the basic dimensional requirements of each site and any other site constraints that may be present. Increases in the intensity of commercial uses beyond what is customarily permitted by right may be allowed by the Planning Commission through a transfer of development rights as described in Article XVII of this chapter. These increases in commercial use intensity beyond what is customarily allowed shall occur as the result of increases in the allowable height of buildings pursuant to article IV, table 2B standard dimensional regulations for business districts, note 6. Increases in the intensity of uses shall require compliance with all other applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance including, but not limited to, allowable uses, parking requirements, design standards, and signage. 
(3)  Buffers. Landscaping shall be required between non-residential uses or mixed use developments and existing residential districts. Buffer zones shall occupy the specified setback area in table 2B of article IV and shall substantially screen the site from view in accordance with the standards listed in section 21-277 of the zoning ordinance. Fences may be used as part of screening but shall not be constructed from materials incongruent with the design goals of the PR district as determined by the department of planning and development or the planning commission. 
These requirements shall not apply to non-residential or mixed use development that are interior to any development in the district or that are designed to integrate existing or future neighboring residences into the site through the use of walkways, bicycle paths or other pedestrian amenities. 
(4)  Design. 
a.  All proposed land development projects on vacant land in the PR district shall comply with the Post Road district design guidelines and standards in their entirety as listed in the subdivision and land development regulations. 
b.  Applicants are encouraged to adhere to the PR district design guidelines for land development projects on sites where existing buildings and parking are in place. Where existing buildings and site constraints do not allow for the compliance with the PR district design guidelines and standards the planning commission may waive the requirements. 
c.  All land development projects shall make proposals for streetscape requirements including: the installation of sidewalks, landscaping and lighting meeting ordinance and subdivision and land development regulations. 
d.  All new signage shall meet the PR district design guidelines as set out in section 14.3.13 of the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(5)  For structures being modified or enlarged that are located within the PRD, no increase in net parking or loading spaces shall be allowed in front of the primary structure. In instances where existing parking or loading spaces are to remain in front of the primary structure, all applicable buffering standards shall be met in accordance with this chapter to minimize the impact of the existing parking and loading spaces. For new developments applicants shall meet parking requirements as indicated in section 14.3.2: site design in the PR design guidelines of the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(6)  Applicants for development of lots located along Post Road that have frontage on more than one road, shall designate a front which will be subject to planning commission approval. 
(Ord. No. 08-18, § 2, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 10-04, § 2, 2-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 4-26-2010; Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 5-23-2011; Ord. No. 11-18, § 2, 6-27-2011; Ord. No. 12-13, § 2, 10-22-2012; Ord. No. 16-02, § 1, 1-11-2016) 
Sec. 21-95. - Compact village development (CVD). 
    The intent of the compact village development provisions is to create opportunities for land development projects consistent with the CVD ordinance and to create or reinforce the character and function of village centers through compact arrangement of residential and nonresidential uses which are well related to community needs. 
(1)  Establishment of CVD District. Applications for a CVD may be submitted to the town planning commission for land within an existing CVD district or as part of a proposed future land use map amendment (if necessary) and a zoning map amendment consistent with the requirements in section 21-95. Where a change to the zoning map is required, applicants shall follow the procedures of section 21-19 of the zoning ordinance. Applicants for a zoning map amendment shall accompany the submittal of application materials to the planning commission with a site plan that meets the requirements of a master plan submittal for major land development projects. A CVD must include both residential and nonresidential uses as allowed in section 21-95(4). 
(2)  Eligibility. Locations eligible for CVD shall meet all of the following criteria: 
a.  At least one lot within a proposed CVD shall have adequate frontage on and access to an arterial or collector street as defined in section 21-22 of the zoning ordinance. 
b.  When establishing a CVD, the entirety of a conforming lot that is zoned as a planned business district, general business district, neighborhood business district or multifamily residential district must be included in any land proposed to be rezoned as a CVD. Any additional lots that are proposed to be included in the CVD may be any other business, industrial or residential district, excluding the Wickford Village Center district and the Post Road District. 
c.  For newly proposed CVD districts located in an existing village as identified in the comprehensive plan, the minimum total land area of the district shall be two (2) acres. For newly proposed CVD districts that are not located within an existing village area as identified by the comprehensive plan, the minimum total land area shall be ten (10) acres. For any newly proposed CVD that is less than ten (10) acres, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the town council at the pre-application stage of review as to whether the proposed CVD is located within a village. The final determination for whether a proposed CVD is located within a village shall then be made by the town council at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
d.  After a CVD has been established, land that abuts an existing CVD district and has a business, industrial, multi-family or Village/VR20 designation may be considered for a CVD zone change where the property will be integrated by design into the existing CVD. Where abutting property may be added to an existing CVD, there shall be no minimum area requirement for the additional property. 
(3)  Permit procedures. Review of development proposals within an existing or proposed CVD district shall be as follows: 
a.  Any application for CVD that requires a change to the zoning map shall be reviewed as a major land development project. 
b.  Where a CVD district is already established on the zoning map, but the development proposed as part of the initial zoning map change was not constructed per the conditions of the approved master plan within the required timeframe allowed by state law, new proposals or revisions to the master plan shall require review as a new major land development project. 
c.  Any change to restrictions or conditions per the original Zoning Map amendment including, but not limited to, deed restrictions, covenants, maintenance agreements, and limits on commercial square footage, shall require a change to the master plan and a zone change application. Notification to abutters shall be the same as outlined in section 21-19 of the zoning ordinance. 
d.  Where a CVD zoning district is already established and the plans reviewed as part of the initial zoning map change are substantially complete, applications for additional development or changes within the district shall be reviewed in accordance with section 21-133 of the zoning ordinance and the requirements of a major land development project in accordance with the town subdivisions and land development regulations. 
e.  Where a master plan submittal requires a zoning map amendment and/or a comprehensive plan amendment, the master plan approval is subject to the town council approving the zoning map amendment and the comprehensive plan amendment. 
f.  The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development would have an adequate water supply. 
g.  If the CVD is proposed to be built in phases, phasing requirements shall be determined at the discretion of the planning commission. 
h.  The planning commission shall consider how the proposed percentage of nonresidential and residential development promotes the development of a walkable village as contemplated by the CVD ordinance. In determining the appropriate amount of residential and nonresidential uses or the ratio between the residential and nonresidential uses, the planning commission shall consider the following, without limitation: 
1.  The amount and type of nonresidential use on nearby properties. 
2.  The amount of residential use in close proximity to the CVD and the degree to which that residential use is readily connected to the proposed CVD through vehicular, pedestrian or bicycle connections. 
3.  The degree to which the proposal may be compatible with historic or otherwise notable structures in or near the proposed CVD. 
4.  The degree to which the proposed CVD may represent historic development patterns in the area or otherwise model traditional New England village types. 
5.  The capacity for roadways to effectively handle anticipated volumes of traffic. 
6.  The capacity for existing or proposed utilities to effectively provide service to the proposed mix of uses. 
7.  The carrying capacity of the site, the watershed(s) within which the site lies or the underlying groundwater. 
8.  The need for commercial or residential uses in the area. 
9.  The current zoning of the proposed CVD district. 
10.  The current future land use map designation in the comprehensive plan. 
11.  The percentage of proposed protected open space or recreation land. 
(4)  Allowable uses. A CVD project must include both a residential use and a nonresidential use. Use allowances within a CVD district shall follow the use allowances specified for the neighborhood business district with the exceptions, additions or alterations provided below. 
a.  The following residential uses shall be allowed by right: 
1.  Single-family dwellings; 
2.  Two-family dwellings; 
3.  Multi-family dwellings including townhouses; 
4.  Dwelling units above nonresidential use; 
5.  Home occupation within a dwelling in accordance with section 21-320 of the zoning ordinance; 
6.  Nursing home or convalescent home; 
7.  Accessory dwelling units. 
b.  Farm markets shall be allowed by right. 
c.  The following recreational uses shall be allowed by right: 
1.  Golf courses with associated facilities; 
2.  Health and fitness facilities. 
d.  All additional restrictions on use provided for in the groundwater or other overlay districts shall apply if the parcel is located in said overlay districts. 
(5)  Dimensional requirements . The dimensional regulations for the CVD are provided herein: 
Dimension Minimum Lot area within the CVD 4,000 square feet Lot width 40 feet Lot frontage 40 feet Building setbacks  Front 0 feet  Side 0 feet  Corner side 0 feet  Rear 20 feet  Side and rear from adjacent residential district 30 feet Maximum Building stories 3 Building height 40 feet  
a.  The proposed lot(s) included in any development plan, regardless of use, must contain on average at least 5,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit proposed. 
b.  The average number of bedrooms per dwelling unit for all residential units located within the CVD District shall not exceed two. 
c.  Subject to the limits of the other sections of the ordinance, the footprint of any individual commercial building shall not exceed 10,000 square feet; provided, however, that one 15,000 square foot commercial building shall be allowed for properties containing more than ten acres of buildable land. TDR may be used to exceed this allowance pursuant and subject to the limitations of Section 21-95(k) inside the Urban Services Boundary. In no instance, shall any building footprint exceed 15,000 square feet. 
1.  Historic structures may be exempt from this subsection with the approval of the planning commission provided that the structure supports the historical integrity of the village and the exemption will be consistent with or enhance the goals of developing a CVD district. The burden of proof for the determination of a historic structure shall be placed upon the applicant. The applicant may refer to the definition of a historic site as defined in section 21-22 and/or the North Kingstown, Rhode Island Statewide Historical Preservation Report W-NK-1 published by the Rhode Island Historical Preservation Commission November 1979. 
d.  The side and rear setback and the setback from residential use minimums shall apply only to lots abutting the boundary of the CVD district. 
(6)  Inclusionary zoning . All housing which is included in the CVD shall have a minimum of ten percent of all units deemed affordable as defined in section 21-22. All of the provisions of article XXII, inclusionary zoning, shall apply except for those provisions that grant additional lot density bonuses for affordable housing units. Total lot density in a CVD shall be determined by sections 21-95(5) and 21-95(10). 
(7)  Architectural and lot layout design specifications. Section 21-269, village character design guidelines, of this chapter shall apply as a minimum standard to CVD proposals as a framework for development within the CVD district. Additionally, as part of a major land development review process with the planning commission, the following shall be required. 
a.  The design guidelines provided in section 21-269(3) shall be used by the planning commission where applicable. Where design specifications approved by the planning commission for an individual CVD district differ from or are stricter than those provided in section 21-269(3) of the zoning ordinance, the specifications that are specific to a CVD proposal as approved by the planning commission shall prevail. 
b.  Where a CVD District is already established, the design specifications approved as part of the initial zoning map change shall apply to any new development or redevelopment proposal within the district. Minor changes or deviations from these specifications require approval by the planning commission. Major changes shall be subject to the specification and notice requirements of section 21-95(3)c. 
c.  The applicant shall submit supplementary illustrated design specifications with any proposal to establish a new CVD district. If approved, the additional design documents shall be incorporated into the recorded legal documents for the development. These specifications shall address the following elements specific to the neighborhood context: 
1.  Identify any building typologies within the neighborhood or the community as a whole that should inform the selection of architectural styles. 
2.  Identify the character of the arterial or collector road that provides access to the CVD district and demonstrate how setbacks, vegetation, screening, signage, new roadside features and pedestrian/bicycle amenities will be used in a manner that is consistent with or enhances that character. 
3.  Building envelopes and/or limits of disturbance shall be considered as part of the approval. 
4.  Illustrate how the placement of buildings, parking lots and entrance ways will be consistent with or enhance the goal of developing a walkable CVD district. CVD applications must show a clear, contiguous pedestrian and/or non-motorized vehicle circulation network within the development. Elements, approaches or design specifications that may be required by the planning commission to ensure a walkable/bikeable environment include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Walkways, sitting areas, bicycle racks, lighting, landscaping and canopy trees along property frontage may be required where public sidewalks are not present or in conjunction with public sidewalks to enhance pedestrian mobility. 
ii.  Raised surfaces and/or durable, decorative alternatives to conventional pavement may be required to connect sidewalks or bike lanes across driveways for automobile access points to any site. 
iii.  Where pedestrian or bike lanes intersect with designated automobile travel lanes, strategically placed decorative bollards, stones, landscaped islands or low fencing may be required to provide a greater visual divide between these areas. 
iv.  Pedestrian connections between buildings shall be provided as safe, broad and easily identifiable ways of walking through areas that may also be occupied by automobiles. These walkways shall be designed to clearly show the space is primarily dedicated to pedestrian traffic through the use of raised or alternative surfaces, signage or raised landscaped islands that may serve as a safe resting area for pedestrians between automobile travel lanes. 
v.  Building placement shall be performed in a manner that balances the circulation needs of motorists and pedestrians. Where possible, building placement shall be close enough to property lines to ensure that property setbacks are entirely dedicated to pedestrian and/or bicycle travel. 
5.  Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that building materials, roof lines, fenestration, façades, entranceways, surface treatments, signs and lighting will be used to meet the goals of the CVD ordinance through the provision of architectural elevations and illustrated examples of these individual features. 
d.  The planning commission shall have the ability to require additional design specifications, amenities and development requirements that are compatible with or enhance the surrounding neighborhood. 
e.  Coverage of any lot by nonresidential and residential buildings shall be designed so as to create a walkable village. 
f.  The overall percentage of nonresidential to residential building coverage shall be set by the planning commission at the master plan level of review and approved by the town council as a condition of the zoning map amendment to the CVD district for the parcel(s) of land. In addition to the factors set forth in section 21-95(3)g., this determination shall take into account the existing traffic patterns, existing zoning and land uses, the comprehensive plan, surrounding zoning and land uses, the fiscal impact of the CVD district on the town and the availability of services and utilities including, but not limited to, water and sewer. 
g.  For CVDs located outside of the urban services boundary the impervious coverage for the entirety of the CVD shall not exceed 60 percent, the application shall take into account the impervious coverage in the watershed, and the application shall indicate the potential impacts to the watershed. In all CVDs, stormwater treatments such as pervious pavement, bioswales and other innovative stormwater mitigation methods shall be utilized to minimize the impacts from increased impervious coverage on the site and in the watershed. Individual lots within a CVD need not comply with the impervious lot coverage requirements provided that those requirements are met in the CVD as a whole and the individual lot complies with the approved land development plan. 
(8)  Circulation. Vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic shall be interconnected within the CVD District, and shall connect to adjacent lots containing land zoned for business purposes. Connections shall be designed without the use of traffic signals to the extent practicable. 
(9)  Wastewater disposal. All parcels located in the CVD shall be tied into a sanitary sewer system if available. Where a sanitary sewer system is not available applicable nutrient loading standards shall be met as stated in subsection (10) below. Community or shared OWTS shall be utilized on site unless not appropriate due to site constraints. In the event the applicant cannot utilize a single community OWTS, the applicant shall use a combination of as few as possible smaller OWTS unless financially and technically unfeasible. In addition, a permanent maintenance agreement for wastewater disposal throughout the entire CVD shall be required as part of the final approval. The burden of proof of these requirements shall be placed upon the applicant. An OWTS leachfield(s) may be allowed in the open space area by the Planning Commission if it furthers the goals and intentions of this ordinance. 
(10)  Nutrient loading and density limitations in a CVD . 
a.  Nutrient loading and density limitations associated with a CVD shall vary depending on the location of the CVD relative to both the North Kingstown groundwater overlay district (zone 1 and zone 2) and the Rhode Island Statewide Planning Urban Services Boundary (USB) in accordance with the table below and the notes and explanatory provisions that follow. Where the provisions associated with section 21-186(d)(1) are different from those in this subsection, the provisions of this subsection shall govern. 
Inside Groundwater Zone 1 Inside Groundwater Zone 2 Outside the Groundwater Overlay District Inside the USB 3.5 bedrooms per 2 acres of buildable land. 1, 2 One housing unit allowed per 5,000 square feet of CVD area. 1 One housing unit allowed per 5,000 square feet of CVD area. Outside the USB 3.5 bedrooms per 2 acres of buildable land. 1, 2 3.5 bedrooms per 2 acres of buildable land. 1, 2 3.5 bedrooms per minimum lot size of buildable land associated with existing zoning. 3  
Table Notes: 
1.  This bedroom density shall not be interpreted as removing the need for development proposals within the groundwater overlay zones to meet the nitrate loading standard of five mg/L as set forth in chapter 8, article VI, ("Groundwater Reservoirs and Recharge Areas") of the Revised Ordinances according to the requirements of 21-186(f)(5). 
2.  Where the pre-existing zoning may require minimum lot sizes greater than two acres, that lot size shall be used to determine bedroom density for that portion of the CVD. For example, if ten buildable acres of a proposed CVD are located in district that requires five acres for a minimum lot size, that portion of the CVD will yield seven bedrooms. 
3.  Sample calculation: 
For a CVD that contains eight acres of buildable land in RR, six acres of buildable land in VR-20, and two acres of buildable land in NB: 
RR: 8 acres/80,000 sf = 4.36 
VR-20: 6 acres/20,000 = 13.01 
NB: No yield as residential not allowed by-right 
Total: 17.37 x 3.5 = 61 bedrooms (rounded) 
b.  Where a CVD proposal may include land split by the boundary of the groundwater protection overlay district and/or the USB, the areas outside and inside the overlay zone shall be treated separately with regard to the density limitations as described in section 21-95(10)a. 
c.  None of the provisions of this subsection shall be interpreted as removing any density limitations or nutrient loading limitations that may be required by RIDEM or RICRMC for specific areas. 
d.  Fractions of bedrooms shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
e.  Provisions for reporting to the town the concentration of nitrate (NO 3 ) and total nitrogen (TN) concentration in onsite wastewater treatment systems (OWTS) effluent at least once per year every year shall be a condition of all approvals in a CVD district. 
f.  Where a proposed CVD in a groundwater zone 2 overlay district would create average nitrogen concentrations within the district that exceed five mg/L, an applicant may propose to offset the difference between the five mg/L and the predicted concentration by adding dedicated off-site open space into the nutrient loading calculations in accordance with the assumptions for nitrogen loading and natural recharge found in section 21-186. The following shall apply: 
1.  Dedicated off-site open space is only eligible for offsetting nutrient loads from a CVD if the open space and the CVD are located within the same aquifer recharge area. 
2.  The dedicated off-site open space can only come from a groundwater overlay zone 1 district. 
3.  Off-site nitrogen load offsets may only be used for CVDs located in the state designated urban services boundary. 
4.  The open space shall be land that is not restricted or protected from development through any easements or restrictions such as but not limited to: open space or conservation easements. 
5.  The open space land shall be considered buildable as defined in section 21-22 and not encumbered by significant physical or environmental constraints. 
6.  The original nutrient loading analysis in the proposed CVD parcels may not show an average concentration of nitrogen that exceeds seven and a half mg/L. The nutrient loading analysis including the open space offset shall not exceed five mg/L. 
(11)  Transfer or purchase of development rights (TDR). Except as set forth in section (5)c., the transfer or purchase of development rights shall be required for any individual commercial building that will exceed a 10,000 square foot ground floor area, but in no circumstances shall the footprint for any individual commercial building exceed 15,000 square feet. In no instance, shall any building footprint exceed 15,000 square feet except historic structures may be exempt from this subsection with the approval of the planning commission provided that it supports the historical integrity of the village and will be consistent with or enhance the goals of developing a CVD district. The burden of proof for the determination of a historic structure shall be placed upon the applicant. The applicant may refer to the definition of historic site and/or the North Kingstown, Rhode Island Statewide Historical Preservation Report W-NK-1 published by the Rhode Island Historical Preservation Commission November 1979. The following shall also apply: 
a.  The transfer or purchase of development rights for use within a CVD district shall be allowed only from a sending area located within North Kingstown. 
b.  The transfer or purchase of development rights for use within a CVD district shall allow nonresidential structures to expand from a maximum of 10,000 square feet ground floor area to 15,000 square feet ground floor area. This shall be the only application of TDR available to nonresidential uses in a CVD district and no other zoning standards (e.g., maximum height, allowable use, minimum open space, etc.) may be exceeded through TDR. 
c.  Any CVD district utilizing the transfer or purchase of development rights must be located within the state designated urban services boundary and meet all applicable nitrogen loading standards of this ordinance. 
(12)  Fiscal impact. The applicant shall submit a fiscal impact analysis demonstrating the potential costs to be incurred by the town for the provision of municipal services to the CVD district and the estimated municipal tax revenue to be generated by the CVD district. 
(13)  Traffic impact. An applicant for any zoning map change shall submit a traffic analysis that includes impacts to intersections within one-half mile of the CVD district. Where the proposed CVD district would reduce the level of service (LOS), as defined by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), either by one level or to a level at or below "D", the applicant shall present an alternatives analysis to illustrate how different traffic control measures within the traffic study area could be used to mitigate impacts and restore LOS to the existing level or to a level "D" or above, as applicable. Use of traffic signals for mitigation is discouraged. Where mitigation measures are not practicable, the planning commission shall consider the impacts in its recommendation for a zoning map change and for approval of the master plan. The duration of low service levels, the number of intersection approaches negatively affected, and the recurrence interval of unacceptable levels shall be considered by the planning commission in its recommendation. 
(14)  Stormwater management. All applications shall be required to meet RIDEM's stormwater standards. 
(15)  Property ownership. Parcels in separate ownership may be made part of the same CVD project provided that the owners of all parcels document their commitment to compliance with the land development plan to the satisfaction of the town including, but not limited to, through appropriate deed restrictions as part of the application and approval process. 
(16)  Dedicated open space. Where a CVD district of ten acres or more is proposed outside of the Rhode Island Statewide Planning Urban Services Boundary, a minimum of 25 percent of the total land area shall be dedicated as open space/recreation area and shall be designed as a system of available spaces throughout the development. Where a CVD is proposed within the urban services boundary, civic spaces, pocket parks or natural areas shall be required and integrated into the CVD in a manner that provides year round accessible open areas, gathering places and/or recreational opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 3, 2-27-2012; Ord. No. 12-13, § 3, 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 21-96. - Wickford Junction district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The Wickford Junction (WJ) district is established as a mixed use, transit-oriented, economic development center. Because of the available transit infrastructure within and around the district, development shall be designed to provide a mix of commercial and residential uses at higher densities than what is permitted in most of the other zoning districts in the town. Density bonuses shall be made available through transfer of development rights and/or nutrient loading offsets to encourage environmentally friendly and bicycle and pedestrian-oriented site design practices and the incorporation of diverse housing types into mixed use environments. Better site design practices shall be encouraged in the district to facilitate the development of pedestrian friendly environments, to leverage environmental improvements, to increase property values, to promote commercial development, and to improve the general aesthetic appeal of the area. 
(b)  General requirements. 
(1)  Wastewater disposal. Wastewater disposal shall be centralized to the maximum extent practicable. All parcels located in the Wickford Junction shall be tied into a centralized sewer system if there is ready access to the collection system and the disposal system capacity can accommodate the calculated flow. Where proposed development cannot access a centralized sewer system, a community or shared OWTS shall be utilized on site unless not appropriate due to existing conditions or site constraints. In the event the applicant cannot utilize a single community OWTS, the applicant shall use a combination of as few as possible smaller OWTS unless financially and technically unfeasible. In addition, a permanent maintenance agreement for wastewater disposal throughout the entire Wickford Junction property shall be required as part of the final approval. The burden of proof of these requirements shall be placed upon the applicant. An OWTS leachfield(s) may be allowed in any dedicated open space area by the planning commission if it furthers the goals and intentions of this ordinance. 
(2)  Nutrient loading limitations. 
a.  Development proposals in the Wickford Junction district that lie within the Groundwater Recharge and Wellhead Protection overlay district shall not discharge nitrogen to groundwater at an average site-wide concentration beyond five mg/L except as may be provided for below. Nitrogen loading calculations shall incorporate those standards listed in subsection 21-186(g)(5) of the zoning ordinance. The concentration of nitrogen in wastewater effluent shall be determined by the wastewater disposal approach in accordance with subsection 21-186(g)(5) regardless of the proposed individual use or mix of uses. 
b.  Where a proposed Wickford Junction district development in a Groundwater Zone 2 overlay district would create average site-wide nitrogen concentrations that exceed five mg/L, an applicant may propose to mitigate the load that goes beyond the five mg/L threshold by adding dedicated open space to the nutrient loading calculations. Recharge from the dedicated open space would be added to the nutrient loading calculations in accordance with the assumptions for nitrogen loading and natural recharge found in section 21-186 and must provide enough dilution to return the nitrogen loading to a maximum of five mg/L. In order for any dedicated open space to be used as an offset for nitrogen loading associated with a particular development proposal, the following conditions shall be met: 
1.  Dedicated off-site open space may only be used to offset nutrient loads in the Wickford Junction district if the open space and the development proposal are located within the same aquifer recharge area. 
2.  The dedicated off-site open space used to offset the nutrient loading from the proposed development must be located in a Zone 1 groundwater protection area. 
3.  The open space shall be land that is not already or otherwise restricted or protected from development through any easements or restrictions including, but not limited to, open space or conservation easements. 
4.  The open space land shall not be considered unbuildable land as defined in section 21-22 and shall not be encumbered by significant physical or environmental constraints. 
5.  The original nutrient loading analysis for the proposed development site may not show a site-wide average concentration of nitrogen that exceeds 7.5 mg/L. 
Land used and protected as part of a transfer of development rights transaction for the proposed development may also be used to offset nitrogen loading provided it meets all of the other criteria of subsection 21-96(b)(2). The nutrient loading analysis including the open space offset shall not exceed five mg/L. 
(3)  Stormwater management. All applications shall be required to meet RIDEM's stormwater standards. 
(4)  Non-conformity. Pre-existing non-conforming land or structures shall be governed by those provisions listed in article XII of the zoning ordinance. In addition to those requirements, the following shall apply: 
a.  The relocation or reconstruction of any building that may be allowed pursuant to article XII shall require compliance with all Post Road district/Wickford Junction district design guidelines listed in the subdivision and land development regulations; 
b.  Where a building is non-conforming by dimension, and any addition, enlargement, expansion or change of use is proposed, such activity shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 21-309 and 21-311 where the proposed development activity will result in closer adherence to the purposes and standards associated with the Wickford Junction district and the requirements of the Wickford Junction district design guidelines. In these instances, the development activity shall be reviewed as part of a development plan review application to the planning commission. The planning commission may also review these activities as land development projects in accordance with the review thresholds in section 21-133. 
(5)  Commercial use. The intensity of commercial uses allowed in the Wickford Junction district is subject to the basic dimensional requirements of each site and any other site constraints that may be present. Increases in the intensity of commercial uses beyond what is permitted by right may be allowed by the planning commission through a transfer of development rights as described in article XXIII of this ordinance. Increases in commercial use intensity beyond what is allowed by right shall occur as the result of increases in the allowable height of buildings pursuant to article IV, table 2B, standard dimensional regulations for business districts, note 6. Increases in the intensity of uses shall require compliance with all other applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance including, but not limited to, allowable uses, parking requirements, design standards, and signage. 
(6)  Buffers. Landscaping shall be required between non-residential uses or mixed use developments and abutting residential districts. Buffer zones shall occupy the entire specified setback area in table 2B of article IV and shall substantially screen the site from view in accordance with the standards listed in section 21-277 of the zoning ordinance. Fences may be used as part of screening but shall not be constructed from materials incongruent with the design goals of the Wickford Junction district as determined by the planning commission. These requirements shall not apply to non-residential or mixed use development that are interior to any development in the district or that are designed to integrate existing or future neighboring residences into the site through the use of walkways, bicycle paths or other pedestrian amenities. 
(7)  Design guidelines. All proposed development in the Wickford Junction district shall comply with the Post Road/Wickford Junction district design guidelines and standards listed in the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(c)  Specific requirements. 
(1)  Residential use. 
a.  Residential units are prohibited in ground floor operations for buildings within 200 feet of Ten Rod Road in the Wickford Junction district that lie east of Quaker Lane and northeast of Ten Rod Road. 
b.  One unit of residential use shall be allowed for each two acres of buildable land by right. 
c.  For projects that apply transfer of development rights as described in article XXIII of this ordinance, the planning commission may increase the allowable residential density to 30 units per buildable acre provided all applicable performance standards within this ordinance are met. 
d.  The average bedroom count per unit for any residential development in the Wickford Junction district shall not exceed 1.5 bedrooms per unit. 
e.  All housing which is included in the Wickford Junction district shall have a minimum of 15 percent of all units deemed affordable as defined in section 21-22 and shall be maintained as such in accordance with section 21-602, Assurance of affordability. Options for off-site location, fee-in-lieu, and land conveyance as provided for in section 21-601, Basic inclusionary unit requirement, may be used to satisfy this requirement. 
f.  Affordable units that will exceed 20 percent of the total housing units in a development shall be required to utilize TDRs for those additional affordable units. 
(2)  Multi-modal circulation. Development proposals shall demonstrate circulation oriented design as follows: 
a.  Development proposals must have a clear, contiguous pedestrian and non-motorized vehicle circulation network within the development and leading to and from the site. 
b.  Sites directly adjacent to public transit stations shall clearly demonstrate that the pedestrian and non-motorized network connects to the public transit station. 
c.  Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided along the front or side edge of each primary structure or another reasonable location on site. These may include bicycle racks or dedicated bicycle parking areas that have racks or other structures designed for securing bicycles. One bicycle rack shall be provided at a minimum for each primary structure. 
d.  Travel lanes and driveways developed interior to the site shall have a minimum of four feet in width and indicated with striping dedicated bicycle lane(s) distinct from automobile travel lanes. This lane shall provide access to and from the site. The planning commission or the director may allow the use of sharrows at their discretion where traffic control measures such as speed bumps are incorporated into the travel lane. 
e.  Pedestrian connections between buildings, landscaped islands, park areas, or other pedestrian resting areas shall be provided as safe, broad and easily identifiable ways of walking through areas that may also be occupied by automobiles. These walkways shall be designed to clearly show the space is primarily dedicated to pedestrian traffic through the use of raised or alternative surfaces, signage or raised landscaped islands that may serve as a safe resting area for pedestrians between automobile travel lanes. 
(Ord. No. 13-19, § 2, 12-9-2013) 
Secs. 21-97-21-99. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-100. - Quonset Business Park district. 
(a)  Findings. The town herein makes the following findings relative to the Quonset Business Park (QBP): 
(1)  The QBP is established through unique state legislation for the primary purpose of large-scale economic development. 
(2)  The Quonset Development Corporation (QDC), as steward of the QBP, has developed a vision to achieve sustainable economic development through its master land use and development plan (master plan). 
(3)  The QDC has developed the Quonset Business Park Development Package to establish review processes and standards for development proposals. These processes and standards are consistent with the vision laid out in the master plan. 
(4)  The success of the QBP is an integral part of the town's overall fiscal and economic viability as a provider of tax revenue and jobs. 
(5)  The town comprehensive plan provides clear language requiring careful consideration of how these lands are developed and the necessity of first avoiding, then minimizing, then mitigating impacts to the environment, the town's infrastructure, and town residents. 
(6)  All development proposals shall be consistent with the provisions of the town comprehensive plan, the performance standards listed below, and the QDC development package as amended. 
(7)  The town and QDC shall execute and maintain a memorandum of agreement that ensures amendments to QDC regulatory standards can be reviewed and approved by the town with adequate due process before they are adopted by the QDC board of directors. The town may terminate this memorandum of agreement at any time and for any reason (or no reason at all) by providing 90 days advanced written notice to QDC, in which event the memorandum of agreement shall terminate and the town may amend the zoning ordinance as appropriate. 
(8)  The town is represented at QDC by two appointees to the board of directors, and shall be represented by two members of the five-member technical review committee (TRC). 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The QBP district is established as a mixed use center for economic activity, which may be supported by residential use and recreational opportunities. Due to the presence of significant infrastructure including access highways, a general aviation and military airport, a wastewater treatment facility, freight rail, a working waterfront, and public water supply, the QBP district is uniquely suited to accommodate a high density mix of uses. These uses will potentially include standard commercial (retail/office), light and heavy industry, open space and recreation, water-dependent use, freight transport, energy generation, and transit-oriented development. It is the intent of this district to facilitate the development of these uses through a unique relationship between the town and QDC. The QBP is a performance-based development district that will focus on facilitating economic development that recognizes, is protective of, and is consistent with the overall community planning objectives of the town. 
(c)  Relationship to the local zoning standards and administration. Development proposals in the QBP shall be reviewed under the procedures and standards located in the Quonset Business Park Development Package (September 2005, amended in September 2008, and as subsequently amended consistent with the memorandum of agreement dated December 15, 2010, and as subsequently amended). Development proposals within the QBP shall comply with the performance standards contained within subsection 21-100)(f) of this zoning ordinance. Development proposals within the QBP are not subject to other design standards, processes, or other limitations set by this chapter including the land use table, dimensional regulations, parking requirements, inclusionary zoning, signs, development plan review, and any other provisions that may conflict with those processes and standards provided in the Quonset Business Park Development Package. 
(d)  Relationship to comprehensive plan standards. All development proposals shall be consistent with the goals, objectives and actions within the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  District boundary. The boundary of the QBP district is depicted on the official map entitled "Quonset Zoning District Official Map" located on file with the town clerk, dated (the day of adoption) and signed by the president of town council. Where any conflicts in zoning district designation may exist between the official map and descriptions provided as part of section 21-363, the designation provided by the Quonset zoning district map shall prevail. Any amendments to this map shall follow the procedures contained in section 21-19 of this chapter. 
(f)  Performance standards. Construction activities and resulting land uses in the QBP district shall conform to the following performance standards: 
(1)  Residential districts and neighborhoods that abut the QBP shall be protected from the impacts of uses within the QBP through the careful location, design and buffering of non-residential uses on QBP lands. 
(2)  Buffers created for the protection of residential districts and neighborhoods shall be designed to maximize visual screening and minimize impacts from noise, glare, pollution, odor and heat transfer through the use of best buffering and mitigation practices which may include berms, structural barriers and non-invasive resilient plant species. 
(3)  Selection of allowed uses shall consider potential impacts from noise, heat, glare, air quality, traffic or other standards enumerated in the development regulations on residential areas and shall be performed in a manner that precludes the possibility of any use causing a nuisance to residential areas under regular operations. 
(4)  Parking areas shall be designed to avoid more parking spaces than is reasonably required by the use. 
(5)  Parking areas shall incorporate landscaping in a manner that improves visual appeal by breaking up long stretches of pavement, utilizing landscaping to treat stormwater where appropriate, and providing shade to reduce the heat island effect. 
(6)  Development proposals shall take into account the availability of water supply, the ability to adequately treat and dispose of wastewater, and the ability to provide adequate circulation for daily traffic demands. 
(7)  Access to the bay shall be provided in a manner consistent with the QDC public access plan approved by CRMC. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 2, 1-10-2011) 
Secs. 21-101-21-109. - Reserved. 
INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 21-110. - General requirements; permitted and prohibited uses. 
(a)  Property and buildings to be used for industrial purposes shall be so designed and laid out as to minimize disturbance to adjacent property by such features as buffer fences, planting, suitably located points of traffic ingress and egress, and areas for loading and parking. It is the intent of this section to also provide the necessary protection for industry from other neighboring uses and to provide assurances of continued legal operation to industrial uses. The primary vehicle used to achieve these goals will be the establishment and use of performance standards. 
(b)  All uses permitted in industrial zones shall conform with performance standards in this section. These shall include uses involving the processing, assembly and fabrication of materials; accessory uses; wholesaling and warehousing; public utilities; research facilities; corporate offices; shipping; and the extraction of natural resources. 
(c)  A solid waste management facility shall be a prohibited use in an industrial zone. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-5-1; Ord. No. 85-5, § 2, 2-11-1985; Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-111. - Light industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the light industrial district is to provide opportunities for industrial uses which are of a less intensive nature than those allowed in the general industrial district. It is also intended to provide for industrial areas in groundwater recharge overlay or wellhead protection overlay districts or areas where sanitary sewers are not available. These types of areas are intended to serve as a transition from more intensive to less intensive uses. 
(b)  Performance standards. In the light industrial zone, the standards in this subsection will be applied during the review of land uses proposed for this zone. Such standards are considered to be minimum and in addition to any other performance standards contained within this chapter. Such standards are established to ensure the protection of surrounding land uses and implementation of the comprehensive plan and this chapter. The performance standards are as follows: 
(1)  Noise. Noise shall be measured from the nearest property line and shall not exceed, other than background noises produced by nonindustrial sources such as vehicular traffic, the following levels: 
a.  At all times ..... 65 dBA 
b.  When abutting a residential district: 
1.  8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. ..... 60 dBA 
2.  10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. ..... 50 dBA 
(2)  Vibration. Vibration shall be measured from the nearest property line and shall not be discernible to the human sense of feeling other than background vibration produced by nonindustrial sources such as vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Odor. Light industrial uses shall not emit noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases in any quantity. 
(4)  Fire and explosives. All uses and storage facilities shall be approved by the town fire marshal with regard to fire and explosive hazards. 
(5)  Heat or glare. Any heat or glare produced by any operation or use shall not be discernible from any property line. Exterior lighting shall reflect away from all abutting properties and streets. 
(6)  Waste or effluent. There shall be no discharge of any kind into the ground other than domestic sewage. 
(7)  Conduct of activities. All land use activities in a light industrial zone shall be conducted indoors, except for outside storage permitted by this chapter. 
(8)  Buffers. Buffer requirements are set out in subsection 21-112(b). 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Sec. 21-112. - General industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the general industrial district is to provide opportunities for a wide range of industrial activities. The intent is to concentrate industrial activities in areas where minimal infringement upon the character of established residential areas will result and where sanitary sewers and adequate transportation facilities are available or can be made available. 
(b)  General requirements. General requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Fences; screens. Where a lot in an industrial district adjoins a residential district or faces a residential district and wherever an industrial building or use, including required off-street parking spaces, is within 200 feet of the residential district, there shall be placed and maintained parallel to the common district boundary a wall or fence of solid appearance or a plant screen of not less than six feet in height which shall extend along and for the full length of the common zone boundary. In any required front or principal corner side yard or within 25 feet of the intersection of a driveway centerline and a street, the landscaping provisions of this chapter shall be met. 
(2)  Buffer requirements at Quonset Point. Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) of this section, a vegetated buffer of no less than 25 feet in width shall be required along any lot line wherein an industrial district in the Quonset Point/Davisville Industrial Park adjoins a residential district. Such vegetation shall be no less than six feet in height and shall consist of species designed to provide protection from the visual and noise impact of industrial use. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 01-1, § 7, 2-12-2001) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Sec. 21-113. - Waterfront industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the waterfront industrial zoning district is to provide opportunity for marine-related and marine-dependent industries which require deepwater facilities. 
(b)  Setback from coastline. No building or structure shall be closer than 200 feet to the coast of the shore except for piers, docks, floats and marine railways and other facilities normally requiring a location on or adjacent to the shore. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Secs. 21-114-21-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LAND USE TABLE[4] 
    Any use not expressly permitted by this chapter shall be deemed to be prohibited. However, any list of prohibited uses contained in any section of this chapter shall be deemed to be illustrative only, not exhaustive. 
List of districts for use table: 
Residential: 
Rural (RR/R-80) 
Pojac Point (PP) 
Neighborhood (NR/R-40) 
Village (VR/R-20) 
Multifamily (MF) 
Planned village (PV) 
Very low density residential (VLDR-200) 
Low density residential (LDR-120) 
Business: 
Neighborhood (NB) 
Waterfront (WB) 
General (GB) 
Heavy (HB) 
Planned (PB) 
Institutional/office (IO) 
Wickford Village Center (WVC) 
Post Road district (PR) 
Wickford Junction (WJ) 
Industrial: 
Light industrial (LI) 
General industrial (GI) 
Waterfront industrial (WI) 
Other: 
Open space (OS) 
Public (P) 
Abbreviations: 
Y = Yes, use is permitted 
N = No, use is prohibited 
S = Special use permit is required for use 
A = Use is an accessory use 
Uses RR/R80 PP NR/R40 VR/R20 MF PV VLDR LDR NB WB GB HB PB IO WVC PR WJ GI LI WI OS PL Dev. Standards Agricultural 1. Agricultural and crop farming Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y N Y N Y Y N Y Y 2. Raising of livestock S N S S N N S S N N N N N N N N N N N N S S 2a. Raising of Poultry S/Y S/Y S/Y S/Y N N S/Y S/Y N N N N N N S S N N N N Y Y 3. Commercial greenhouse or nursery(8) S/Y N S/Y S/Y N N S/Y S/Y Y S Y Y Y S Y(2) S/A S/A N N N S Y 4. Noncommercial greenhouse A A A A A A Y Y A A A A A N A A A N N N A A 5a. The sale of farm, garden and/or nursery products grown on site A N A A A A Y Y A A A A A A A A A A A N A A 5b. The outdoor sale of farm, garden and/or nursery products not grown on site N N N N N Y(9) N N Y(9) N Y(9) N Y(9) N N Y(9) A N N N N Y(9) 6. The sale of animals raised on the premises A N N N N N A A N N N N N N N N N N N N N A 7. Wildlife management Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y S Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 8. Forest management Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y S Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 9. Aquaculture N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N S N N Y Y Y S S 10. Medical Marijuana (a) Nonresidential cooperative cultivation N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S S N N N Y (b) Residential cooperative cultivation (12) A A A A A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) A A N N N N N N A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) N N N N N (c) Medical marijuana cultivation center i. Microlicense (0-2,500 sq. ft.) N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S S N N N Y ii. Class A (0-5,000 sq. ft.) N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S S N N N Y iii. Class B (5,001-10,000 sq. ft.) N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N iv. Class C (10,001-15,000 sq. ft.) N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N v. Class D (15,001-20,000 sq. ft.) N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N vi. Over 20,000 sq. ft. N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N (d) Patient cultivation A A A A A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) A A N N N N N N A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) N N N N N (e) Caregiver cultivation (1 patient) (14) A A A A A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) A A N N N N N N A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) Y Y N N N Y 
(14) (f) Caregiver cultivation (2 to 5 patients) (14) A A A A A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) A A N N N N N N A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) A/N 
(13) Y Y N N N Y 
(14) Residential 1. Single-family dwelling Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y N N N N N N Y Y(6) Y(7) N N N N N 2. Two-family dwelling* N N S S Y Y N N N N N N N N S Y(6) Y(7) N N N N N 3. Multifamily dwelling* (1) N N N N Y/S Y/S N N N N N N Y/S N S Y(6) Y(7) N N N N N 4. Community dwelling Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N Y N N N N N N N 5. Accessory family dwelling unit S S S S N S S S S S N N N N S N N N N N S N Y 6. One accessory dwelling unit S S S S N S S S S S S N S N S N N N N N S A Y 7. Residential associated with mixed use N N N N N N N N S S S N S N S Y Y N N N N N Y 8. Mobile home S N N N N N S S N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y 9. Mobile home park N N N S N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y 10. Nursing home or convalescent home S N S S S N N N N N N N N N N S S N N N N N Y 11. Not more than 2 rooms rented or table/board furnished incidental to a single-family res. use A N A A N A A A N N N N N N Y N N N N N N N 12. Home occupation: Y a. Within a dwelling A A A A A A A A N N N N N N A Y Y N N N N N b. Within an accessory structure A N A A N A A A N N N N N N A N N N N N N N Public and Semipublic 1. Public or private park Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y A Y Y Y A A A Y Y 2. Conservation or recreation Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y A Y Y Y A A A Y Y 3. Museum S N S S S S N N Y Y Y N Y Y Y(2) Y Y N N N N Y 4. Libraries, art galleries, art centers (incl. assoc. educational and instructional activities): a. Located within a building having a gross floor area not exceeding 3,500 square feet S N S S N S N N Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y N N N N Y b. Located within any permissible structure N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N Y Y Y(2) Y Y N N N N Y 5. Religious institutions (incl. assoc. resid. structures and assoc. bldgs. for religious personnel, but not including elementary or secondary school buildings) S N S S S N N N Y N Y N Y N Y Y Y N N N N N Y 6. Noncommercial clubs or fraternities S N S S S N N N Y N Y N Y N Y(2) Y Y N N N N N Y 7. Hospital S N N N N N N N N N Y N Y N N S S N N N N N Y 8. Medical clinic S N S N N N N N Y N Y N Y Y S(2) Y Y N N N N N Y 9. Municipal facilities Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y(2) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 10. Post office N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y(2) Y Y N N N N Y 11. Cemetery S S S S S S S S N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Utilities 1. Communications services and broadcasting offices N N N N N N N N Y N Y Y Y Y Y(2) Y Y Y Y N N N 2. Communications tower S S S S S S S S S S Y Y Y A N S S Y Y N N S Y 3. Electric substation S S S S S S S S S S S S S S N S S S S S N S 4. Electric and steam power generation N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N S N N 5. Electric transmission towers S N S N N N S S N N N S N S N N N S S S S S 6. Public utilities not otherwise listed N N N N N N S S S S S S S S S(2) S S S S S N S 7. Building mounted wind energy systems N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 8. Small wind energy systems N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 9. Medium wind energy systems N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 10. Large wind energy systems N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 11. Meteorological towers N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 12. Roof mounted solar energy systems (11) A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A Y 13. Freestanding accessory solar energy systems (11) A A A A A A A A S S S S S S S S S Y Y Y N S Y 14. Freestanding solar energy systems (11) N N N N N N N N S S S S S S N N N Y Y Y N S Y Educational 1. Family day care A A A A A A Y Y N N Y N Y N Y(2) Y Y N N N N N Y 2. Day care center S N S S A S S N Y N Y N Y Y Y(2) Y Y A A N N Y Y 3. Nursery school S N S S A S N N Y N Y N Y N Y(2) Y Y N N N N Y Y 4. Elementary and secondary schools S N S S N S N N N N N N N N N S S N N N N Y 5. Trade or vocational school N N N N N N N N N N S Y S Y N S S Y S N N Y Y 6. Colleges, universities, community colleges S N N N N N N N N N S N S S N S S N N N N N Y 7. School conducted as a private gainful business entirely within a building (i.e., music, dance) N N N N N N N N Y N Y N Y N Y(2) Y Y N N N N N 8. Educational and training center N N N N N N N N S A Y Y Y Y S(2) Y Y Y Y Y N Y Retail Business 1. Sales of food (excluding fish and shellfish), drugs, clothing, jewelry, stationery, or similar personal or specialty items N N N N N N N N Y A Y N Y N Y(2) Y Y N N N N N 2. Sales or rental of general merchandise, furniture, household goods, automotive accessories, or other similar retail products Y Y Y Y a. Without outside display/storage N N N N N N N N Y N Y S Y N Y(2) Y N N N N N N N b. With small scale outside display N N N N N N N N N N S(9) S(9) N N S(9) S(9) S(9) N N N N N Y c. With large scale outside storage/display N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y/S 
(9) S(9) N N N N N Y 3. Sale of fish and shellfish N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N Y N Y(2) Y Y N N A N N 4. Shop for custom work, shop for making or restoring articles or products to be sold at retail: a. With outside storage N N N N N N N N N S N Y Y N N N N N N N N N b. Without outside storage N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y N Y(2) Y Y N N N N N 5. Open air markets, such as craft markets, flea markets, or produce markets N N N N N N N N S N S S S N S(2) S S N N N N N 6. Sale of motor vehicles, trailers, building supplies or machinery: a. With repair and/or outside storage N N N N N N N N N N S Y S N N N N N N N N N b. Without repair and/or outside storage N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N N Y/S S N N N N N Y 7. Sales of boats and trailers: a. With repair and outside storage N N N N N N N N N Y S Y S N N S N N N N N N b. Without repair and outside storage N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N(3) S S N N N N N 8. Sales or display areas within wholesale/manufacturing establishments limited to 1,000 s.f. of net floor area N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N A A A N N 9. Farm markets N N N N N N N N S N S S S N S(2) S S N N N Y Y Y 10. Home improvement stores N N N N N N N N Y N Y N Y N Y(2) Y Y N N N N N N a. Without outside sales, display or storage N N N N N N N N Y N Y N Y N Y Y N N N N N N N b. With outside sales, display and/or storage N N N N N N N N N N Y(9) N Y(9) N N Y/S 
(9) S(9) N N N N N Y 11. Compassion center N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 12. Marijuana store (retail) N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Personal Convenience Services Y(2) N N N N N 1. Services such as barbershop, hairdresser, tailor shop, dressmaker, laundry and dry cleaning services, home appliance repair, shoe repair N N N N N N N N Y N Y N Y A Y(2) Y Y N N N N N Professional and Business Services 1. Professional offices N N N N N N N N Y N Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N 2. Mortuary or funeral homes N N N N N N N N S N Y Y Y N S(2) Y Y N N N N N 3. Bank or credit union N N N N N N N N Y N Y N Y A Y(2) Y Y N N N N N General Services Business 1. Animal hospital S N N N N N N N S(10) N Y Y Y N N Y Y N N N N N 2. Animal board kennel S N N N N N S S N N Y N N N N S S N N N N N 3. Clinical veterinary services N N N N N N N N Y(10) N Y Y Y N N Y Y N N N N N 4. Heavy equipment and machinery repair N N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N Y Y Y N N 5. Dry cleaning plants N N N N N N N N N N N S N N N N N Y S N N N 6. Rental of motor vehicles, tools and machinery N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N N Y Y N N N N N 7. Material equipment storage and lay down yard N N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N Y Y Y N N 8. Drive-in windows (accessory): a. Food services N N N N N N N N N N S S S N N S S N N N N N Y b. All other services N N N N N N N N A N S S S N N S S N N N N N Y 9. Ministorage facilities N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N N N N S S N N N 10. Automobile service station N N N N N N N N S N Y Y Y N S(2) S N N N N N N 11. Automobile services N N N N N N N N N N S S S N N S S N N N N N Restaurant and Entertainment 1. Carryout food services N N N N N N N N Y S Y Y Y N Y(2, 
4) Y Y N N N N N 2. Fast-food restaurant: a. Greater than 1,500 square feet N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N N S Y N N N N N b. Less than or equal to 1,500 square feet N N N N N N N N Y N Y Y Y N N S Y N N N N N 3. Restaurant N N N N N N N N Y S Y N Y A Y(2) Y Y A A N N A 4. Motion picture theater, maximum 500 seats N N N N N N N N S N Y N Y N N Y Y N N N N N 5. Theater, auditorium, lecture hall or conference center N N N N N N N N Y N Y N Y N S(2) Y Y N N N N N Recreation 1. Indoor commercial recreation N N N N N N N N Y N Y Y Y S Y(2) Y Y N S N N Y 2. Outdoor commercial recreation S N N N N N S S S Y Y N Y N N Y Y N S N N Y 3. Commercial establishments whose principal purpose is the furnishing for use and for a profit coin-operated amusement devices N N N N N N N N N N S S S N N S S N N N N N Y 4. Golf courses with associated facilities S N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y 5. Health and fitness facility N N N N N N N N S S S S S S S(2) Y Y S S S N Y Tourism 1. Travel trailer park S N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y 2. Camping area S N N N N N S S N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y 3. Hotel; motel; inn, within a building previously occupied as a residence N N N N N N N N Y S Y Y Y S S(2) Y Y S S N N N Y 4. Bed and breakfast S N S S N S S S S N N N N N S(2) S Y N N N N N Y Marine Business 1. Marine and oceanographic research labs N N N N N N N N N Y N N N S N S S Y Y S N Y 2. Marinas N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N S(2) N N N N N N Y 3. Marine-oriented clubs, i.e., boating, swimming S N S S N S N N N Y N N N N S(2) N N N N N N Y 4. Boat building or boat restoration N N N N N N N N N S N N N N N N N Y Y Y N N 5. On-land boat storage during nonboating season N N N N N N N N N Y S Y N N N N N Y Y Y N Y 6. Agency for rental of boat and marine equip. N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N N S(2) S S N N N N Y Marine Industrial 1. Commercial fishing docks and facilities N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N N N Y N Y N Y 2. Commercial fish processing N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y N Y N N 3. Wholesale fish and shellfish establishment N N N N N N N N N Y N Y N N N N N Y N Y N N 4. Waterfront terminal operations N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y N N 5. Vessel towing services N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N N N N N Y N N 6. Marine salvage N N N N N N N N N S N S N N N N N Y N Y N N Industrial 1. Earth removal N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S S N N N Y 2. Commercial salvage yard N N N N N N N N N N N S N N N N N Y N N N N 3. Processing of sand and gravel N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S S N N N Y 4. Recycling facilities N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N N N N Y 5. Manufacturing, fabrication or processing N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N N 6. Assembly or packaging N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N N 7. Printing and publishing plant N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y N N N 8. Distribution center, parcel delivery center, delivery warehouse N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N N 9. Millwork N N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N Y Y N N N 10. Research and development facilities N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N S S Y Y S N N 11. Wholesaling and warehousing N N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N Y Y Y N N 12. Custom work or restoration: a. With outside operations and storage N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S S S N N b. Without outside operations and storage N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y N N 13. Business incubator, no one use to exceed 2,500 square feet in size N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y N Y Y Y Y N N N Transportation 1. Bus terminal N N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N Y Y Y Y N N N 2. Freight terminal N N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N Y N Y N N 3. Helistop N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N N N S N S N N 4. Passenger terminal N N N N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N N N N  
(1)  Except as permitted under article 9. 
(2)  Subject to limitations on the size of uses and structures as stated in section 21-93, Wickford Village district, general provisions, paragraph (2). 
(3)  Sales or rental of kayaks, canoes, or other nonmotorized small craft shall be allowed with a special use permit. 
(4)  Any carry-out window shall be located in such a manner that it is accessible only from the property upon which the business is located. No interference with the public right-of-way shall be allowed. 
(5)  Operation of a boat brokerage shall be a permitted use. 
(6)  Subject to restrictions listed in subsection 21-94.B. 
(7)  Minimum lot size shall be 80,000 square feet. 
(8)  A special use permit is required to locate a commercial greenhouse or nursery on a residentially zoned parcel that is less than ten acres. 
(9)  Development plan review is required before the planning commission unless waived by the administrative officer for good cause shown. 
(10)  Hours of operation will take into consideration compatibility of different uses in the area. Hours will not exceed Monday-Friday 8:00 a.m.-8:00 p.m., Saturday 9:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. Waste/grass areas will be identified in transit areas for walking to and from the facility. The premises will be cleaned daily. 
(11)  Subject to section 21-323. 
(12)  One or more member(s) of a residential cooperative must occupy the property in all residential zoning districts and in WVC, PR, and WJ. If members do not occupy property, use is not allowed. 
(13)  Allowed as accessory in the residential component of the property only. Use prohibited in any non-residential portion of the property. 
(14)  The caregiver must occupy the property in residential or mixed use zones. The use must meet the development standards for a home occupation (section 21-320). 
* Notwithstanding the provisions of article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 96-20, § 2, 11-18-1996; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 98-13, § 2, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 00-9, § 3, 3-13-2000; Ord. No. 01-1, § 9, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-14, § 1, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 02-7, § 3, 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-20, § 3, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-8, §§ 2, 3, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 04-19, § 2, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 05-16, § 1, 11-14-2005; Ord. No. 07-02, § 8, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 07-23, § 4, 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-18, § 3, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-19, § 2, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 10-04, § 3, 2-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 3-5-2010; Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 10-16, § 2, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 11-18, § 3, 6-27-2011; Ord. No. 11-22, § 2, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 4-29-2013; Ord. No. 13-19, § 3, 12-9-2013; Ord. No. 13-20, § 1, 12-19-13; Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 3-30-2015; Ord. No. 17-07, § 2, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 6-12-2017; Ord. No. 17-15, § 1, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 18-02, § 2, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 18-11, § 2, 5-7-2018) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- See editor's note to art. II of this chapter. 

ARTICLE IV. - DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS[5] 
TABLE 2A. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Dimensional Requirements RR/ 
R80(3) PP(3) NR/ 
R40(3) VR/ 
R20(3) MF(1),(3) PV(2),(3) VLDR/ 
200(3) LDR/ 
120(3) Minimum Dimensions Lot area (3):  One-family dwelling 80,000 sf 5 acres 40,000 sf 20,000 sf 200,000 sf 120,000 sf  Two-family dwelling - - - 40,000 sf - - Lot depth:  One-family dwelling 250' 300' 200' 140' 300' 250'  Two-family dwelling - - - 160' - -  Other permitted and special use permit uses (3) 300' 300' 300' 160' 300' 300' Lot frontage:  One-family dwelling 200' 200' 180' 140' 300' 250'  Two-family dwelling - - - 165'(4) - - Lot width:  One-family dwelling 200' 200' 180' 140' 300' 250'  Two-family dwelling - - - 165' - - Building setback:  Front yard (5) (5) (5)  Side yard/rear yard 35' 35' 35' 15' 35' 35'  Accessory bldg. One-story side/rear 25' 35' 25' 10' 35' 35'  Accessory bldg. Two-story side/rear 35' - 35' 15' 35' 35' Maximum Dimensions Building stories 3 3 3 3 3 3 Building height 35' 35' 35' 35' 35' 35'  
L = Local C = Collector A = Arterial 
(1)  Refer to section 21-40. 
(2)  Refer to section 21-61. 
(3)  Unless otherwise stated in section 21-325, Development Standards for Certain Uses. 
(4)  This provision is for frontage lots created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(5)  Refer to subsection 21-306(a). 
Note: See section 21-216 for dimensional regulations for uses in conservation development. See section 21-221 for dimensional regulations for approved cluster developments. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 95-11, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-1995; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 03-8, § 4, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 06-06, § 3, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 07-02, § 9, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 2, 3, 4-26-2010; Ord. No. 14-04, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
TABLE 2B. BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
STANDARD DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS FOR BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
NB GB PB PR WJ WB HB WVC WVDGO MIN MAX MIN MAX MIN MAX MIN MAX MIN MAX MIN MAX MIN MAX MIN MAX MIN MAX Lot area 4,000 sf - 20,000 sf - 5 
acres - 5,000 sf - 5,000 sf - 40,000 sf - 20,000 sf - 4,500 sf - 4,500 sf - Lot width 40' - 200' - 400' - 40' - 40' - 150' - 200' - 40' - 40' - Lot frontage 40' - 200' - 400' - 40'(12) - 40'(12) - 150' - 200' - 40' - 40' - Building setbacks: Front (1) - 25' - 25' - 10'(7) 20'(13) 10'(7) 60' 25' - 50' - (1) - (1) -  Side (2) - 15' - 65' - 0' - 0' - 25' - 25' - (4) - (4) -  Corner side (1) - 25' - 25' - 0' - 0' - 25' - 50' - (1) - (1) -  Rear 30' - 25' - 50' - 0' - 0' - 25' - 25' - 30' - 30' - From residential district 30' - 50' - 65' - 20'(8) - 20'(8) - 30'(8) - 40' - 50' - 50' - Building stories 1 3 1 3 1 4 1(9) 3(6) 1 3(6) - 2 - - - 3 - 3 Building height 15' 35' 15' 35' 25' 50' 16'(9) 38'(6) - 38'(6) - 40' - 35' - 35' - 27'(14) Ground floor area - 10,000 sf - 50,000 sf - (3) - 20,000 sf (10) - 50,000 sf (10), (11) - 50,000 sf - 50,000 sf - 7,000 
sf 
(15) - 7.000 
sf 
(15) Building width - 2.5 × bldg. hgt. - - - - - 2.5 × bldg. hgt. - - - - - - - 2.5 × bldg. hgt. - 2.5 × bldg. hgt. Building depth - 3.5 × bldg. hgt. - - - - - 3.5 × bldg. hgt. - - - - - - - 3.5 × bldg. hgt. - 3.5 × bldg. hgt. Impervious lot coverage - 90% - 90% - 80% - 90% - 90% - 90% - 90% - 90% - 90%  
NOTES: 
(1)  See subsection 21-87(b). 
(2)  Zero feet if attached; 15 feet if not attached. 
(3)  For land parcels comprised of five to 15 acres, the maximum size of any one building footprint shall not exceed the lesser of 50,000 square feet or 25 percent of the area of land suitable for development. For land parcels comprised of in excess of 15 acres, the maximum size of any one building footprint shall not exceed the lesser of 85,000 square feet or ten percent of the area of land suitable for development, nor shall there be more than one building in excess of 50,000 square feet in any single master plan or site plan in a planned business district. 
(4)  Zero feet if attached; ten feet if not attached. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Where density bonuses are allowed by the planning commission for the inclusion of affordable housing or the use of transfer of development rights, building stories may be increased to four and building height may be increased to 50 feet. 
(7)  Where lots do not front Post Road, Ten Rod Road, Quaker Lane or another arterial road within the PR or Wickford Junction District as applicable, the minimum front yard setback may be zero so long as pedestrian access remains uninterrupted across the front of commercial and mixed use building(s). However, it is the intent of the Wickford Junction District to preserve setbacks along Ten Rod Road that will allow for the contiguous travel of pedestrians and/or bicyclists across property frontage to the maximum extent practicable. It is also the intent of this district to create a consistent or near-consistent setback of buildings along Ten Rod Road in order to enhance the pedestrian experience. The planning commission shall consider these long-term objectives as part of its review of setbacks along this corridor. 
(8)  Minimum of 20 feet or equal to the height of the building, whichever is greater. 
(9)  Single story buildings may be allowed so long as no more than 5,000 square feet of floor space is contained within the single story area. The minimum height of the single story structure shall be 16 feet. 
(10)  Ground floor area per commercial operation. 
(11)  Any proposal that received master plan approval for a commercial operation that exceeds this maximum in advance of the adoption of this provision shall be considered "conforming" with regard to this standard. 
(12)  As part of the master planning of an entire development project, the planning commission may reduce the frontage requirement for newly created lots within the district to zero in instances where this frontage reduction would promote better site design and buildings are sited in a manner that is consistent with the goals of the district. 
(13)  Applicants will not be required to meet these maximum setback requirements on those lots impacted by easements. The planning commission, as part of their review process may increase the maximum setback for buildings on lots in the PR district that are impacted by an easement that otherwise cannot comply with the PR setback requirements. 
(14)  See subsection 21-191(f). 
(15)  Any use or structure in excess of 4,000 square feet gross floor area shall require a special use permit and no structure shall have a footprint exceeding 7,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 02-20, § 4, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 08-18, § 4, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 12-13, § 4, 10-22-2012; Ord. No. 13-19, § 4, 12-9-2013; Ord. No. 16-02, § 2, 1-11-2016; Ord. No. 18-30, § 1, 11-26-2018) 
TABLE 2C. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
Dimensional Requirements I/O LI(3) GI WI Minimum Dimensions Lot area 40,000 sf 60,000 sf 80,000 sf 80,000 sf Lot width 150' 150' 175' 125' Lot frontage 150' 150' 175' 125' Building Setbacks:  Front yard 35' 35' 35' 35'  Side yard/corner side yard 30' 30' 30' 30'  Rear yard 30' 30' 30' 30'  From district boundary 50' 50'(1) 100'(1) 100'(1)  From residential boundary 200' 200' 200' 200' Maximum Dimensions Building stories 3 3 - 3 Building height 35' 35' (2) 35' Impervious Lot Coverage 80% 80% 80% 80%  
A = Arterial C = Collector L = Local 
(1)  Does not pertain to boundaries between other industrial districts. 
(2)  Building height shall not exceed the distance from the lot line. 
(3)  The building setback for those portions of Lots 48, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56 and 57 on Assessor's Plat 79 that abut the residential zoning district created by lot 3 on Assessor's Plat 79 shall be 30 feet. This exemption shall apply to the specific lots listed above and shall only remain in effect for the period of time that Lot 3 on Assessor's Plat remains zoned residential. 
(4)  Where a lot abuts a road and residential property lies directly opposite the industrial lot, the setback from residential district boundary shall be measured from the property line of the industrial lot. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 03-8, § 5, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 11-01, § 3, 1-10-2011) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- See editor's note to article II of this chapter. 

ARTICLE V. - LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS 

Sec. 21-131. - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this article is to permit the review and establishment of land development projects. Land development projects may be permitted through review of the planning commission and/or other local agents in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 45-23-1 et seq., based on the impacts associated with the nature of the use; scale of the project; or other unusual conditions which require additional regulations to meet the objectives of this article, the subdivision and land development regulations adopted by the planning commission and the town comprehensive plan. The review process for land development projects is promulgated to further the following purposes: 
(1)  Provide for the orderly, thorough and expeditious review of projects; 
(2)  Promote high quality and appropriate design and construction; 
(3)  Promote the protection of the existing natural and built environment and the mitigation of all significant negative impacts of any proposed development on the existing environment; 
(4)  Promote project design which will be well integrated with the surrounding neighborhoods with regard to natural and built features and which concentrates development in areas which can best support it by reason of natural characteristics and existing infrastructure; 
(5)  Encourage local design and improvement standards to reflect the intent of the town comprehensive plan with regard to the physical character of various neighborhoods and districts of the municipality; 
(6)  Promote thorough technical review of all proposed land development projects by appropriate local officials; 
(7)  Give developers guidance before incurring the cost of final design and engineering while providing assurances to the town and the general public that the approved project will meet with approved objectives and standards; 
(8)  Encourage that local requirements for dedications of public land, impact mitigation and payment-in-lieu thereof are based on clear documentation of needs and fairly applied and administered; and 
(9)  Encourage the establishment and consistent application of procedures for local recordkeeping on all matters of land development review, approval and construction. 
(Ord. No. 08-18, § 5, 7-7-2008) 
Sec. 21-132. - Criteria for approval. 
A.  A land development project or any component thereof shall be consistent with the following general criteria where applicable. Additional criteria and standards may be listed within individual districts under article II. 
(1)  Promote economical and efficient use of the land while providing diverse housing choices and opportunities; 
(2)  Promote flexibility in design and diversification in the location of structures; 
(3)  Promote greater flexibility and creative and imaginative design for the development of residential and mixed use areas than what is generally possible under conventional zoning regulations; 
(4)  Provide suitable safeguards and consideration for land use and site and architectural design that is compatible with adjacent districts and uses; 
(5)  Promote development that is commensurate with the availability of public facilities and services and promote the safe circulation of traffic throughout the town; 
(6)  Preserve and protect natural resources and features and encourage consideration of environmental impacts and mitigation measures; 
(7)  Encourage the provision of open space and public access and give due consideration to the quality and design of landscaping; 
(8)  Provide for the proper control of erosion, surface and subsurface drainage and pollution through innovative design and best management practices; 
(9)  Facilitate orderly and harmonious site development, including safe and convenient design and provision of egress and ingress, off-street parking, truck loading, internal circulation, emergency access, refuse disposal, outdoor storage, signage and lighting; 
(10)  Preserve natural, historical and cultural resources to the maximum extent feasible; 
(11)  Protect appropriate vistas and environmental qualities of the town; and 
(12)  Assure compliance with the various elements of the comprehensive plan of the town. 
(Ord. No. 08-18, § 5, 7-7-2008) 
Sec. 21-133. - Applications and review procedures. 
A.  Commercial or industrial developments in which the total floor area is at least 50,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet and mixed use developments in which the total floor area is at least 100,000 square feet but less than 200,000 square feet will be considered Minor Land Development Projects and shall be reviewed in accordance with the Subdivisions and Land Development regulations adopted by the Planning Commission. Commercial or industrial developments in which the total floor area is at least 100,000 square feet, mixed use developments in which the total floor area is at least 200,000 square feet, or projects proposing density bonuses through the Transfer of Development Rights or Inclusionary Zoning will be considered Major Land Development Projects and shall be reviewed in accordance with the Subdivision and Land Development regulations. These regulations shall provide for application requirements, review procedures, findings, amendments and appeals. 
B.  Commercial or industrial developments containing less than 50,000 square feet of total floor area and mixed use developments containing less than 100,000 square feet of total floor area shall be subject to section 21-284, development plan review. 
C.  Where the land development project also constitutes a subdivision, as defined in the land development and subdivision regulations, the two processes shall proceed concurrently in a contemporaneous manner. The procedures for review shall be in accordance with this chapter and the subdivision and land development regulations, including requirements for applications and fees. All information must be submitted, but where there is a duplication of requested information, the application need only provide the information once and make reference to the plans/documents on the other application. At each stage, the subdivision review and action shall take place prior to the decision on the land development project. 
D.  Where the land development project requires a special use permit or variance, the two processes shall proceed in a contemporaneous manner to the extent possible. The procedures for review shall be in accordance with this chapter and the subdivision and land development regulations, including requirements for applications and fees. All information must be submitted, but where there is a duplication of requested information, the applicant need only provide the information once and make reference to the plans/documents on the other application. 
E.  All multifamily developments not considered mixed use projects will be reviewed by the planning commission as a land development project. Multifamily development projects with less than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area will be reviewed as minor land development projects. All multifamily development projects with 50,000 square feet or more of gross floor area will be reviewed as major land development projects. 
(Ord. No. 08-18, § 5, 7-7-2008) 
Secs. 21-134-21-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-14, § 3, adopted October 7, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former art. VI, §§ 21-131-21-136. Former art. VI pertained to development districts, and derived from the Revised Ordinances of 1974, §§ 17-6-1-17-6-5; Ord. No. 85-5, adopted February 11, 1985; and Ord. No. 94-12, adopted June 27, 1994. 

Secs. 21-146-21-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OPEN SPACE/PUBLIC[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 98-7, adopted May 11, 1998, amended the Code by repealing former article VII, §§ 21-156-21-159, and adding a new article VII, §§ 21-160 and 21-161. Former article VII pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Revised Ordinances of 1974, sections 17-7-1-17-7-4; and Ord. No. 94-12, adopted June 27, 1994. 

Sec. 21-160. - Open space. 
    The open space district is designed for all lands which shall be dedicated to open space, recreation or conservation. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-161. - Public. 
    The public district is designed for all lands which are dedicated to public uses, such as federal, state and municipal facilities; cemeteries; schools; and other public buildings. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Secs. 21-162-21-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 21-181. - Purpose of article. 
(a)  Overlay districts establish additional requirements for the primary zoning districts based upon specific hazards and problems outlined in the Soil Survey of Rhode Island prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service; the flood insurance rate maps for the town published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated February 16, 1983, as amended from time to time; and in the report of the United States Geological Survey on groundwater resources. 
(b)  The administrative officer of this chapter shall determine when an overlay district and its requirements regulate the granting of a building permit. The location of the primary structure shall determine the application of overlay requirements. An engineering soil survey to determine suitability of land for development, upon review of the soil conservation service, shall supersede the overlay district map. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-8-1; Ord. No. 83-1, § 1, 1-24-1983) 
Sec. 21-182. - Use regulations; special use permits. 
(a)  Within the limits of the overlay districts, all requirements set forth in the primary district shall apply with the enumerated additions, exceptions and conditions. 
(b)  The zoning board shall request the soil and water conservation district to make available expert assistance from those agencies that are assisting such district under a memorandum of understanding. Site plans must be approved by the planning director and town engineer before a building permit can be issued. 
(c)  Permission to alter a wetland does not alter the restrictions of any overlay district. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-8-2; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Sec. 21-183. - Very severe limitations district. 
(a)  Designation. The very severe limitations district shall include all lands designated on map sheets of the soil survey of the town by the following symbols: 
Sb Aa Co Mk Ba Pp Ma Mc Rp Re Ru Rf  
(b)  Characteristics. All soils designated by the symbols in subsection (a) of this section have very severe high water tables, peat and muck, tidal marsh or a flood hazard. 
(c)  Permitted use. Permitted uses are any uses permitted in the primary zoning district which do not require a basement or a subsoil sewage disposal system. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-8-3; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-184. - Severe limitations district. 
(a)  Designation. The severe limitations district shall include all lands designated on map sheets of the soil survey of the town as having severe limitations and including the following symbols: 
Rc BrA ChD PnB RaA PmA PmB NeA NeB NoC NeC NfB Bc PsA PsB Wa BoC Ss CaC CaD CeC SuB SvB StA StB CkC WbA WbB WcB WdB Dc Se Sf ScA Tb WhA WhB WrB NcC PaA PaB PbB PcC RaB BrB  
(b)  Characteristics. All soils designated by the symbols in subsection (a) of this section have periodic or constant high water tables, very slow permeability, severe fragipan, severe stoniness or shallow depths to bedrock, conditions which severely limit the proper functioning of on-site sewage disposal systems. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are any uses permitted by the primary zoning district. 
(d)  Minimum restrictions. No lot shall be recorded as a building lot in the land evidence records with any portion in a severe limitations district unless: (i) public sewerage or (ii) approval for an on-site sewage disposal system has been received from the state department of health. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-8-4; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-185. - Steep slope overlay district. 
(a)  Designation. The steep slope overlay district shall include all lands designated on map sheets of the soil survey of the town by the following symbols: 
CaD ChD HkD  
(b)  Characteristics. The soils designated in subsection (a) of this section pose special problems in building construction and may be subject to severe erosion. On-site sewage disposal systems must be carefully installed. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses include any uses which are permitted by the primary zoning district, provided: 
(1)  The proposed structure shall be of sound engineering design with footings designed to extend to stable rock or soil. 
(2)  Access roads and other land clearing shall be designed to avoid excessive erosion and to maintain scenic values. 
(3)  Leaching fields are laid out with consideration for the slope and contours of the land. 
(d)  Site plan. All proposed uses shall submit a site plan for approval by the town engineer and the planning director. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-8-5; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-186. - Groundwater recharge and wellhead protection overlay districts. 
(a)  Findings. The groundwater underlying the town is the sole source of its existing and future drinking water supply. Discharges of toxic and hazardous materials and sewage discharge threaten the quality of such groundwater supplies and hydrologically connected surface waters posing potential public health and safety hazards and threatening economic losses to the community. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to: 
(1)  Protect the health, safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Protect the public drinking supply in the town from the effects of high intensity land development and from potentially hazardous materials associated with specific land uses; 
(3)  Protect, preserve and maintain the quality and quantity of the groundwater supply; and 
(4)  Permit the use of land within the groundwater protection zones for agricultural purposes and encourage the use of farmland in a manner which is consistent with the protection of groundwater resources. 
(c)  Criteria for designation of groundwater protection zones. The town establishes the groundwater protection zones in this subsection. The designated zones described in this subsection have been mapped based on the best available scientific information. Lines have been established based on current wells and pumping ability. Information concerning installation of new wells and other updated information will be incorporated into this section as it becomes available. The groundwater protection zones are hereby established as those areas depicted on the groundwater protection zones map dated May 5, 2014, as amended from time to time. An official copy of the map is on file and can be viewed at the town clerk's office or planning department. The character of soils and subsoil conditions in these areas is such that any use introducing pollutants, contaminants or waste into the natural drainage system could adversely affect the quality of municipal drinking water sources. The zones are as follows: 
(1)  Zone 1 groundwater protection areas. Zone 1 includes a 1,750-foot radius circle around transient noncommunity water system wells located outside the water service area. The creation of new water service areas shall automatically remove or modify to the correct zone any affected lots from the applicable groundwater protection area. The creation of new water service areas and the construction of publicly serviced water lines in areas that fall into this category will automatically remove all lots within the 1750-foot radius circle around the transient noncommunity water system wells from the groundwater 1 designation and place said lots in a groundwater 2 designation, unless other such groundwater protection requirements from this chapter apply to keep said lots in the groundwater 1 protection zone. 
a.  Annaquatucket Wellhead Protection Area. This district includes those areas described in the town wellhead protection area pilot project, prepared by the United States Environmental Protection Agency in cooperation with the state department of environmental management and the town, December 1991. Zone 1 includes the delineated wellhead protection areas for four municipal supply wells. 
b.  Hunt Wellhead Protection Area. This district includes those land areas described in the Phase I Report Hunt River Aquifer Wellhead Delineation Study, prepared by GZA, Inc., for the Towns of North Kingstown and East Greenwich, the City of Warwick, the Rhode Island Economic Development Corporation, and the Kent County Water Authority. The area is identified as the wellhead protection area (groundwater capture zone) for seven existing and one proposed public well sites. This area also includes the groundwater reservoir area for the Hunt Aquifer. 
c.  Pettaquamscutt Wellhead Protection Area. This area includes the community wellhead protection area to the three town public water supply well sites. 
d.  High Point wells #1 and #2. This district includes the wellhead protection area for two community wells located at the SSTAR facility on 1950 Tower Hill Road in North Kingstown (plat 36, lot 5). These wells are by definition community wells. 
e.  Zone 1 groundwater protection areas. Zone 1 includes a 1,750-foot radius circle around transient noncommunity water system wells located outside the water service area. The creation of a new water service area shall automatically remove or modify to the correct zone any affected lots from the applicable groundwater protection area. The creation of new town water service areas and the construction of town serviced water lines in areas that fall into this category will automatically remove all lots and abutting lots from the groundwater 1 designation and place said lots in a groundwater 2 designation, unless other such groundwater protection requirements from this chapter apply to keep said lots in the groundwater 1 protection zone. 
(2)  Zone 2 groundwater protection areas. The zone 2 groundwater protection area includes those critical portions of the recharge areas to groundwater reservoirs as mapped by the state department of environmental management (RIDEM) which are located beyond the defined zone 1 groundwater protection areas or the line of zero transmissivity established by the U.S. Geological Survey, whichever is more conservative. These areas shall include: 
a.  Those areas lying within the drainage basin and contributing recharge to zone 1 in the Hunt, Annaquatucket, Pettaquamscutt and Chipuxet aquifers. This boundary has been modified to reflect the findings of Phase I Report Hunt River Aquifer Wellhead Recharge Area Study. 
b.  Zone 2 includes a 1,750-foot radius circle around the transient noncommunity water system wells located inside the water service area. 
(3)  Only those portions of a lot located in a groundwater protection zone shall be subject to the requirements of section 21-186. 
(d)  Permitted uses in Zone 1 and Zone 2 Groundwater Protection Areas. All uses permitted in the underlying districts shall be permitted in the zone 1 and zone 2 areas subject to the development criteria listed in (1)-(3) below. However, these development criteria shall not apply to development in the Post Road district that will be connected to a centralized sewer system and that meets all other applicable development standards required by the town. 
(1)  The average density of any residential development shall not exceed one dwelling unit per two acres and the use is not prohibited in table 1 in subsection (h) of this section. No density bonuses shall be granted in groundwater protection areas. 
(2)  All new commercial and industrial development must show that the nitrate loading standard of five mg/l as set forth in article VI of chapter 8 of this Code, pertaining to groundwater reservoirs and recharge areas, can be met on site using a conventional individual sewage disposal system. Developments located within the Wickford Junction District can meet this standard utilizing a denitrifying OWTS. 
(3)  On residential lots that are nonconforming by area (square footage) and where municipal sewers are not available, for all new construction, alteration, additions, expansions, enlargements or intensifications for which the state department of environmental management determines that an upgrade to the individual sewage disposal system is required, the upgraded system must include the installation of a nitrogen reducing septic disposal system for on-site treatment of wastewater approved by the state department of environmental management. 
(4)  For the purpose of determining nitrogen loading, where separate commercial and residential operations use the same denitrifying OWTS, the portion of the design flow attributed to residential use shall be assigned a nutrient loading coefficient of 19 mg/L in wastewater effluent. The portion of the design flow attributed to commercial use shall be assigned a nutrient loading coefficient of 35 mg/L. 
(e)  Special use permits. Where consistent with the definition of the district or reasonably necessary for the public convenience and welfare, certain land use activities may be granted by special use permit by the zoning board of review in a zone 1 or zone 2 wellhead protection area, following development plan/site plan approval and recommendation by the planning commission (see subsection (h), table 1). 
(f)  Criteria for special use permits. In addition to any other requirements imposed by this chapter or any other applicable sections of this chapter, all special uses shall comply with the following design criteria: 
(1)  The storage of any toxic or hazardous materials that are permitted by this chapter shall be stored indoors on impervious surfaces which shall be bermed to retain any spillage, and in accordance with all other applicable regulations. 
(2)  No floor drains shall be permitted. 
(3)  All site plans submitted for review shall, in addition to all other materials, include for approval by the planning commission a current hazardous material handling and contingency plan and a waste management plan. 
(g)  Land development and development plan review 
(1)  All uses proposed to be located in zone 1 or zone 2 groundwater protection areas shall be reviewed in accordance with section 21-133 or section 21-284 of the zoning ordinance as applicable. 
(2)  At the request of the director of planning and development, the planning commission or zoning board of review, applications may be referred to existing town committees, commissions or boards or outside expertise, at the expense of the applicant, for a report of findings and recommendations including a statement on the general consistency of the application with the goals and purposes of this section. Recommendation shall be rendered within 45 days of receipt of the application by the groundwater committee or conservation commission. 
(3)  In granting approval for applications located within a zone 1 and/or zone 2 groundwater protection area, the following shall be considered by the reviewing body and applied in the decision-making process: 
a.  Adequacy and suitability of the site for the proposed use, including the availability of utilities and other public services. 
b.  Demonstration of the use of currently accepted best management practices (BMPs) (see section 21-187). 
c.  Adequacy of sewage disposal method, water source and stormwater management. 
d.  Nitrate-nitrogen loading pursuant to article VI of chapter 8 pertaining to groundwater reservoirs and recharge areas. 
e.  Soil erosion and sediment control plans. 
f.  Provisions of appropriate natural buffers for wetlands and surface water bodies. 
g.  Impact on public and private water supplies. 
h.  Proposed groundwater withdrawals. 
i.  Storage of any potentially hazardous material and a hazardous materials contingency plan for these materials. 
j.  The ability to meet standards contained in article VI of chapter 8 pertaining to groundwater reservoirs and recharge areas. Applicants may be required to assess ambient water quality. 
(4)  In addition to the standard site plan submission requirements, the following shall also be provided for proposals to be located in the groundwater areas: 
a.  Existing and proposed water sources and volumes of projected water use. 
b.  Location and description of any proposed facilities for refuse storage and disposal. 
c.  Location and brief description of existing vegetation, topographic features and water bodies and wetlands. 
d.  Location of public wells within 400 feet and private water supply wells within 200 feet of the subject property. 
(5)  Nutrient loading calculations performed as part of any permit submittal shall incorporate the following assumptions: 
Loading numbers for nitrogen sources 
Activity or Discharge Nitrogen Loading Coefficient Effluent from standard OWTS 35 mg/L Effluent from DEM approved innovative system 19 mg/L Effluent from centralized wastewater facility 10 mg/L (zero if transported off-site) Turf fertilization 3.0 lbs per 1,000 square feet with 25% leaching rate to groundwater* Roof runoff 0.5 mg/L per unit area Pavement runoff 1.5 mg/L per unit area Atmospheric Deposition 0.05 mg/L  
* For the purposes of any residential lots included in nitrogen loading calculations, any land that is not covered by a structure or other permanent surface as part of the development proposal shall be considered "turf" for the purposes of these calculations unless otherwise determined by the town during review. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that these areas should be considered something other than turf based on unique site conditions. Conditions that should warrant a different designation for these areas may include, but shall not be limited to, the presence of exposed ledge, wetland, easements or other legal agreements that would specifically preclude the establishment of turf. Physical permanent boundary markers shall be installed to indicate the boundaries of turf and natural areas. 
Recharge Numbers for Nitrogen Dilution 
Site Area Rate of Recharge Artificial recharge from impervious areas Annual volume determined by stormwater management calculations Undisturbed areas by NRCS hydrologic soils group  A soils 24 inches per year  B soils 18 inches per year  C soils 10 inches per year  D soils 3 inches per year  Wetlands and surface waters 0 inches per year  
(h)  Regulated uses in zone 1 and zone 2 groundwater protection areas. Regulated uses in zone 1 and zone 2 groundwater protection areas shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any use or accessory use which is not permitted as a permitted use or by special use permit in the underlying zoning district is prohibited in the groundwater protection areas; 
(2)  Table 1 as follows indicates prohibited and permitted uses in zone 1 and zone 2 groundwater protection areas. 
TABLE 1. RESTRICTIONS ON LAND USE ACTIVITIES IN ZONE 1 AND ZONE 2 GROUNDWATER PROTECTION AREAS 
Y = Permitted use 
N = Prohibited use 
S = Special use permit required 
Land Use Activity Zone 1 Zone 2 Pretreatment facility for existing nonconforming use (1) (See end notes at the end of this table) S Y Gravel extraction (2) S S Excavation other than for construction associated with a permitted use and installation of a physical improvement associated therewith to a level closer than eight feet to the groundwater table (1 and 3) N N Filling, grading or transferring material from off site in excess of 20 cubic yards (4) S S Medical or dental offices (5) S Y Commercial storage for resale of paint, thinners, lacquers, chemical strippers and chemical preservatives (6) S Y Vehicle maintenance as accessory to a permitted or special use (1)(8) S S Car and truck cleaning, as accessory to a permitted use (not including engines) (1) S Y Incinerators, solid waste landfills, hazardous waste treatment, storage or disposal facilities and solid waste transfer stations and recycling facilities (7) N N Vehicle maintenance, airplane, boat, truck, other vehicle maintenance and/or small engine service stations and gas stations (8) N N Junkyards and salvage yards N N Machine shops (9) N S The process of wood preserving and furniture painting and refinishing except as accessory to a permitted use N S Paint application shops, rustproofers, metal and drum cleaning/reconditioning (1) N S Commercial on-site dry cleaning or commercial laundering N S Barbershop and other establishments where the only service is hair-cutting (no hair coloring, dying, straightening, intensive conditioning, perms, manicures, chemical based treatments or other procedures that require the use of chemicals, solvents, or other similar materials) (17) S Y Beauty shops, salons, parlors, and hair salons including the commercial operation of similar cosmetology or hairdressing establishments/schools (17) (19) N S Veterinary offices N S Commercial kennels and pounds or animal shelters N S Health care facilities, hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes and medical or biological laboratories, clinics or research facilities N S Commercial on-site photo processing, including but not limited to medical X-rays and nuclear medicine N S All uses which discharge process wastewater on site except for the discharge of sanitary waste in accordance with the approved individual sewage disposal system (1) N N Commercial washing of automobiles or trucks (10) N S Any other use which involves as a principal activity the generation, storage, use, treatment, transportation or disposal of hazardous waste N N Except as otherwise permitted by this section, all uses which involve the use, storage, treatment, processing, recovery or disposal of hazardous materials designated under 40 CFR 116, pursuant to section 311 of the Federal Clean Water Act and subsequent amendments thereto or other toxic pollutants as defined under G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq., as amended (1 and 11) N N Underground storage of hazardous materials, oil, gasoline or other petroleum products, excluding liquefied petroleum gases, in any quantity (12) N N Storage or piping of petroleum or refined petroleum products other than liquefied petroleum gases or petroleum products, which will provide heat for the premises. All aboveground tanks must be bermed and the planning commission must approve adequate containment measures (1 and 13) N N The bulk storage in vehicles of fuel oil or other toxic and hazardous substances in excess of 110 gallons overnight or for more than 12 hours (1) N N Storage of road salt and deicing chemicals N N Commercial metal plating and etching N N Jewelry manufacturing and jewelry plating N N On-site embalming N S Sewage treatment plant N N All uses which require a UIC permit from the state department of environmental management (RIDEM)(17) Y Y Commercial feedlots/concentrated animal feeding operations (14) S S Pesticide and fertilizer storage (1) S Y Addition, enlargement or expansion of a permitted use on nonconforming lots (15) S S Chemical and bacteriological laboratories (14) N N New automobile dealerships (16) N S Commercial storage for resale of propane or liquefied petroleum gases provided the storage capacity does not exceed 2,000 gallons (18) Y Y  
*All permitted and special use permits must include the use of best management practices (BMPs). 
End notes: 
(1)  These prohibitions and/or permit requirements shall not apply, however, to uses accessory to on-site agricultural operations as that term is defined in G.L. 1956, § 2-23-4 or any amendment thereto on any lot on which, as of October 5, 1998, agricultural operations were being performed as a primary use. 
(2)  Gravel extraction, gravel mining and mineral deposit removal, except as part of preparation for an approved development project or an existing licensed removal site, providing that the following conditions are met: 
a.  All conditions as required by chapter 16, entitled "Soil and Earth Removal," are complied with. 
b.  Excavation for removal of earth, sand, gravel and other soils shall be no closer than eight feet above the maximum groundwater table. A well shall be installed by the property owner to verify the groundwater elevations at a location approved by the town. 
(3)  In all cases, excavation to a level closer than eight feet to the groundwater table shall be minimized if possible. 
(4)  Except where part of an approved final development/site plan or approved building permit or performed in the normal course of maintenance or operation of a permitted use, or where the use of the land is for the primary purpose of agriculture. 
(5)  Provided, however, that the zoning board of review may require effluent separation and the installation of separate waste disposal systems for the disposal of toilet and bath facilities waste and for the disposal of waste from all other sources of the premises. 
(6)  The commercial storage for resale of paint, thinners, lacquers, chemical strippers and chemical preservatives as accessory to a primary permitted use. 
(7)  Except horticultural waste from on-site agricultural operations. 
(8)  It is the intent of this ordinance to prohibit vehicle maintenance, airplane, boat, truck maintenance and/or small engine service stations and gas stations as a primary use. Vehicle maintenance may be allowed by special use permit when accessory to a permitted or special use activity. Such repair/maintenance activities shall be conditioned on the use of the best available control technologies and best management practices that protect and monitor water quality. The developer will be required to provide for oversight/monitoring of repair facilities by a mutually agreed upon qualified entity. 
(9)  Except where accessory to an on-site agricultural operation as defined in end note (1) for table 1 of this subsection (h)(2). 
(10)  Provided, however, car and truck cleaning may be allowed by special use permit where accessory to a permitted use or a use allowed by special use permit; however best available control technologies and best management practices shall be used and water reclamation/recycling shall be required. The number of vehicles may be conditioned by the zoning board of review. 
(11)  Provided, however, that quantities of the substances described in this section do not exceed 55 gallons or 250 pounds dry weight may be stored on the premises, if, in the opinion of the building official and planning department, the storage of the substance does not constitute a potential for degradation of surface water or groundwater resources in the area and there is compliance with the following requirements: 
a.  The total quantity of all of the hazardous materials stored on the premises shall not exceed 55 gallons or 250 pounds dry weight. 
b.  The hazardous materials stored on the premises shall only be used for office or business use. 
c.  All hazardous materials stored on the premises shall be contained in a suitable storage area which shall be approved by the building official. 
(12)  Replacement or upgrade of preexisting storage facilities shall be exempt from this provision, provided that any such replacement of a preexisting storage facility shall not, without the grant of a special use permit, exceed 125 percent of the tank size total capacity existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, and all such replacements shall be required to obtain all necessary permits and licenses from the state department of environmental management and the town. 
(13)  Aboveground storage tanks located outside shall have containment dikes or berms surrounding them. Containment dikes shall be coated concrete or metal or equivalent materials and shall be large enough to contain 110 percent of the tank capacity. Storage tanks located inside buildings shall be placed on an impervious surface which shall be bermed to retain spillage. Storage tanks permitted by this section shall be located either outside of the building and above ground or within the building for which the petroleum product is providing heat. 
(14)  Except where accessory to an on-site agricultural operation as defined in end note (1) for Table 1 of this subsection (h)(2) concerning which site plan approval for such accessory use by the technical review committee shall be required. 
(15)  On residential lots that are nonconforming by area (square footage) and where municipal sewers are not available, for all additions, expansions, enlargements or intensifications for which the state department of environmental management determines that an upgrade to the individual sewage disposal system is required, the upgraded system must include the installation of a nitrogen reducing septic disposal system for on-site treatment of wastewater approved by the state department of environmental management. 
(16)  New automobile dealerships may be allowed in zone 2 groundwater areas where existing conditions would preclude future water supply development. Applicant must demonstrate that existing water quality would be protected. 
(17)  Such systems shall be conditioned on the use of the best available control technologies and best management practices that protect water quality. The developer may be required to provide for oversight/monitoring of UIC. 
(18)  Provided however; best management practices (BMP's) shall be used in the siting and containment of the propane or liquefied petroleum gas. Aboveground outside storage tanks need not be enclosed within a roofed three-sided structure. The propane or liquefied petroleum gas storage shall be in compliance with the National Fire Protection Association standards, applicable Groundwater Recharge and Wellhead Protection Overlay District standards and section 21-279 (d)(13)d. 
(19)  For establishments that utilize an OWTS and will perform hair coloring, dying, straightening, intensive conditioning, perms, manicures, chemical based treatments or other procedures that require the use of chemicals, solvents, or other similar materials, all sinks and hair washing stations must be plumbed directly into a holding tank to separate all potential impacts of chemicals into the groundwater. This holding tank will be separate from the required OWTS in areas where municipal sewer services are not available. Copies of the chemical manifest and product purchases, as well as reporting of the pumping out of the holding tank shall be submitted to the North Kingstown Department of Water Supply on a quarterly basis. 
(i)  Nonconforming lots. Nothing contained in this section shall affect the validity of any standard subdivision, cluster subdivision or residential compound which was given final approval by the planning commission prior to October 5, 1998, and the validity of any uses permitted within such standard subdivision, cluster subdivision or residential compound, with respect to the application of subsection (d) of this section, shall be governed by the provisions of this section that were in effect prior to October 5, 1998, or upon the date of giving final approval to any standard subdivision, cluster subdivision or residential compound for which the planning commission has given conceptual approval of the entire development and at least preliminary approval of a phase of the development prior to October 5, 1998. Furthermore, nothing contained in this section shall prevent the planning commission from giving final approval to any standard subdivision, cluster subdivision or residential compound for which the planning commission gave preliminary approval prior to October 5, 1998; if such final approval is given by the planning commission, the validity of and uses permitted within such standard subdivision, cluster subdivision or residential compound shall, with respect to the application of subsection (d) of this section, be governed by the provisions that were in effect prior to October 5, 1998. 
Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the planning commission from renewing or extending final approval to any standard subdivision, cluster subdivision or residential compound for which the planning commission gave final approval prior to October 5, 1998, but which expired because the approval was not submitted for signature and recording, as long as a new final application is submitted to the planning commission by December 31, 1998. 
Further, nothing contained in this section shall affect the minimum dimensional requirements for size of any lot which is a lot of record, the dimensions of which have not been altered since the creation by voluntary conveyance which rendered such lots more nonconforming and which was created by the following: 
(1)  A deed or plat recorded on or after July 28, 1947, and which was in full compliance with the minimum dimensional requirements for size of the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of such recording; or 
(2)  A deed or plat recorded prior to July 28, 1947. 
(j)  Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses are those uses that were lawfully existing or in receipt of a building permit prior to the first publication of notice of public hearing for the ordinance from which this amendment derives. Any expansion or change in use shall be subject to this section. 
(k)  Creation or modification of lots. Upon the creation or modification of lots from a lot that was in an existing groundwater protection zone, said new or modified lot(s) shall automatically be included or removed from the applicable groundwater protection zone, according to the official groundwater protection area map and as specified in this chapter. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-8-6; Ord. No. 88-21, § 1, 10-24-1988; Ord. No. 90-1, §§ 1, 3, 2-12-1990; Ord. No. 91-1, § 1, 2-11-1991; Ord. No. 92-20, § 1, 11-16-1992; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 99-5, § 1, 5-10-1999; Ord. No. 03-13, § 2, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 07-02, §§ 10-12, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 07-12, §§ 3-6, 6-11-07; Ord. No. 08-18, § 6, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 10-04, § 4, 2-22-2010; Ord. No. 11-10, § 1, 5-23-2011; Ord. No. 12-03, §§ 4, 5, 2-27-2012; Ord. No. 13-19, § 5, 12-9-2013; Ord. No. 13-22, § 1, 12-16-2013; Ord. No. 14-07, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-2014) 
Sec. 21-187. - Best management practices. 
(a)  Recommendations and guidelines. To the extent possible, all applicants for activities in groundwater areas shall follow the recommendations and guidelines contained in the documents listed below. Where any applicable standards in the Post Road district conflict with those listed in these publications, the standards for the Post Road district shall apply. 
(1)  Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, 1989, as amended. 
(2)  State of Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, 1993, as amended. 
(3)  Controlling Urban Runoff: A Practical Manual for Planning and Designing Urban BMPs, by the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, 1987, as amended. 
(4)  The USEPA Office of Water Publication Guidance Specifying Management Measures for Sources of Nonpoint Pollution in Coastal Waters, 1993, as amended. 
(b)  Demonstration of use. In addition to subsection (a) of this section, all applicants shall demonstrate the use of the best management practices (BMPs), including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Maintenance. All facilities and structures constructed in accordance with the prescribed best management practices shall be maintained by the owner and/or operator to ensure the ability of such facilities and structures to function as designed. Failure to properly maintain such facilities and structures shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be subject to enforcement action of the town. 
(2)  Secondary containment. Use of a berm, dike, wall or other physical means shall be used to contain spilled material and reduce or eliminate influx of precipitation. Containment must be designed sufficient to contain ten percent of the total volume of ll containers of hazardous materials and/or substances stored or 110 percent of the largest container, whichever is greater. Secondary containment requirements for aboveground storage tanks are contained in table 1 of subsection 21-186(h). 
(3)  Blocking of existing interior floor drains; design of new buildings without floor drains/sumps. All existing structures with a potential for the release of hazardous materials/substances to the environment via a floor drain or sump must ensure that such exit routes are maintained blocked (e.g., spill mats, berms, etc.) to prevent the release or accumulation of material. All new structures that utilize such materials must be designed without drains and/or sumps. 
(4)  Prohibited outdoor unenclosed hazardous material and pesticide storage. The storage of hazardous materials/substances and pesticides is prohibited when not provided with three-sided structures with roofs and a means to prevent the influx and/or flow of precipitation. 
(5)  Fertilizer storage. The storage of fertilizers is prohibited when not provided with a means to prevent the influx and/or flow of precipitation. 
(6)  UST compliance; retrofitting of existing USTs and prohibition of the installation of new USTs. All existing underground storage tanks (USTs) used to store hazardous materials/substances/petroleum products must be retrofitted in accordance with the requirements specified in the state department of environmental management regulations for underground storage facilities used for petroleum products and hazardous materials (effective July 21, 1992). Installation of all new USTs is prohibited. 
(7)  Cover and secondary containment for loading/unloading areas. All areas utilized for the loading/unloading/transfer of hazardous materials/substances/petroleum products must be provided with sufficient overhead and side cover to prevent the influx of precipitation and sufficient secondary containment (via berms, dikes, negative berms, etc.) to prevent the release of the material to the environment. 
(8)  Density restrictions for unsewered areas. There shall be a limitation on the average density of development to two acres per dwelling unit for all residential structures located in areas not served by municipal sewers. Density bonuses shall not be granted in groundwater protection areas. 
(9)  Facility spill prevention. Development of a facility spill prevention plan for all facilities utilizing hazardous materials/hazardous substances, petroleum products shall be required. The plan shall be developed in accordance with the minimum requirements of Rhode Island Rule 5.02 Contingency Plan Requirements. Note: This requirement does not preclude or substitute for any potentially applicable requirements of the Rhode Island Oil Pollution Prevention Regulation (RIGL) chapters 46-12, 42-17.1 and 42.35 or USEPA Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure Plan (SPCC), 40 CFR 112. 
(10)  Mandatory inspection and pumping of individual sewage disposal systems. Inspection and pumping of individual sewage disposal systems located in groundwater protection areas shall be required. Such pumping and inspection shall be consistent with any applicable sections of this Code or town ordinances pertaining to wastewater management. 
(11)  Surface stormwater runoff controls. The use of on-site surface stormwater runoff controls to both prevent the potential for releases of hazardous materials/substances, oil, fertilizers or pesticides to the environment and provide for discharge off site shall be required. Controls may include such structures as trench drains, berms, retention ponds, vegetated buffer areas, etc. 
(12)  Mandatory monitoring of wells. The installation and/or use of existing wells to monitor for the presence of specified pollutant parameters shall be required. 
(13)  Denitrification systems. The design and installation of a biological denitrification septic disposal system for the on-site treatment of domestic wastewater shall be required. Denitrification systems must have the approval of the state department of environmental management, division of water resources, individual sewage disposal systems division. Due to required maintenance and monitoring of denitrification systems, all denitrification systems must be noted on the deed to the lot to ensure knowledge, recognition and maintenance of the system at the time of sale. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 08-18, § 6, 7-7-2008) 
Sec. 21-188. - Special flood hazard overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure public safety, minimize hazards to persons and property from flooding, protect watercourses from encroachment, and to maintain the capability of floodplains to retain and carry off floodwaters. The town elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended). 
(b)  Applicability . This special flood hazard area overlay district contains special flood hazard areas, including floodways and coastal high hazard areas. Special flood hazard areas are subject to recurrent flooding which presents serious hazards to the health, safety, welfare, and property of the residents of the town. Regulation of the development and alteration of such areas is thus in the public interest. 
For communities adopting specific panel numbers with "Countywide" FIRMs and FIS: 
(1)  The special flood hazard areas (SFHA) are herein established as a floodplain overlay district. The district includes all special flood hazard areas within the town designated as zone A, AE, AH, AO, A99, V, or VE on the Washington County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and digital FIRM issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Washington County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the town are panel numbers 44009C0013H, 44009C0085H, 44009C0092H, 44009C0094H, 44009C0101H, 44009C0102H, 44009C0103H, 44009C0107H, 44009C0111H, 44009C0113H, 44009C0185H, 44009C0201H dated October 19, 2010; and 440090014J, 44009C0018J, 44009C0019J, 44009C0102J, 44009C0104J, 44009C0106J, 44009C0107J, 44009C0108J, 44009C0109J, 44009C0112J, 44009C0114J, 44009C0116J, 44009C0118J and 44009C0202J dated October 16, 2013. The exact boundaries of the District may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Washington County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated October 16, 2013. The office of planning and development is responsible for floodplain management. The FIRM and FIS report and any revisions thereto are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the town building official. 
(2)  Administrative provisions. The sections below contain language to ensure proper administration and the legal enforceability of this section. 
a.  Building permit. All proposed construction or other development within a special flood hazard area shall require a permit. 
b.  The National Flood Insurance Program special flood hazard area requires permits for all projects that meet the definition of development, not just "building" projects. Development projects include any filling, grading, excavation, mining, drilling, storage of materials, temporary stream crossings. If the construction or other development within a special flood hazard area is not covered by a building permit, all other non-structural activities shall be permitted by either the Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Council and/or the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management as applicable. Therefore if another state agency issues a permit, the local building official must have the opportunity for input and keep a copy of the respective permit in their files. 
c.  Prior to the issuance of a building or development permit, the applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary permits and approvals have been received from all government agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. 
d.  Review by building official. The building official shall review all development proposed in the special flood hazard overlay district to ensure the development is in compliance with the provisions of the tenth edition of the state building code (July 1, 2010), and all subsequent amendments, concerning flood-resistant siting and construction. 
e.  A permit fee (based on the cost of the construction) may be required to be paid to the town and a copy of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application. An additional fee may be charged if the code enforcement officer and/or board of appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer. 
f.  Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the primary zoning district shall be permitted in the special flood hazard overlay district, provided that such use is in accordance with the following additional minimum requirements: 
1.  Floodways. No development proposing fill, new construction, substantial improvement, or other encroachment within a floodway which will result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the 100-year flood shall be permitted. The placement of mobile homes shall be prohibited. 
2.  Coastal high hazard areas. The alteration of sand dunes, where existent, is prohibited. All new construction shall be located landward of the spring (moon) high tide. The placement of mobile homes shall be prohibited. 
g.  Special use permits. Exceptions to subsection (c) of this section may be granted by the zoning board of review when consistent with section 21-6 and section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program, as amended. 
h.  Site plan review. Every person proposing development in the special flood hazard area, including but not limited to buildings and other related structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling, shall submit a site plan for approval by the building official, town engineer and the director of planning and development. Site plans shall supply at least the following information: 
1.  Accurate location of the proposed development. 
2.  Nature of the proposed development including types of activities proposed; areas to be disturbed; and quantities of materials to be excavated, moved or filled. 
3.  Elevation of the site relative to mean sea level according to established standards. 
4.  A description of the extent to which any existing watercourse would be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. Prior to granting site plan approval for a proposal involving the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the director of planning and development shall notify adjacent communities, the state office of statewide planning, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
5.  Any such additional information as is deemed necessary for a complete description of the proposed development. 
i.  Disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by the ordinance is considered reasonable but does not imply total flood protection. 
j.  Severability. If any section, provision, or portion of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected. 
k.  Abrogation and greater restriction. This section shall not in any way impair/remove the necessity of compliance with any other applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, etc. Where this section imposes a greater restriction, the provisions of this section shall control. 
l.  Enforcement. The building official shall enforce all provisions as applicable in reference to RIGL § 23-27.3-108.1. 
m.  Penalties. Every person who shall violate any provision of this code shall be subject to penalties put forth in RIGL § 23-27.3-122.3. 
(c)  Notification of watercourse alteration. In a riverine situation, the building official shall notify the following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
(1)  Adjacent communities; 
(2)  Bordering states (optional); 
(3)  NFIP state coordinator: 
Rhode Island Emergency Management Agency 
645 New London Avenue 
Cranston, RI 02920 
(4)  Risk analysis branch: 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I 
99 High Street, 6th Floor 
Boston, MA 02110 
The carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(d)  Use regulations. 
(1)  Reference to existing regulations (b, c, d, e communities). The special flood hazard areas are established as a floodplain overlay district. All development in the district, including structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit must be in compliance with the following: 
a.  Rhode Island State Building Code (as established under RIGL § 23-27.3); 
b.  Coastal Resources Management Act, Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Council (RIGL ch. 46-23); 
c.  Endangered Species Act, Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIGL § 20-1-2); 
d.  Freshwater Wetlands Act, Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIGL § 2-1-18); 
e.  Minimum Standards Related to Individual Sewage Disposal Systems, Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIGL chs. 5-56, 5-56.1, 23-19.15, 23-19.5, 23-24.3, 42-17.1, and 46-13.2); 
f.  Water Quality Regulations, Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIGL chs. 42-17.1 and 42-17.6 and 46-12). 
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above referenced state regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of these state regulations. 
(2)  Other use regulations. 
a.  Within zones AH and AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths must be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (c, d, e communities, if AH or AO appear) 
b.  Within zones AO on the FIRM, new and substantially improved residential structures shall have the top of the lowest floor at least as high as the FIRM's depth number above the highest adjacent grade and non-residential structures shall be elevated or flood-proofed above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth number on the FIRM. On FIRMs without a depth number for the AO zone, structures shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade (c, d, e communities, if AO appear). 
c.  In zones A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that have a regulatory floodway designated on the Washington County FIRM encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge (d, e communities). 
d.  All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that: 
1.  Such proposals minimize flood damage; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards (b, c, d, e communities). 
e.  Detached accessory structures in zones A, AE, A1-30, AO, and AH (i.e., garages, sheds) do not have to meet the elevation or dry flood-proofing requirement if the following standards are met. 
1.  The structure has a value less than $1,000.00. 
2.  The structure has unfinished interiors and must not be used for human habitation. An apartment, office or other finished space over a detached garage is considered human habitation and would require the structure to be elevated. 
3.  The structure is not in the floodway. 
4.  The structure is not used for storage of hazardous materials. 
5.  The structure is used solely for parking of vehicles and/or limited storage. 
6.  The accessory must be wet floodproofed and designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood water. 
7.  The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
8.  Service facilities such as electrical, mechanical and heating equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood elevation. 
9.  The structure must not increase the flood levels in the floodway. 
f.  Existing contour intervals of site and elevations of existing structures must be included on plan proposal (optional for b, c, d, e communities). 
g.  No person shall change from business/commercial to residential use of any structure or property located in the floodway of a special flood hazard area so as to result in a use or expansion that could increase the risk to the occupants. 
h.  The space below the lowest floor: 
1.  Free of obstructions as described in FEMA Technical Bulletin 5 "Free of Obstruction Requirements for Buildings Located in Coastal High Hazard Area in Accordance with the National Flood Insurance Program;" or 
2.  Constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting piles or columns; or, 
3.  Designed with an enclosed area less than 300 square feet that is constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls that have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten or more than 20 pounds per square foot. 
(e)  Definitions. Unless otherwise specified, the definitions provided for below shall only be applicable to section 21-188. 
    Area of shallow flooding (for a community with AO or AH zones only). A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height, as established in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum where specified), in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
    Coastal A zone. Area within a special flood hazard area, landward of a V zone or landward of an open coast without mapped V zones. The principal source of flooding must be astronomical tides, storm surges, seiches, or tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During the base flood conditions, the potential for breaking wave heights shall be greater than or equal to 1.5 feet. 
    Cost. As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, costs to correct code violations subsequent to a violation notice, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM). 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). The official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted a technical engineering evaluation and determination of local flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface elevations. The flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations, and may provide the regulatory floodway limits. 
    Flood proofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "regulatory floodway" is synonymous in meaning with the term "floodway". 
    Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use or facility. A use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Limit of moderate wave action (LiMWA). An advisory line indicating the limit of the 1.5-foot wave height during the base flood. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; Provided , that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of § 60.3. 
    Regulatory floodway. See definition for "floodway." 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA). The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30 ,AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard." 
    Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. For insurance purposes, "structure" means: 
(1)  A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site; 
(2)  A manufactured home ("a manufactured home," also know as a mobile home, is a structure; built on permanent chassis, transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation); or 
(3)  A travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community's floodplain management and building ordinances or laws. 
For the latter purpose, "structure" does not mean recreational vehicle or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in paragraph (3) of this definition, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Violation. Failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management ordinance. Construction or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, § 2, 1-24-1983; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 10-18-2010; Ord. No. 13-14, § 1, 9-23-2013) 
State Law reference- General purposes of zoning ordinances, RIGL § 45-24-30(10). 
Sec. 21-189. - Scenic overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The scenic overlay district is intended to preserve, protect and maintain scenic roads and highways and vistas in the town as described in the town's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Designation. The town council may designate a scenic corridor or vista to the scenic overlay district. Designation may be based on one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Physical criteria including but not limited to vegetation, topography, agricultural activities, stone walls, character of the road, rock outcrops, vistas, historic features, humanmade features, cultural features, wildlife habitat or wetlands. 
(2)  Aesthetic criteria including but not limited to uniqueness, harmony of landscape, integrity of roadway, vividness or susceptibility to change. 
(c)  Designated scenic overlay districts. Designated scenic overlay districts shall be as follows: 
(1)  Congdon Hill Road. 
(2)  Route 102: Ten Rod Road and Phillips Street. 
(3)  North Quidnesset Road. 
(4)  Forge Road. 
(5)  Harrison Street. 
(6)  Potter Road. 
(7)  Fletcher Road. 
(8)  Shermantown Road from Slocum Road to Tower Hill Road. 
(9)  Gilbert Stuart Road from Tower Hill Road to Boston Neck Road. 
(10)  Boston Neck Road from Phillips Street to Narragansett town line. 
(11)  Slocum Road from Indian Corner Road to South Kingstown town line. 
(12)  Indian Corner Road. 
(13)  Route 4. 
(14)  Route 1 from Route 4 to the South Kingstown town line. 
(15)  Hamilton-Allenton Road. 
(16)  Snuff Mill Road. 
(d)  Development plan approval required. Development proposed in designated scenic overlay districts shall be subject to development plan approval by the planning commission. In considering a proposal for a scenic overlay district, the commission shall give full consideration to the criteria that formed the basis of the designation and the protection and preservation of the district. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-190. - Sending area overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the sending area overlay district is to identify parcels of land in the town or land in the Town of Exeter that is referred to in the memorandum of agreement between the Town of North Kingstown and the Town of Exeter for the "retained ten acre parcel" adopted on December 6, 2010 and December 13, 2010 by the Towns of Exeter and North Kingstown respectively that are eligible to participate in the transfer of development rights program outlined in article XXIII of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Designation. The boundaries of the sending area overlay district are established and shown on the town official sending area overlay district map, as it may be amended from time to time, filed at the office of the town clerk. The official sending area overlay district map, which together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted and made part of this Code. The official sending area overlay district map shall be identified by the signature of the president of the town council, in office at the time of adoption, attested by the town clerk and bearing the seal of the town. 
(c)  Interpretation. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the sending area overlay district map, boundaries shown as approximately following lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. For any other circumstance, the administrative officer shall interpret the zoning district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 2, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 1-10-2011) 
Sec. 21-191. - Wickford Village Design Guidelines Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this zoning overlay district is to encourage creative solutions that will preserve the unique and historic qualities of Wickford's village center, while helping businesses meet the challenging economy of the 21 st century. 
(b)  Overlay district. 
(1)  For the purpose of section 21-191, the boundaries of the overlay district are established and hereby adopted as shown on the map, entitled, "Wickford Design Guidelines Overlay Map", dated November 26, 2018, filed at the office of the town clerk. Such map is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(2)  Those properties included in the overlay district shall be subject to the use provisions of the Wickford Village Center (WVC) zoning district and dimensional provisions pertaining to the Wickford Village Center Design Guidelines Overlay District, as outlined in section 21-93, article III and article IV of the zoning ordinance, unless otherwise stated within this chapter. 
(3)  The Brown Street Wickford Design Guidelines and Standards dated September 24, 2018 are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. The document shall govern any alteration, repair, removal or demolition affecting the exterior appearance of a structure or any new construction or reconstruction on any property within the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Overlay District. 
(4)  Any alteration, repair, removal or demolition affecting the exterior appearance of a structure or any new construction or reconstruction on any property within the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Overlay District shall require design approval from the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee or the planning director/designee as determined within this section. 
(5)  Properties within the overlay district are subject to development plan review approval pursuant to section 21-284 prior to obtaining a building permit. 
(c)  Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee (WVDGC). 
(1)  Established. In order to carry out the purposes of this article, there is established a Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee which, along with the planning director, shall be charged with carrying out the purposes of this article within the provisions of design plan review under RIGL 1956, § 45-24-49 and section 21-284. 
(2)  Membership and appointment. There shall be seven members and three alternates on the WVDGC, to be appointed by the town council as follows: 
a.  The five members of the historic district commission (HDC) shall also serve and be appointed as members of the WVDGC as well as the two alternates of the HDC. These two alternates shall only sit as alternates when HDC members are not available to sit as members of the WVDGC. 
b.  Two business property owners in the overlay district shall also be appointed as members of the WVDGC. A third alternate, who is also the owner of a business property within the district, shall be appointed to serve only in the absence of a business property owner. 
c.  The business owners and the business alternate shall serve three-year terms. 
d.  Appointed members shall be eligible for re-appointment and upon the expiration of their term may continue to serve until replaced. In the event of a vacancy with an unexpired term, interim appointments may be made to complete the term. 
(3)  Meetings and quorum. A quorum of four shall be necessary to conduct a meeting and to vote on any matter. A majority of those voting shall be necessary to approve any application. All meetings shall comply with the state Open Meetings Act. 
(4)  All decisions shall be in writing and the reasons and basis for the decision in accordance with applicable standards and the guidelines shall be provided. 
(5)  Enforcement. The building official shall be empowered to enforce the decision and the requirements of this section, including by the filing for relief, damages, and equitable relief and injunction in superior court. 
(d)  Application, review, decision, and appeal procedures. Procedures for application, review, decision and appeals shall be as follows: 
(1)  Application procedures. Applicants within the overlay district shall submit an application and accompanying materials for development plan review, as set forth in section 21-284 with the exception of voluntary demolition applications, which shall follow the provisions of subsection 21-191(e). 
(2)  Review procedures. 
a.  Any alteration, repair, removal or demolition affecting the exterior appearance of a structure or any new construction or reconstruction shall be first assessed at the design level. 
1.  Administrative approval required. The following shall require development plan approval by the planning director or his/her designee including: 
i.  Any cosmetic improvement including, but not limited to, window replacements, siding, reroofing, mechanical equipment, and in-kind repairs or replacements of building materials; and 
ii.  Site improvements such as patios, walkways, and fences. 
2.  Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee approval required. Any alteration, repair, removal or demolition affecting the exterior appearance of a structure or any new construction or reconstruction on any property other than as described in subsection 21-191(d)(2)a.1. shall require design review and approval by the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee. In addition, the planning director/designee has the authority to refer applications that meet subsection 21-191(d)(2)a.1. for administrative review to the committee for good cause. 
3.  The planning director or his/her designee shall maintain a list of all approvals granted and submit it to the WVDGC in a manner and form required by the committee. 
4.  Required findings. In granting design review approval, the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee or the planning director/designee shall require evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
i.  The requested action will not alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or purpose of this chapter, in accordance with the Brown Street Wickford Village Design Standards and Guidelines or the comprehensive plan upon which this chapter is based. 
ii.  The proposal has architectural integrity and maintains an appropriate relationship with other structures in the immediate area as related to height, massing and design features. 
iii.  Building mass is articulated to relate to the human scale, both horizontally and vertically. Building elevations have variation and depth and avoid large blank wall surfaces. Residential or mixed-use residential projects incorporate elements that indicate habitation, such as identifiable entrances, stairs, porches, bays, and balconies. 
iv.  Exterior building materials and finishes convey high quality, permanence and durability, and are used effectively to define design features and structural elements. Materials and finishes have been used in a manner that serves to reduce the perceived appearance of height, bulk and mass, and are harmonious with other structures in the immediate area. 
v.  Landscape and hardscape features are designed to complement the building and parking areas, and to be integrated with the building architecture and the surrounding streetscape. 
vi.  Signage is designed to complement the building architecture as related to style, materials and proportions. 
vii  Mechanical equipment is screened from public view and the screening is designed to be consistent with the building architecture in form, material and detailing. 
viii.  Service, trash and utility areas are screened from public view, or are enclosed in structures that are consistent with the building architecture in materials and detailing. 
b.  Properties within the overlay district are also subject to further development plan review for approval for matters not subject to the guidelines pursuant to section 21-284 prior to obtaining a building permit. 
(3)  Decision procedures. The applicant shall receive both a design approval decision and, for matters not subject to the guidelines, a development plan review decision. Decisions granted pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of filing of the decision, during which time application for a building permit shall be made. The approving agency may grant up to an additional year as a condition of approval, when such is requested in writing before the expiration of the original one-year period. 
(4)  Appeals. An appeal of a decision by the committee or administrative officer with regard to design review or development plan review approval may be taken by an aggrieved party in accordance with section 21-284 and section 21-17. 
(5)  Inspections. Upon the request of the building official, the engineering department shall inspect all site work required as part of the development plan review approval and shall report its findings to the building official. 
(e)  Voluntary demolition. The town is committed to preserving the historically and culturally significant built environment and neighborhood architectural identities located within the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Overlay District. Therefore, a demolition permit is required prior to the demolition of any structure located within the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Overlay District. Administration of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Application/inspection fee. No application shall be considered complete unless accompanied by the required application fee. If applicable, an inspection fee shall be paid by the applicant as a condition of approval of a demolition plan. The fee shall be an amount based on the value of improvements as determined by the town engineer. The demolition permit application may be processed simultaneously with any required development plan review, variance and/or special use permit application. 
(2)  Application materials. The completed demolition permit review application shall include the following: 
a.  Demolition review application and non-refundable fee; 
b.  Demolition staging plan; 
c.  Site plan identifying all existing structures; 
d.  Plans and elevations for the proposed reuse of the property in accordance with the Brown Street Wickford Village Design Standards and Guidelines; 
e.  Stormwater management plans and specifications made in conformance with the town's stormwater management regulations; and 
f.  Site restoration plans and specifications (only applicable if commencement of construction of a new structure is not planned within 60 days after completed demolition). 
(3)  Review standards and findings. The Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee shall review all demolition permit applications in accordance with this chapter and ordinances of the town, together with the following findings: 
a.  The granting of the permit is not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
b.  The proposed demolition of the structure is consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. 
c.  The proposed demolition does not create land with constraints to development. 
d.  The proposed demolition does no harm to the character of the immediate neighborhood or area of the town. 
e.  If an application is submitted for demolition affecting the appearance of a structure or its appurtenances which the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee deems so valuable to the town, state, or nation that the loss thereof will be a great loss to the town, state, or nation, the committee shall endeavor to work out with the owner an economically feasible plan for the preservation of such structure. Unless the committee is satisfied that the retention of such structure constitutes a hazard to public safety, which hazard cannot be eliminated by economic means available to the owner, including sale of the structure to any purchaser willing to preserve such structure, or unless the committee votes to approve of the proposed reuse of the property, the committee shall file with the building inspector its rejection of such application for demolition. 
f.  If any structure is deemed so valuable for the period of architecture it represents and important to the neighborhood within which it exists, the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee may file with the building inspector its approval of demolition if: 
1.  Preservation of such structure is a deterrent to a major improvement program which will be of substantial benefit to the community; 
2.  Preservation of such structure would cause undue or unreasonable financial hardship to the owner, taking into account the financial resources available to the owner including sale of the structure to any purchaser willing to preserve such structure; or 
3.  Preservation of such structure would not be in the interest of the majority of the community. 
g.  When considering an application to demolish or remove a structure of historic value, the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee shall assist the owner in identifying and evaluating alternatives to demolition, including the sale of the structure in its present site. In addition to any other criteria, the committee also shall consider whether there is a reasonable likelihood that some person or group other than the current owner is willing to purchase, move, and preserve such structure and whether the owner has made continuing, bona fide and reasonable efforts to sell the structure to any purchaser willing to move and preserve such structure. 
h.  In circumstances where Wickford Village Design Guidelines Committee review may overlap with historic reviews of the state historic preservation commission, it shall be the obligation of the committee to arrange a coordinated review process with the state agency. This coordinated review shall be arranged within the time limitations established through the local committee's rules of procedure for its own review of an application. The purpose of the coordinated review shall be to minimize the potential for conflicting opinions on matters related to historic preservation on the part of the local and state authorities. The committee shall solicit the written comments of the state historic preservation commission. 
(4)  Recommended conference. Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit, a conference is recommended between the building official and the demolition contractor to review the requirements and conditions for demolition. 
(5)  Conditions and restrictions. The committee and administrative officer may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the issuance of the demolition permit as may be necessary to satisfy the review standards and findings of subsection (3) above. 
(6)  Construction standards. Upon approval, any demolition shall be done in accordance with the provisions of the building code in force at the time, the requirements of the codified ordinances, and any additional requirements or conditions of the committee. The applicant shall also be required to submit to the town proof of disconnection of utilities prior to commencing demolition of the building. Demolition practices shall also adhere to the following standards: 
a.  General. Demolition permit applications are conditioned upon approval of any state-mandated requirements in place at the time of the completed applications. 
b.  Particulate control. Airborne particles shall be controlled at all demolition sites. 
c.  Fencing. Fencing shall be installed around the entire perimeter of any excavated area greater than 24 inches below grade in depth. 
d.  Restoration. If construction of a new development has not commenced within 60 days of demolition, the property must be restored to a safe condition. 
e.  Noise. Upon issuance of a demolition permit by the building official, demolition activity shall only take place Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(f)  General requirements. 
(1)  Building height. No structure located within the Wickford Village Design Guidelines Overlay District shall exceed 27 feet in height. For a vacant parcel of land, building height shall be measured from the average, existing-grade elevation where the foundation of the structure is proposed. For an existing structure, building height shall be measured from average grade taken from the outermost four corners of the existing foundation. In all cases, building height shall be measured to the top of the highest point of the existing or proposed roof or structure. This distance shall exclude spires, chimneys, flag poles, and the like. For any property or structure located in a special flood hazard area, as shown on the official FEMA flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs), building height shall be measured from base flood elevation, and where freeboard, as defined in this section, is being utilized or proposed, such freeboard area, not to exceed five feet, shall be excluded from the building height calculation; provided, however that the Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Council design elevation maps may be used by an owner or applicant to establish a base flood elevation for a property that is higher than the official FEMA FIRMs. 
(g)  Interpretation. The committee or administrative officer, as appropriate, shall be responsible for deciding the meaning and intent of any section of this article which may be unclear or in dispute. 
(Ord. No. 18-28, § 1, 11-26-2018) 
Secs. 21-192-21-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, adopted April 10, 2006, amended the Code by repealing former art. IX, §§ 21-211-21-218, and adding a new art. IX, §§ 21-211-21-220. Former art. IX pertained to cluster developments, and derived from Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-9-1-17-9-8; Ord. No. 83-11, adopted July 25, 1983; Ord. No. 85-17, adopted October 15, 1985; Ord. No. 86-12, adopted June 9, 1986; Ord. No. 94-12, adopted June 27, 1994; Ord. No. 98-7, adopted May 11, 1998; Ord. No. 01-1, adopted February 12, 2001. 

Sec. 21-211. - Purpose of article. 
    The purposes of conservation developments are: 
(1)  To conserve open land, including those areas containing unique and sensitive natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes, streams, floodplains, wetlands, aquifers and their recharge areas, and agricultural lands, by setting them aside from development; 
(2)  To preserve historical and archaeological resources; 
(3)  To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of services and infrastructure, including the opportunity to reduce length of roads, utility runs, and the amount of paving required for residential development; 
(4)  To provide for a diversity of lot sizes, building densities, and housing choices to accommodate a variety of age and income groups, and residential preferences, so that the population diversity of the community may be maintained; 
(5)  To implement adopted municipal policies to conserve a variety of irreplaceable and environmentally important resources as set forth in the comprehensive plan; 
(6)  To provide reasonable incentives for the creation of a greenway system within the town; 
(7)  To implement adopted land use, transportation and community service policies, as set forth in the comprehensive plan; 
(8)  To protect areas of the town with productive agricultural soils for continued or future agricultural use by conserving blocks of land large enough to allow for efficient farm operations; 
(9)  To create neighborhoods with direct visual and/or physical access to open land, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space, and with a strong neighborhood identity; 
(10)  To provide for the maintenance of open land set aside for active or passive recreational use, stormwater drainage or conservation lands; 
(11)  To conserve and create scenic views and preserve the rural character of the town; 
(12)  To provide a buffer between new development and existing streets and neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 21-212. - Applicability. 
(a)  The planning commission may approve, as a land development project, a conservation development only in the following zoning districts: VLDR200, LDR12O, RR8O, NR4O, VR2O and PVD. 
(b)  Administrative subdivisions and subdivisions that create lots which are not for the purpose of present or future development shall not be required to be developed as a conservation development. 
(c)  In accordance with the standards set forth in article IX of the zoning ordinance, the planning commission may not require that any major or minor subdivisions or land development projects be developed as a conservation development, whether a subdivision or not. Applications for a major or minor conventional subdivision shall be at the discretion of the applicant. 
(d)  The planning commission shall not require an application for a residential compound to be submitted as a conservation development. Applications for approval of a residential compound shall be at the discretion of the applicant, subject to the provisions of article XVII of this chapter, and in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth herein for minor or major land development projects. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 21-213. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted (P) in a conservation development: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Townhouses, up to a maximum of four (4) dwelling units per building. 
(4)  Uses customarily accessory and subordinate to residences. 
(5)  Community centers, recreation facilities and similar structures designed for the use of the residents of the conservation development, and their guests. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 21-214. - Maximum density for conservation developments. 
    The maximum density for a conservation development shall not exceed the number of lots (or dwelling units) which could reasonably be expected to be developed upon the conservation development site under a yield plan as defined in section 21-22 herein. The planning commission shall make this determination in accordance with the following procedure. 
(1)  The basic maximum number of dwelling units allowed on a parcel of land proposed for development as a conservation development is defined as the maximum number of dwelling units that could reasonably be expected to be developed as a conventional subdivision upon that parcel under a yield plan as defined herein. The applicant for approval of a conservation development shall have the burden of proof with regard to the reasonableness and feasibility of the design and of the engineering specifications for such yield plan; provided, however, that the planning commission's determination of the basic maximum number shall be conclusive. 
(2)  Yield plans shall be prepared by the applicant as conceptual layout plans in accordance with the pre-application checklist (checklist B, subdivision and land development regulations). Yield plans shall show proposed streets, lots, rights-of-way, land unsuitable for development and other pertinent features. Although the yield plan must be drawn to scale, it need not be based on a field survey, nor shall it include field verified wetlands. However, it must be a realistic layout reflecting a development pattern that could reasonably be expected to be implemented, taking into account the presence of land unsuitable for development as defined in section 21-22, existing easements or encumbrances and the suitability of soils for subsurface sewage disposal. 
(3)  The yield plan shall also reflect the dimensional standards for uses being proposed, as contained in article IV, dimensional regulations, and table 2A-2C, or other applicable dimensional requirement of this zoning ordinance. The yield plan must identify how conventional lots or uses could be developed having the required area not including land unsuitable for development, frontage and other dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  On sites served by individual sewage disposal systems (ISDS), density shall be further determined by evaluating the number of dwelling units or other uses that could be supported by ISDS on lots in a conventional subdivision. Lots or dwelling units shown on a yield plan shall not include dwelling units proposed to be serviced by an ISDS that requires the granting of a variance by the state department of environmental management. The planning commission shall determine the suitability of the parcel to be developed as a conventional subdivision, based on the soils information provided by the applicant, upon observations mad during the site visit to the property, and/or upon other evidence available to the commission at any time during the development review process. 
(5)  At the pre-application stage of review, the planning commission shall discuss the basic maximum number of lots/dwelling units permitted in a development. This initial determination shall not be binding upon the commission or applicant, but shall provide guidance and direction to the applicant regarding the maximum number of lots or dwelling units that appear to be feasible, taking into account the physical constraints to development present on the site. The applicant shall use this initial determination as the basis for submission of more detailed information during subsequent stages of review. Upon further investigation and upon receipt of more detailed soils and environmental information as may be provided in subsequent stages of review, the planning commission may increase or reduce the number of lots/dwelling units contained in the initial basic maximum number. For all developments, the final basic maximum number shall be made at the final stage of review. 
(6)  In developments that require alteration to be made to freshwater wetlands, the commission may establish an initial basic maximum number contingent upon confirmation by the state department of environmental management that such alterations are permitted under the provisions of the Freshwater Wetlands Act. 
(7)  Accessory dwelling units shall be excluded from the determination of the number of dwelling units allowed under a yield plan and shall not be counted as dwelling units in the determination of development to subsequently be permitted, whether the conservation development was approved before or after adoption of this provision. Provided, however, that the maximum number of permitted dwelling units in the conservation development site shall not be increased by a factor of more than 1.5 above the basic maximum number where granted a zoning incentive as provided in section 21-215. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 07-23, § 5, 9-24-2007) 
Sec. 21-215. - Zoning incentives. 
    The planning commission may award a zoning incentive so as to increase the number of dwelling units in a conservation development beyond the basic maximum number; provided, however, that the maximum number of permitted dwelling units in the conservation development site shall not be increased by a factor of more than 1.5. An incentive may be awarded in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The number of single household dwelling units in townhouses only having one or fewer bedrooms, including so-called "studio units" may be increased by a factor of 1.5 for the purpose of calculating the basic maximum number; and/or, 
(2)  The number of single household dwelling units in townhouses only having a maximum of two bedrooms may be increased by a factor of 1.5 for the purpose of calculating the basic maximum number; and/or 
(3)  Where the planning commission determines that occupancy of the dwelling unit in the conservation development is limited to adults 55 years of age or older, subject to the exceptions set forth in the Federal Fair Housing Act, the Basic Maximum Number of permitted dwelling units in the development may be increased by a factor of 1.5; and/or, 
(4)  Where the planning commission determines that the amount of open space area provided in the entire conservation development exceeds the minimum amount as provided in the subdivision and land development regulations, the basic maximum number of permitted dwelling units in the development may be increased by a factor in accordance with the following table: 
Amount of Open Space Provided Permitted Increase in Density More than 10 to 20 percent more than minimum Factor of 1.05 More than 20-50 percent more than minimum Factor of 1.1 More than 50 percent above minimum Factor of 1.15  
(5)  The planning commission may determine that an existing dwelling which is currently located on the property being developed should be preserved for any of the following purposes: maintenance of historic or traditional development patterns; preservation of streetscape features; maintenance of building placement, setback and alignment on the site; preservation of historic structures that contribute to the character of an area; design of public or common open space; or other design or site planning issues identified in the comprehensive plan. 
In such cases, the planning commission may allow the applicant to exceed the basic maximum number of permitted dwelling units in the development by one. Any dwelling granted a zoning incentive under the provisions of this section shall be subject to deed restrictions prohibiting the removal or alteration of the dwelling except as may be approved by the planning commission as a condition of approval. This dwelling may contain more than two bedrooms. 
(6)  Zoning incentives pursuant to this section shall not be permitted in a groundwater overlay district. 
In computing the number of incentive dwelling units, all figures shall be rounded down. Except as provided in subsection 21-215(e) above, dwelling units qualifying as incentives herein shall be subject to deed restrictions approved by the planning commission's legal counsel limiting the number of bedrooms to two or less. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 07-23, § 6, 9-24-2007) 
Sec. 21-216. - Lot dimensional requirements. 
    A conservation development may be developed with dwelling units on separate lots, a single lot, or a combination thereof. Where dwellings are proposed to be located on individual lots, the following minimum dimensional regulations shall be applicable to dwellings within a conservation development. 
    Lots utilizing town water shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
Use Lot Area (sq ft) Lot Frontage and Width (ft.) Front Yard Depth (ft.) Rear Yard Depth (ft.) Side Yard (each side) (ft.) Single-family dwelling 10,000 20 25 30 10 Two-family dwelling 15,000 20 25 30 10 3-4-family household dwelling 30,000 20 40 40 20  
    Lots not utilizing Town Water shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
Use Lot Area (sq ft) Lot Frontage and Width (ft.) Front Yard Depth (ft.) Rear Yard Depth (ft.) Side Yard (each side) (ft.) Single-family dwelling 15,000 20 25 30 10 Two-family dwelling 20,000 20 25 30 10 3-4-family household dwelling 30,000 20 40 40 20  
Accessory structures in a conservation development. 
    Lots utilizing town water shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
Use Front Yard Depth (ft.) Rear Yard Depth (ft.) Side Yard Depth (ft.) One-story accessory structure* 30 15 5 Two-story accessory structure* 30 20 7.5  
*No accessory structures shall be located in front of the principal structure except by special use permit. 
    Lots not utilizing town water shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
Use Front Yard Depth (ft.) Rear Yard Depth (ft.) Side Yard Depth (ft.) One-story accessory structure* 30 15 5 Two-story accessory structure* 30 20 7.5  
*No accessory structures shall be located in front of the principal structure except by special use permit. 
    Note: The density and dimensional requirements for conservation developments in the planned village district shall be as provided in section 21-64 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 07-12, § 7, 6-11-07; Ord. No. 07-23, § 7, 9-24-2007) 
Sec. 21-217. - Uses permitted within open space areas. 
    The open space in a conservation development shall be devoted only to conservation purposes or for park, recreation and agricultural purposes. Stormwater drainage areas and well placement may also be allowed if permitted by the planning commission in accordance with the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(1)  Uses permitted within the open space of a conservation design subdivision shall be in accordance with the development restrictions placed in the conservation easement that is to be granted to the town. 
In addition, the following specific uses are permitted: 
a.  Conservation of land and other natural resources; 
b.  Agricultural uses, as provided in article III, land use table of this chapter. The prohibition of any such use (N) or the requirement to obtain a special use permit (S) as provided in this table shall apply; 
c.  Privately owned and maintained wells for individual uses within the Conservation Development; 
d.  Privately owned and maintained community wells for uses within the Conservation Development; 
e.  Subdivision parks; and, 
f.  Community centers, recreation facilities and similar structures designed for the use of the residents of the conservation development 
Placement of individual sewage disposal systems (ISDS) within the open space shall be permitted only by the granting of a waiver from the requirements of the subdivision and land development regulations by the planning commission. The only grounds for such a waiver shall be where the literal enforcement of one or more of the provisions of the regulations is impractical and will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question or where such waiver is in the best interest of good planning practice or design as evidenced by consistency with the comprehensive plan and this chapter. 
Where ISDS and/or wells are proposed to be located within the open space area of a conservation development, the planning commission may, as a condition of approval, require that a capital fund be established to cover future maintenance of these utilities. The commission shall set the requirements for this capital fund to be administered by a home owners' association, by individual lot or dwelling unit owners, or other organization approved by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 21-218. - Open space in conservation developments. 
(a)  The open space shall be established as a lot or lots separate and distinct from the lots intended for residential and accessory uses, and from land dedicated as street rights-of-way. 
(b)  The minimum amount of required open space area shall be based on a percentage of the land suitable for development in the entire conservation development as provided in the table below. None of the minimum required open space area shall include land unsuitable for development as defined in article I, section 21-22. 
Zoning District Minimum Amount of Required Open Space VLDR/200 75% LDR/120 65% RR/R80 60% NR/R40 50% VR/R20 35% PVD 30%  
(c)  This minimum required area shall be in addition to any open space used for stormwater drainage facilities. Provided, however, that the planning commission may allow stormwater drainage facilities to count toward the minimum required open space area if it finds that the drainage areas are designed as a fully integrated part of an overall open space landscape plan which incorporates trails, active or passive parks, landscaped site features, streambelts or greenways, and are designed to facilitate infiltration and recharge of water, and that such facilities are not in conflict with the intent and purpose of a conservation development as stated in article 13.2 of the subdivision and land development regulations, or with the general purposes of these regulations. 
Where stormwater drainage facilities are approved by the commission to be located within common open space areas, the commission shall require legal documents to be recorded along with the approved plat that clearly specify maintenance responsibilities. In addition, the applicant shall prepare for approval by the commission a maintenance plan for the facilities as part of the open space use and management plan as provided in article 13.12.a of the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(d)  Open space provided by a conservation development for public or common use, shall either: 
(1)  Be conveyed to the town and accepted by the town for park, open space, agricultural, or other permitted use or uses; or 
(2)  Be conveyed to a nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space or resource protection; or 
(3)  Be conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or units within the conservation development or owners of shares within a cooperative development. If such a corporation or trust is used, ownership shall pass with conveyances of the lots or units; or 
(4)  Remain in private (non-common) ownership if the use is limited to agriculture, habitat or forestry, and, in accordance with the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance, that private ownership is necessary for the preservation and management of the agriculture, habitat or forest resources. The planning commission may limit the amount of open space that may remain in private ownership where necessary to contribute to a connecting greenway system or to provide public access to open space, as provided in the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  In any case where the land is not conveyed to the town, a restriction, in perpetuity, enforceable by the town or by any owner of property in the land development project in which the land is located shall be recorded providing that the land shall be kept in the authorized condition(s) and not be built upon or developed. 
In addition, in any case where the land is not conveyed to the town, the development rights and other conservation easements on the land may be held, in perpetuity, by a nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space or resource protection. 
(f)  Buildings, structures, parking areas or other impervious improvements which are accessory to and subordinate to a permitted open space use, may be located on any open space lot provided that, in all cases, they occupy no more than five percent of the total open space area of the conservation development. 
(g)  All open space, regardless of whether it is conveyed to the town, shall be protected against further development and unauthorized alteration in perpetuity by appropriate deed restrictions, and by the grant of a conservation or preservation restriction to the town, pursuant to RIGL tit. 34, ch. 39, as amended. In addition, the perpetual maintenance of all open space shall be guaranteed by appropriate deed restrictions and by the grant of a conservation or preservation restriction to the town, pursuant to RIGL tit. 34, ch. 39, as amended. The planning commission or administrative officer shall approve the form and content of all deed restrictions at the time of final approval of the subdivision. Every deed restriction providing a maintenance guarantee shall contain the following provision: 
"If the owners, or their successors or assigns fail to maintain the open space, the town may perform any necessary maintenance and enforce the payment for such costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, by an action at law or in equity against the owners or their successors or assigns." 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 21-219. - Buffer areas. 
    The planning commission may require a vegetated buffer between new development and existing streets, neighborhoods, active farmland, adjacent park or conservation land, or other surrounding uses or areas in accordance with the following standards: 
If property abutting the proposed conservation development contains developed residential building lots, or if there are existing residential structures within 100 feet of the perimeter of the conservation development, the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  Structures in the conservation development must be located to meet at least the minimum rear yard setback as provided in section 21-216, and, 
(2)  A permanent buffer along the perimeter of the conservation development shall be established, providing for the preservation of existing trees or other vegetation or for the planting of new vegetation having adequate density, height and type of vegetation, in order to provide an all-season visual and audio screen between the conservation development and adjacent land uses. This buffer may be provided in either of two alternative forms, to be determined by the planning commission: 
a.  A separate open space lot or lots as provided in section 21-218 above, entitled "open space in conservation developments;" or, 
b.  A permanent easement along the perimeter of the conservation development to be located along the rear or side property line of the proposed lot or lots that abut the perimeter of the conservation development. Said easement shall run in favor of the town and shall be for conservation or open space purposes only. Where such easements are located on privately owned lots, they shall not be counted toward the minimum required open space area. 
(3)  The width of the required perimeter buffer shall be at least 50 feet provided, however, that the planning commission may reduce this width to a minimum often ten feet. In making this determination, the planning commission shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The nature of adjacent land uses existing at the time of master plan review (or preliminary review for a minor subdivision or land development project); 
b.  The nature of proposed or projected future land uses on adjacent property; 
c.  The physical characteristics of adjacent property (e.g., wetlands, slopes, stone walls, etc.); 
d.  The ownership of adjacent property (e.g., private, public, non-profit conservation, etc.); 
e.  The zoning of adjacent property; 
f.  The land use classification of adjacent property as provided on the comprehensive plan land use plan map. 
If lots on the outer perimeter of the proposed conservation development are not contiguous to developed residential building lots outside the conservation development, the planning commission shall determine if a buffer is required. 
Lots on the outer perimeter of the proposed conservation development, which are directly adjacent to a public street, must be separated from said public street by a thickly wooded buffer or screen of at least 100 feet in depth along the entire street frontage, except for any necessary access streets. On sites where there is little or no existing vegetation along an existing public street, consideration shall be given to creation of a new parallel street separated from the existing public street by a foreground meadow as described in the subdivision and land development regulations. 
If development within the conservation development is such that individual building lots are not being created (i.e., subdivision) but that buildings are proposed to be located on a single lot (i.e., condominium) or combination thereof, the provisions stated above with regard to buffer areas shall be interpreted to apply to the setback, screening and location of individual buildings. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 21-220. - Previously approved cluster developments. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall affect the validity of any cluster development which was given final approval by the decision of the planning commission prior to January 11, 1982, and the validity of and uses permitted within such a cluster development shall be governed by the ordinances that were in effect on the date that such final approval was given only if the approved plat or plan and legal documents concerning such development were or are recorded in the records of land evidence of the town no later than six months after January 11, 1982. Furthermore, nothing contained in this article shall prevent the planning commission from giving final approval to any cluster development to which the planning commission gave preliminary approval prior to November 23, 1981. If such final approval is given by the planning commission, the validity of and the uses permitted within such a cluster development shall be governed by the ordinances that were in effect on the date that such preliminary approval was given only if the approved plat or plan and legal documents concerning such development or compound are recorded in the records of land evidence of the town no later than one year after January 11, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 4, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 21-221. - Dimensional requirements for previously approved cluster developments. 
(a)  Density. The total number of residential dwelling units permitted on any cluster development shall be equal to the number of units allowed at the time of approval by the planning commission. Accessory structures including accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in accordance with article III, land use table, and section 21-325(7) and (16) as applicable. 
(b)  Dimensions. The minimum lot dimensions shall be in accordance with the following table: 
Type of Unit Zoning District Single-Family 
Detached Two-Family 
Detached One-Story 
Accessory Two-Story 
Accessory Rural Residential Lot size (square feet)* 20,000 30,000 Front (feet) 50 50 Lot yard (feet) 15 15 10 15 Neighborhood Residential Lot size (square feet)* 15,000 20,000 Front (feet) 50 50 Lot yard (feet) 10 10 10 15 Village Residential Lot size (square feet)* 12,000 14,000 Front (feet) 50 50 Lot yard (feet) 10 10 10 15 Very Low Density Residential Lot size (square feet)* 40,000 - Front (feet) 50 - Side yard and rear yard (feet) 25 - 20 25 Low Density Residential Lot size (square feet)* 30,000 - Front (feet) 50 - Side yard and rear yard (feet) 25 - 20 25  
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 3, 4-26-2010) 
Secs. 21-222-21-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SIGNS 

Sec. 21-241. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety by regulating the use of existing and proposed outdoor signs, signs visible from the outside and other advertising devices. This article is intended to enhance and protect the physical appearance and natural beauty of the community, protect property values and contribute to an attractive business climate by allowing sufficient freedom to identify and promote the availability of goods and services. It is further intended to promote and protect public safety by reducing sign and advertising distractions, obstructions and hazards that may contribute to traffic accidents or personal injury. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994) 
Sec. 21-242. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A-frame means a temporary sign commonly referred to as a sandwich board, where the frame or support structure is hinged or connected at the top of the sign in such a manner that the sign is easily moved or erected. 
    Billboard means any off-premises sign exceeding 15 square feet in area. 
    Digital sign means an electronic sign display or device that changes message copy on the sign by means of light emitting diodes (LED), fiber optics light bulbs, liquid crystal display or other illumination devices within the display area. Signs using such display methods are commonly called by various names, including, CEVMS (commercial electronic variable message signs or changeable electronic variable message signs), electronic message boards, electronic reader boards, dynamic signs, digital signs, electronic signs, message centers and similar terms. 
    Directory sign means a sign which contains listings of two or more commercial establishments and which is designed and constructed so as to allow for changes to the listings to reflect changes in occupancy without major alterations of the entire sign. Each individual directory sign shall not exceed eight square feet. 
    Flag includes any banner adopted by a nation, state or city/town. 
    Flag/banner, decorative, means any flag or banner other than the U.S., state or municipal flag. 
    Lighting, direct, means internal illumination that shines through a plastic or other translucent covering. 
    Lighting, indirect, means lighting that is external to the sign. 
    Linear frontage means the length of the lot in feet that abuts a public road. For a corner lot, the linear frontage shall be measured along the public road that serves as the primary entrance to the establishment. 
    Shopping center means two or more retail or mixed use establishments contained within the same building and/or sharing a parking lot. Shopping centers include shopping malls. 
    Sign means any device, whether freestanding or attached to a building or structure, or that is erected, painted, represented or reproduced upon or in (to the extent provided in this chapter) any building or structure, which displays, reproduces or includes any letter, work, name, number, model, insignia, design, device or representation used for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  To identify the premises or occupant or owner of the premises; 
(2)  To advertise the sale or rental or use of all or part of any premises, including that upon which it is displayed; 
(3)  To direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic other than state or municipal highway and roadway markers; and 
(4)  Including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or any representation used to advertise or intended to advertise or promote the interest of any person or corporation. 
    Sign, freestanding, means a sign supported by a pole, uprights, braces or frame on or in the ground and not supported by any wall, building or similar structure. This definition includes ground-mounted signs. 
    Sign height means the vertical distance measured from the ground at the base of the sign of the highest point of any portion of the sign or supporting structure. 
    Sign, obsolete, means any sign which advertises an area, use, business or product no longer sold on site or service no longer offered. 
    Sign, off-premises, means any sign or advertising device, not exceeding 15 square feet, which advertises a use or activity not located or a product not sold or manufactured on the lot on which the sign or device is located. 
    Sign, projecting, means a sign erected so as to project approximately perpendicular from the exterior of any building, ceiling or wall. 
    Sign setback means the setback measured from the property line to the outermost edge of the sign or supporting structure, whichever is closer to the lot line. 
    Sign, wall-mounted, means a sign erected against or attached to the wall of any building or structure, except a freestanding sign support, including signs affixed to fences, screens and freestanding walls. 
    Storefront area means the area of the storefront measured from outside wall to outside wall and from top of the first floor joist to bottom of the second floor joist. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 02-20, § 5, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-8, § 6, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, 10-19-2015) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-243. - Exemptions. 
    The following signs shall be allowed in any zoning district without the necessity of obtaining a sign permit. Noncompliance with the terms of this section shall cause such a sign to forfeit its exempt status and require the owner to follow the permit procedure set forth in this article. Owners or lessees of such signs shall ensure that exempt signs conform to all other applicable regulations, and the owners and lessees shall be responsible for the safe and proper erection and maintenance of such signs: 
(1)  One sign not to exceed two square feet when identifying a residence. 
(2)  A memorial sign or tablet, or a sign not exceeding eight square feet indicating the name of a building or the date of its erection. 
(3)  Signs identifying churches and places of worship or certified nonprofit organizations when located on the property thereof and not larger than 15 square feet. 
(4)  Bulletin boards for public or religious institutions when located on the property thereof, provided that such signs do not exceed 15 square feet and bear no commercial advertising. 
(5)  Pennants, spinners, streamers, banners and decorative flags when associated with events of religious, public or charitable organizations or new business openings for a period not to exceed ten days. Such advertising device may be located off premises provided it is erected and maintained in a safe and proper condition. 
(6)  One sign customary and necessary in the offering of real estate for sale or to let by the owner or the owner's licensed broker or agent, which shall not exceed six square feet in residential zones or 20 square feet in nonresidential zones. Signs indicating the property has been sold must be removed within two weeks after the sale is closed. 
(7)  Construction or contractor signs where there is only one per location identifying the project, the building and subcontractors, not exceeding nine square feet in area. Such a sign must be removed upon completion of the job. 
(8)  Development/subdivision signs, one wall-mounted or freestanding sign, erected at the development/subdivision entrance from a major artery. The sign shall not exceed 15 square feet and may bear decorative or logo devices, but not commercial advertisement. 
(9)  Signs erected by or on behalf of the United States of America, this state or the town pursuant to and in the discharge of any governmental function or required by any law, ordinance or governmental regulation. 
(10)  Political and preelection signs shall be permitted in any zone provided, however, that any such sign shall not exceed the maximum permitted size for residential or commercial sign located in the applicable zoning district. No signs may be posted on trees, utility poles, traffic or regulating signs of any nature. 
(11)  The following signs customary and necessary to the operation of filling and service stations: 
a.  Lettering on buildings displayed over individual entrance doors consisting of the words "washing," "lubrication," "repairing" or words of similar import, provided that there shall not be more than one such sign over each entrance and that the letters shall not exceed ten inches in height. 
b.  Lettering or other insignia which is a structural part of a gasoline pump or lighting fixture consisting only of a brand name, lead-warning sign and other signs as required by law. 
c.  A credit card sign not exceeding two square feet in area, affixed to the building or a permanent sign structure. 
d.  One sign bearing the brand or trade name of the station, of a design specified by the manufacturer, permanently affixed to the building or its own metal substructure, such sign not to exceed 30 square feet. 
e.  All point of purchase materials or signs located no further than ten linear feet from the gasoline islands or ten linear feet from the physical structure. 
(12)  Time/temperature clocks when bearing no commercial advertising and not exceeding 20 square feet of surface area. 
(13)  Professional nameplate on the door or adjacent to the door, but not to exceed eight inches by 20 inches per occupant. 
(14)  Integral decorative wall graphics or architectural features which are a part of the building insofar as no visible moving parts are included. 
(15)  Holiday signs and decorations 60 days prior to and 15 days after the specific holiday. The term "holiday" means and includes all federal or state legal holidays and all recognized religious holidays. 
(16)  Farm and home products for sale signs in residential zoning districts or properties used for residential purposes when up to six square feet in area, located on site, and which advertise the sale of farm, garden, nursery or home craft products grown, raised or produced on the premises. 
(17)  Flags of all nations, states, counties, towns and cities when flown in compliance with the United States flag code. 
(18)  Public transit shelter signs when located on one double-faced sign panel not exceeding an area of 48 inches by 69 inches per side, and when illuminated in compliance with this article. 
(19)  Temporary signs as an interim use until such time as all sign permits can be secured, provided the signs do not violate any lettering or lighting methods prohibited by this article and the signs do not cover more than 60 percent of the total window space. A temporary sign for purposes of this subsection shall be defined as a sign not permanently adhered to or painted on any window and the sign is removed within 30 days. 
(20)  Decorative flags or banners not exceeding 15 square feet. 
(21)  All decorative flags in a residential district. 
(22)  One directory sign per shopping center or office building. Directory sign alterations may be made without application, provided changes are in keeping with the directory design and graphics. 
(23)  Neon signs not to exceed five square feet, except in residential districts or the Wickford Business District where such signs shall be prohibited. 
(24)  Barber poles not to exceed three feet in height. 
(25)  Any sign required by another section of this chapter. 
(26)  The numerical street address provided the height of numbers does not exceed six inches and that the numbers are not internally illuminated. 
(27)  One "open" or decorative flag per business not exceeding 15 square feet in area, provided such flags are not less than eight feet above a public sidewalk. 
(28)  Temporary signs associated with advertising a farmers' market which are displayed only during market hours. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 01-1, § 12, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 02-20, § 7, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 08-19, § 3, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 11-25, § 1, 12-5-2011) 
Sec. 21-244. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs shall not be permitted in any zoning district: 
(1)  Signs which incorporate any flashing illumination or animation. 
(2)  Any sign that constitutes a hazard to public safety or health; that creates a nuisance to abutting properties; or that impedes vision or access to or from public streets, sidewalks or other places or ingress or egress. This includes signs which, because of size, location, content or manner or illumination, obstruct the vision of a driver or detract from the effectiveness of traffic control devices. 
(3)  Strings, balloons, streamers, flags, pennants, revolving or flashing lights, spinners or other similar devices strung across, upon, over or along any premises or building whether as a part of a sign or not, except for string lights and strung light bulbs that are part of decorations for recognized legal holidays. 
(4)  Searchlights and inflatables. 
(5)  Billboards. 
(6)  Trailer (portable) and other mobile signs and message boards, whether registered or not, with or without wheels, unless permanently affixed to the premises or an integral part of an approved freestanding sign. 
(7)  Signs affixed to utility poles and trees. 
(8)  Signs placed in or over a sidewalk, street or other public right-of-way in any manner such as to impede or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic, except projecting signs properly placed over a sidewalk in the Wickford Business District. 
(9)  Any part of any sign, including all supports, braces, guys and anchors, that extends over the property line of the lot upon which it is located, except for A-frame signs which receive written permission from abutting landowner. 
(10)  Obsolete or unsafe signs. 
(11)  Any sign, as defined in this chapter, affixed to or part of, any vending machine or other mechanical device for the distribution of goods directly to a consumer without the intervention of any cashier or other employee outside or visible from outside the building is prohibited with the Wickford Village Center district. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 02-20, § 8, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-8, § 7, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 15-11, § 2, 10-19-2015) 
Sec. 21-245. - Permit procedure. 
(a)  Permit required. Any person intending to erect, relocate or alter any sign within the town shall, except as provided in this article, first obtain a sign permit from the office of the building official. 
(b)  Application. Application for a sign permit shall be made on forms provided by the building official and shall contain or shall have attached all of the following information: 
(1)  Submittal requirements are as follows: 
a.  A site plan which shall include the position of all existing and/or proposed signs, indicating the distance and relationship to all existing, proposed and/or adjoining structures or premises. 
b.  A scaled drawing of each face of all existing and/or proposed signs is required, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  All size specifications, including the size of letters and graphics. 
2.  Description of sign and frame materials and colors. 
3.  Wall anchorage details. (Note: Anchorage must be interior to the sign or camouflaged). 
4.  Foundation mounting assembly and/or footing details. 
c.  An elevation drawn to scale of the entire wall of the building to which the sign is to be fixed, correctly locating the sign, and providing the width of the building or affected unit and the height of the first floor. 
(2)  Names of persons performing the work. 
(3)  Written consent of the owner and lessor of the premises. 
(4)  The electrical permit, if any, when required by the state building code. 
(5)  Description of illumination proposed for the signage and its location on the property or building if the proposed signage is indirectly illuminated. 
(c)  Fees. Each application for signage shall be accompanied by a filing fee or such other fees as shall from time to time be established by the town council. 
(d)  Review of applications. It shall be the duty of the building official, upon the receipt of a completed application for a sign permit, to forward such application for review and comment to those departments with the responsibility to do so and to examine such plans, specifications, other data, and if necessary visit the premises upon which the sign is to be located. If it shall appear that the proposed sign is in compliance with all requirements and other town ordinances, the building official shall approve the application and issue the permit. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994) 
Sec. 21-246. - Appeals. 
    Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the building official or the historic district commission made pursuant to this article shall have the right to appeal concerning such decision to the zoning board of review. All such appeals shall be filed with the town clerk not later than seven days after the date of the decision of the building official or the historic zoning district. The zoning board of review shall conduct a de novo hearing on any such appeal of a decision of the building official in accordance with section 21-7. The board of review shall conduct a review of a decision of the historic district commission pursuant to section 21-338. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994) 
Sec. 21-247. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Any sign existing and in compliance with a prior sign ordinance on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, but not in compliance with the terms of this article, shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign. The owner shall be permitted to maintain and/or repair such a sign, provided that: 
(1)  The sign shall not be enlarged or structurally altered in any way unless it conforms with this article. 
(2)  Any such sign that is destroyed or significantly damaged in excess of 35 percent of its total square footage shall be determined to be obsolete and shall only be rebuilt or replaced in conformity with this article. 
(3)  Signs may be relocated provided such relocation occurs on the same property and all other provisions of the sign ordinance have been met. A sign to be relocated off site must comply with all requirements for a new sign. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994) 
Sec. 21-248. - General requirements for area and maintenance. 
(a)  Determination of sign area. Sign area shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The area shall be considered to include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open space or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the display itself. 
(2)  Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols painted on or attached to a building, wall or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other convex shape which encompasses all the letters and symbols. 
(b)  Maintenance. Signs shall be maintained in accordance with the following: 
(1)  All signs, including all supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from all hazards so as to not endanger the public health or safety. Such areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and healthful condition. 
(2)  The area to be maintained shall include both the physical sign structure, including all supports, and outside area within a radius of 20 feet of the base of a freestanding sign and an outside area within a 20-foot radius of the lowest center point beneath a wall-mounted sign, provided that these areas are contained within the legal boundaries of the property on which the sign is located. 
(c)  Obsolete signs. Any sign which advertises an area, use, business or product no longer sold on site or a service no longer offered upon which the sign is located shall be considered to be obsolete and shall be removed within 30 days after the date that it becomes obsolete and shall be deemed a violation. 
(d)  Unsafe signs. If the building official shall find that any sign is unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public health or safety, such conditions shall be deemed a violation. 
(e)  Repair and alteration. No sign, whether previously approved by the building official or considered a legal nonconforming use, shall be altered in any manner to include changes in graphics, lettering, color, brackets or posts without obtaining a sign permit as outlined in section 21-245. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994) 
Sec. 21-249. - Requirements by zone and type of sign. 
(a)  Business and industrial districts. In the business and industrial districts, signs shall be in compliance with the following standards listed below. Properties located in the Post Road District (PRD), Wickford Village District (WVD), and the Historic District (HD) may have additional requirements by zoning and physical standards contained within this chapter. 
(1)  Size and number when the minimum building setback is equal to or greater than 30 feet. When the building zoning setback or physical setback is equal to or greater than 30 feet from the property line, the size and number of signs shall not exceed the following: 
a.  Freestanding signs. When multiple freestanding signs are allowed, such signs must be at least 150 feet apart. The number of signs per support is not limited. The aggregate square footage of all signs on each support may not exceed the following, based on total linear frontage: 
1.  From zero to 100 feet, one freestanding sign is allowed, not to exceed 30 square feet. 
2.  From greater than 100-200 feet, one freestanding sign is allowed, not to exceed 40 square feet. 
3.  From greater than 200-300 feet, one freestanding sign is allowed, not to exceed 50 square feet. 
4.  From greater than 300-400 feet, two freestanding supports are allowed, each shall not exceed 40 square feet. 
5.  From greater than 400-500 feet, two freestanding supports are allowed, each shall not exceed 45 square feet. 
6.  For greater than 500 feet or more, two freestanding supports are allowed, each of which shall not exceed 50 square feet. 
b.  Wall-mounted, projecting or permanent glass signs. Wall-mounted, projecting or permanent glass signs may be used in any number or combination on the front of the building, provided that the signs do not exceed ten percent of the store front area. Side wall signs may be used in any combination that does not exceed ten square feet when the store side directly or indirectly abuts a parking lot or street. Wall-mounted and projecting signs shall not extend more than 12 inches from the wall. 
c.  Digital/electronic signs. Digital or electronic signs shall be allowed subject to receiving a sign permit with the following requirements: 
1.  Digital/electronic signage shall be allowed only on freestanding or groundmounted signs. No digital/electronic signage shall be wall mounted. 
2.  Digital signs shall be allowed only in the following areas: commercial or business zoned properties with property frontage on Route 2, Route 102, Route 1, Route 4, Route 402, and Route 1A (excluding Wickford Village Business District). 
3.  The digital/electronic sign shall be integral to the full sign. 
4.  The digital/electronic portion of the sign shall not exceed eight square feet. 
5.  The digital/electronic message of the sign cannot change more than once every 12 hours, unless the digital/electronic sign is a time and temperature sign. 
6.  The sign shall be monochromatic with no flashing. 
(2)  Size and number when the minimum building setback is less than 30 feet. When the building zoning setback or physical setback is less than 30 feet from the property line, property owners may at their discretion, and where physically possible, utilize either a projecting sign or front wall-mounted sign. The square footage requirements for either a wall-mounted or projecting sign will be the same as subsection (a)(1)(b) of this section. Side wall-mounted signs as described in subsection (a)(1)(b) of this section shall be allowed. However, if property owners at their discretion elect not to use either a projecting or front wall-mounted sign, the area allowed for side wall-mounted signs shall not exceed ten percent of the store front area. Lighting for buildings set back less than 30 feet shall be indirect only. 
(3)  Shopping centers and office buildings. In shopping centers and office buildings, individual signs shall be coordinated as to location, color and design whenever possible. 
(4)  Directory signs. Directory signage shall not exceed eight square feet. 
(5)  Height requirements. Freestanding signs must be erected so that the lowest portion of the sign, not including the support, is higher than seven feet and the highest portion of the sign, including the support, is not above 15 feet. Ground-mounted signs shall not exceed five feet in height. 
(6)  Setbacks. Setback requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  Signs shall be set back from street rights-of-way in accordance with the terms of this section and shall be exempt from the setback and corner clearance requirements contained in Section 21-306. 
b.  Any freestanding or ground-mounted sign that is to be located on a lot that abuts a residential zoning district shall be required to comply with the side yard and rear yard setbacks of that residential zoning district. 
c.  Ground-mounted signs must be at least 15 feet from the property line and driveway. 
(7)  A-frame signage. 
a.  No more than one A-frame sign shall be allowed per business, per lot. 
b.  Where multiple businesses are located on a single lot with frontage in excess of 50 feet, a maximum of one A-frame sign per 50 feet of frontage is allowed up to a maximum of four signs per property. 
c.  A-frame signs that are to be located on a lot which abuts a residential zoning district shall be required to comply with the side yard and rear yard setbacks of that residential zoning district. 
d.  A-frame signs shall be placed on the lot of record for that business and shall not be placed in public rights-of-ways. 
e.  The sign panel on each side shall not exceed six square feet. 
f.  A-frame signs shall only be allowed to be displayed during hours of business operation. Signs shall be removed and stored so that they are not visible when the business is closed. 
g.  A-frame signs shall be properly secured and used in a manner so as to not cause harm to the public. 
h.  A-frame signs shall not be permanently anchored, attached, or chained to a pole, utility pole, newspaper box, or other structures or appurtenances. 
i.  A-frame signs shall not contain any electrical components nor have any moving parts. 
j.  For businesses that do not have public road frontage, one A-frame sign may be allowed on an abutting property with written permission from the landowner subject to meeting all of the above criteria. 
k.  A-frame signs shall not require permits except for those on public property. A-frames on public property must receive permission in writing from town administration. 
(8)  Signage requirements for all properties in the Post Road District (PRD) shall follow this section as well as the sign design guidelines located in the Subdivisions and Land Development Regulations. 
(b)  Residential district. In residential districts, signs shall be in compliance with the following: 
(1)  No signs are allowed in residential districts except those that are exempt from this article according to section 21-243. 
(2)  For business uses permitted by special exception in a residential district, one sign of up to 12 square feet shall be allowed. 
(3)  Sign lighting shall be indirect, only, and shall be shielded such that the light is not directed toward and does not shine light upon adjacent properties. 
(4)  Signs in residential districts shall comply with the setback requirements established in subsection (a)(6) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 03-8, § 8, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 12-13, § 5, 10-22-2012; Ord. No. 15-11, § 3, 10-19-2015) 
Sec. 21-250. - Wickford Village Business District. 
    Businesses within the Wickford Village Business District, defined as those properties with frontage on West Main Street, Main Street, Brown Street, Boston Neck Road to Hussey Bridge, and Phillips Street, shall comply with the following sign regulations in order to help retain the historic charm of the area: 
(1)  Signs shall be wall-mounted, projecting, or painted permanent glass only; freestanding or ground-mounted signs are only allowed by special exception from the zoning board of review in accordance with subsection 21-251(a)(6). 
(2)  Except for painted permanent glass signs, signs shall be constructed of wood. 
(3)  One wood sign or up to two permanent painted glass window signs shall be allowed per business. Additional signs may be permitted to face waterways, parking lots and other streets, as allowed in subsection 21-249(a)(1)b. 
(4)  Signs shall be no larger than necessary so as to not detract from the charm and architecture of the building, and under no circumstances, shall they be larger than 15 square feet or five percent of the area of the first floor frontage of the building occupied, whichever is smaller. First floor frontage shall be determined by measuring the outside wall to outside wall and first floor joist to second floor joist. Subject to the limitation contained in the first sentence of this subsection, permanent painted window signs shall be no greater, in the aggregate, than ten percent of the total glass area of the first floor frontage of the building including the glass area of front store doors provided that the total square footage of signage shall not exceed 15 square feet. 
(5)  Signage in multiple business buildings shall not exceed ten percent of the first floor frontage, and no one sign shall be larger than 15 square feet. Multiple business buildings shall also be allowed eight square feet of signage to be used only for a directory sign. 
(6)  Lighting shall be indirect only. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 02-14, § 4, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-8, § 9, 6-9-2003) 
Sec. 21-251. - Special use permits. 
(a)  The following signs shall not be permitted without a special use permit in business districts and as may be granted by the zoning board of review: 
(1)  Signs with any visible moving parts, except for signs commonly known as barber poles ordinarily and customarily used in connection with barbershops. 
(2)  Off-premises signs not exceeding 15 square feet. 
(3)  Signs using fluorescent, phosphorescent, neon or similar materials, except for one neon sign as provided for in section 21-243, and where those materials are used as a means for internal, enclosed illumination, provided no such sign shall incorporate any flashing, moving or changing illumination or animation. 
(4)  Signs which project over the roofline or roof-mounted in accordance with the size requirements specified in subsection 21-249(a)(1)b. 
(5)  One additional freestanding sign may be permitted by special use permit for a lot which has frontage on more than one public road. Such sign shall be limited in size in accordance with subsection 21-249(a)(1)a. 
(6)  One freestanding sign in the Wickford Business District or for building setback less than 30 feet. 
(7)  Murals. 
(b)  In making decisions for special use permits under this section, the zoning board of review shall consider the following factors and characteristics: 
(1)  Logic of design; 
(2)  Exterior space utilization; relationship to architecture; 
(3)  Quality, character and appropriateness; 
(4)  Attractiveness; 
(5)  Material selection; and 
(6)  Harmony and capability, including coloration. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994) 
Sec. 21-252. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  Violation and penalties. For every violation of this article or of any requirement attached to the granting of a special exception, the owner, lessor, lessee, occupant, sign erector or contractor interested in the premises upon which the violation has been committed who refuses to abate the violation within ten working days after written notice has been served by certified mail or civil process shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00 per day, plus reasonable court costs. Each day of the existence of the violation shall be deemed a separate offense. Immediately upon notification of any violation, the town solicitor shall institute appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such violation. Any sign which is installed contrary to the requirements of this article or without a sign permit shall be a violation of this article. The building official may order the removal of any sign not maintained in accordance with this article or deemed to be unsafe or obsolete. Prior to ordering such removal, the building official shall notify the applicant in accordance with this subsection. 
(b)  Enforcement. This article shall be administered and enforced by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 8-15-1994) 
Secs. 21-253-21-267. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 98-7, adopted May 11, 1998, amended the Code by repealing former article XI, sections 21-276-21-283, and added a new article XI, sections 21-268-21-284. Former article XI pertained to off-street parking and loading, and derived from the Revised Ordinances of 1974, sections 17-11-1-17-11-8; Ord. No. 94-5, adopted March 14, 1994; and Ord. No. 94-12, adopted June 27, 1994. 
Cross reference- Subdivision and land development regulations, app. A. 

Sec. 21-268. - Purpose and intent. 
    The intent of the development plan review is to identify certain elements set forth, the standards and requirements for commercial and industrial development and which serve to carry out the goals, visions and policies of the town's comprehensive plan and the policies and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-269. - Village character design guidelines. 
    The following design guidelines are intended for use by those developing and those reviewing development located within village areas and within areas so delineated by the town's comprehensive plan: 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of these design guidelines is to guide the applicant in the development of site and building design and the reviewing authority in its review of proposed actions. These guidelines shall not be regarded as inflexible requirements. Each guideline could, in fact, generate numerous solutions; creative, imaginative and innovative designs are encouraged. It is the intent that these guidelines will serve in the review of all proposed development plan projects in the neighborhood/village zoning district, and developers and the developers' architects in the design of projects by providing development criteria consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Administration. Building elevations and renderings addressing the stated guidelines shall be submitted as part of an application for a proposed development plan. 
(3)  Guidelines. Guidelines shall be as follows: 
a.  Scale. The scale of a building shall be compatible with its architectural design style and character and that of the surroundings. The scale of ground level design elements such as building entryways, windows, porches, plazas, parks, pedestrian furniture, signs, plantings and other street and site elements should be directed toward the use, comprehension and enjoyment of pedestrians. 
b.  Continuation of treatment. As a general rule, buildings shall reflect a continuation of treatment found in surrounding buildings by maintaining front yard setbacks at the build-to line, maintaining cornice lines in buildings of the same height, and extending horizontal lines of windows and doors. 
c.  Proportions. The proportion, height to width relationship, between windows, doors, signs and other architectural elements shall be compatible with the architectural style and character of the building and that of the surroundings. 
d.  Shape. The shape of windows, doors and other design elements shall be compatible with the architectural style and character of the building and that of its surroundings. 
e.  Roof types. A flat roof should be avoided on one-story buildings, but may be used on buildings with a minimum of two stories, provided that all visibly exposed walls have an articulated cornice that projects horizontally from the vertical building wall plane. Gable and other roof types are permitted as appropriate to the building's architectural design style. Architectural embellishments that add visual interest and that are compatible with the surroundings such as dormers, belvederes, masonry chimneys, cupolas and other similar elements are encouraged. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems should be enclosed with an architectural feature consistent with the building design. 
f.  Offsets. Building wall offsets including projections, recesses, changes in materials, colors or textures or changes in floor level shall be used to avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted ground level walls. Similarly, roofline offsets shall be provided in order to relieve the visual effect of a single, long roof. 
g.  Continuation of building facade. The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be continued, in its major features, around all visible sides of a building. Where construction of a blank wall is necessitated by the building code, the wall should be articulated by the provision of blank window openings trimmed with frames, sills and lintels or, if the building is occupied by a commercial use, by using recessed or projecting display window cases. 
h.  Mixed-use buildings. In mixed-use buildings, the difference between ground floor commercial uses and entrances for upper level commercial or residential uses shall be reflected by distinct but compatible differences in facade treatment. Storefronts are a necessary part of a mixed-use building and shall be integrated in design with the upper floors to be compatible with the building's overall facade character. 
i.  Relation of structures and spaces. The relation of a building to the open space between it and adjoining structures should be compatible with such relations in the surroundings. 
j.  Architectural and site details. Architectural styles, design themes and site details including signs, lighting, pedestrian furniture, planting and paving, along with building materials, colors, textures and grade, shall be compatible within the overall site design and shall preserve and enhance the character of the surrounding area. In the neighborhood/village district, these details should blend with the details' own surroundings to create a diverse, yet unified, street composition. 
(4)  Guideline examples. Guideline examples are shown in the figures that follow. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 

Horizontal Continuation of Elements 

Buildings that Relate to People 

Buildings that Relate to Each Other 

Wrap Architectural Features Around, Avoiding Blank Walls 

Relate Windows and Doors to Building Style 

Good Mixed Use Building Design 
Sec. 21-270. - Off-street parking and truck loading generally. 
    In order to minimize traffic congestion, air pollution and the risk of accidents and to promote other elements of sound community planning, off-street parking and truck loading spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily maintained for all permitted uses of buildings, structures or lots as specified in this section. The requirements of this section apply under the following circumstances: 
(1)  All new buildings and structures erected for a use that requires off-street parking or loading; 
(2)  Any building and/or structure that is altered or enlarged; and 
(3)  All new, additional or expanded uses of a property or any change in an existing use which generates additional off-street parking or loading. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 08-18, § 7, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 17-11, § 1, 6-26-2017) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
Sec. 21-271. - Methods of determining off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking requirements for a single use shall be determined from the schedule of such requirements in section 21-272. 
(b)  When the required number of spaces results in a fraction, the number shall be rounded in a manner that ensures compliance with the minimum and/or maximum number provided in the parking schedule as applicable. 
(c)  If a use is not specifically listed in the schedule of off street parking requirements, the requirements shall be the same as for the most similar use listed as determined by the director of the department of planning and development referencing the Institute of Traffic Engineers Parking Generation Report. 
(d)  When the schedule requires the on-site number of spaces to be calculated per employee and employees are on the site in shifts, the off street parking requirement shall be based on the number of employees present during the largest shift (most employees). The intent is to base the requirement on the total number of employees on the site or who will use the site for parking at any one time. 
(e)  A garage or carport may be used to meet the requirements of this section. A driveway may only be used to meet the requirements of this section where it serves a one-family or two-family dwelling. 
(f)  When any lot contains two or more non-residential uses, the sum of the individual parking demand values shall serve as the baseline parking demand. When deemed appropriate by the director of planning, applicants shall submit a peak use demand analysis to the planning department illustrating the relationship between peak parking demands for the different non-residential uses. 
(g)  Where it can be demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the planning department or the planning commission, that less parking would be needed than the minimum requirements and adequate land is available should future uses warrant additional parking, fewer parking spaces may be allowed. 
(h)  Where it can be demonstrated that the parking demand may be accommodated, up to 100 percent of on-site parking requirements may be provided off-site provided that parking is located within 500 feet of the property boundary in a walkable route from one property boundary to another and safe, well-lit pedestrian access can be demonstrated by the applicant. In such cases, appropriate legal documentation, as approved by the town solicitor and the town planner, shall be recorded to ensure the permanent use of such parking spaces. 
(i)  Delineated on-street parking located directly abutting a lot on which a business use operates may be counted towards fulfilling the off-street parking space requirements of that use. 
    Wickford Village Center District-Off-street parking shall be located, to the maximum extent feasible, at the rear of the building. No new off-street parking shall be located between the street line and the building face containing the principal entrance. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 02-20, § 9, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 07-02, § 13, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 08-18, § 7, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 17-11, § 2, 6-26-2017) 
Sec. 21-272. - Parking schedule. 
    The schedule of off-street parking space requirements shall be as follows: 
Use Minimum Parking Space Requirement Retail 1. Retail stores One per 500 square feet of total retail sales area Residential 2. One-family and two-family dwellings Two per dwelling unit 3. Multifamily dwellings One per efficiency studio and one-bedroom unit and two per two-bedroom unit. For accessory dwellings, one per bedroom Office and Personal Services 4. Offices One per 500 square feet of gross floor area   Banks   Personal services   Municipal offices   Any commercial or business use not otherwise provided for in this section Industrial, Wholesale, R and D and Storage 5. Industrial or manufacturing operations One for every two employees   R and D facilities   Wholesalers   Material equipment storage 6. Storage facilities One for every 5,000 square feet of storage space Public Assembly and Education 7. Churches One per four seats provided   Theaters   Auditoriums   Trade school   Educational or training centers 8. Assembly hall One per 100 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 20 based on seating capacity   Social hall   Mortuary or funeral home 9. Day care centers or nursery schools One per four children of the facility's maximum licensed capacity, plus sufficient off-street space for pick-up and drop-off Arts, Culture and Media 10. Museums One per 750 square feet of gross floor area   Art galleries   Libraries   Communications services and broadcasting offices Restaurants 11. Sit-down restaurants One per 100 square feet of gross floor area but no less than ten parking spaces   Fast-food restaurants Commercial Recreation 12. Bowling alleys For bowling alleys and golf courses, four spaces for every alley or hole. For driving ranges, one space for each tee   Golf courses   Driving ranges 13. Health and fitness facilities One space per 28 square feet devoted to physical activity, excluding locker rooms, restrooms, showers, or utility or ancillary public areas 14. Other indoor sports facilities One space per 200 square feet of floor area Lodging and Overnight Care 15. Hotels and motels One for each guest room, patient room or suite, camping or trailer site, plus ten percent for staff (where applicable)   Tourist homes and cabins   Room and boarding houses   Camping areas and trailer parks   Hospitals   Nursing or Convalescent homes Automotive and Marine Facilities 16. Automatic carwash facilities Five stacked spaces, plus two spaces for each vacuum machine and non-automatic wash bay, plus one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of total floor area, plus two per wash bay for employees 17. Gas stations and motor vehicle repair shops One space for every 200 square feet of floor area 18. Marinas One for each boat slip or mooring station, either water or land based 19. Freight and materials 
Trucking and shipping materials One for every two employees plus adequate spaces for each company vehicle operating from the premises Passenger Terminal Facilities 20. Railroad passenger stations Parking spaces as deemed appropriate by the planning commission for employees, loading and unloading of passengers, or visitors   Bus depots   Airports   Other passenger terminal stations Drive-In Windows 21. Fast food restaurants Six stacked spaces for each drive-in window 22. Banks, pharmacies or retail Three stacked spaces for each drive-in window  
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 98-13, § 3, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 08-18, § 7, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 12-13, § 6, 10-22-2012; Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 6-26-2017) 
Sec. 21-273. - Off-street loading spaces. 
(a)  Number required. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided and maintained by the owner of the property for each building, structure or use which shall be established, erected or enlarged for any business or industrial purpose in accordance with the following schedule: 
Building Floor Area 
(square feet) Loading Spaces Up to 8,000 1 8,000 to 25,000 2 25,000 to 40,000 3 40,000 to 100,000 4 100,000 to 250,000 5 Each additional 200,000 1  
    Where it can be demonstrated and with the approval of the planning commission or the department of planning and development that one or more uses may be generating a demand for loading spaces primarily during periods when other uses are not in peak operation, the total number of required loading spaces may be reduced to equal the peak loading number of spaces. 
(b)  Exemption. No off-street loading spaces shall be required for any building or structure used exclusively for office occupancy. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. An accessory off-street truck loading space shall have a minimum width of 12 feet, a minimum length of 25 feet and minimum clear height of 16 feet. Aisles and driveways serving access to loading areas shall have the same minimum width and clear height. Where large vehicles (i.e., tractor trailers) are anticipated delivering to the site, the department of planning and development may require larger spaces and on-site turning areas to accommodate the trucks as per the latest standard promulgated by the institute of traffic engineers. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 17-11, § 4, 6-26-2017) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 17. 
Sec. 21-274. - Access to parking and loading. 
(a)  Joint access. The sharing of driveway access by two or more properties is encouraged. Such driveways should be located on joint property lines or should be accessible via cross access easements on the private property being served by the joint driveway. The planning commission may waive the setback requirements in subsection 21-275(a) where it finds that such waiver facilitates the coordination of joint access or jointly shared parking areas. 
(b)  Access to state roads. All entrance and/or exit driveways onto a state road shall be in accordance with the requirements of the state department of transportation, and all entrance and exit driveways onto a town road shall be in accordance with the requirements of the department of public works. 
(c)  Vision clearance. A 30-foot line of sight shall be maintained where a driveway or street intersects with a public street. 

Figure 1. Vision Clearance 
(d)  Maximum driveway grade. The gradient of driveways shall have a slope no greater than three percent for the first 100 feet. Driveways that accommodate below-grade loading docks shall be exempt from this subsection. 
(e)  Driveway placement. Driveways must be placed such that an exiting vehicle has an unobstructed sight distance according to the following schedule: 
Street Speed Limit 
(mph) Sight Distance 
(feet) 30 200 35 225 40 275 45 325 50 350  
(f)  Driveway spacing. At least one curb cut shall be permitted per site. Where it is demonstrated that an additional curb cut is warranted, it may be allowed subject to the approval of the town engineer or state department of transportation. Notwithstanding the limits of lot frontage, driveway spacing, both on site and to a driveway on an adjacent site, should be determined as a function of street speed limit according to the following schedule: 
Street Speed Limit 
(mph) Minimum Spacing 
(feet) 25 105 30 125 35 150 40 185 45 230 50 275  
    These spacings are based on average vehicle acceleration and deceleration rates and are considered necessary to maintain safe traffic operation. Spacing will be measured from the centerline of each driveway. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 17-11, § 5, 6-26-2017) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 11-31 et seq. 
Sec. 21-275. - Design requirements for parking and truck loading areas. 
(a)  Minimum setbacks and buffers. Accessory off-street parking areas for parking and truck loading may be located in required side or rear yards, provided that the side or rear yards are set back at least ten feet from all boundaries abutting commercially or industrially zoned land, and further provided that such yards do not encroach on required buffers established in accordance with the landscaping sections of this article. 
(b)  Parking amenities. The physical improvements of off-street parking and truck loading areas shall include the following, except as may be specifically exempted by the planning commission: 
(1)  Curbs. 
(2)  Asphaltic, concrete, or gravel paving. The planning commission or planning director, as appropriate, may allow gravel parking or pervious materials in parking areas where the applicant demonstrates such pervious material will have a positive impact on the recharge of the underlying aquifer, provide for a better site design or better handle stormwater run-off. Pervious material in the groundwater recharge and wellhead protection overlay districts shall have the approval of the town director of water supply. In addition, gravel parking may be allowed by the planning commission or administrative officer in the Wickford Village Center District where less than ten parking spaces are required and where adequate provision is demonstrated for compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
Gravel parking areas shall have drainage facilities as approved by the town engineer and shall provide a means to prevent gravel from spilling onto any state or town roadway or bikeway. 
(3)  Sidewalks. 
(4)  Provision for drainage facilities. 
(5)  Lighting. 
(6)  Landscaping and buffering. 
(7)  Traffic pavement markings and signs: 
a.  All parking spaces shall be striped in accordance with the approved plan, except where relief has been provided for gravel parking lots. All striping shall be four-inch white lines, except handicapped spaces, which shall be four-inch blue lines. 
b.  Traffic islands shall be bordered by two four-inch-wide yellow lines and shall be crosshatched with 12-inch-wide yellow bars. 
c.  Fire lanes shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the town fire department. 
d.  Snow storage areas shall not encroach upon sidewalks or public areas. 
e.  For all gravel or pervious parking areas, spaces shall be marked using stone or other appropriate markings to delineate the individual spaces. 
(c)  Minimum aisle width. Minimum aisle width shall be in compliance with the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) standards as indicated on figure 3 and table 1 in this section. Aisles adjoining a building shall be wide enough to accommodate fire lanes/zones as required by the town fire department. 
TABLE 1. STALL LAYOUT ELEMENTS 
Angle Dimension On 
Diagram 45° 60° 75° 90° Stall width, parallel to aisle A 12.7 10.4 9.3 9.0 Stall length of line B 25.0 22.0 20.0 18.5 Stall depth to wall C 17.5 19.0 19.5 18.5 Aisle width between stall lines D 12.0 16.0 23.0 26.0 Stall depth, interlock E 15.3 17.5 18.8 18.5 Module, wall to interlock F 44.8 52.5 61.3 63.0 Module, interlocking G 42.6 51.0 61.0 63.0 Module, interlocking to curb face H 42.8 50.2 58.8 60.5 Bumper overhang (typical) I 2.0 2.3 2.5 2.5 Offset J 6.3 2.7 0.5 0.0 Setback K 11.0 8.3 5.0 0.0 Cross aisle, one-way L 14.0 14.0 14.0 14.0 Cross aisle, two-way - 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0  
(Source: Parking Principles, Highway Research Board, Special Report No. 125, 1971, p. 99) 

Figure 3. Parking Lot Standards 
(d)  Aisles and turning areas. Aisles and turning areas should provide good internal circulation with adequate radii to ensure pedestrian safety, ample clearance and convenient access and egress, in addition to the design requirements enumerated in this section and required by the planning commission. Sufficient area for maneuvering into and out of all parking spaces shall be provided on site. 
(e)  Minimum parking space size. Accessory off-street parking areas shall be marked off into spaces with minimum dimensions in accordance with the ITE standards as indicated in table 1 and figure 3 in this section. For parking spaces for trucks or special equipment, the minimum size of the spaces shall be approved by the department of planning and development based on the nature of the parked vehicles. 
(f)  Centerline gradients. Centerline gradients of aisles shall not exceed three percent. 
(g)  Handicapped parking spaces required. The number, size, location and identification of handicapped spaces shall comply with the standards of title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(h)  Screening and Landscaping. All open parking areas which abut a public street right-of-way shall provide landscaping as prescribed in subsection 21-277(5) of the zoning ordinance. 
(i)  Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed and maintained so as not to interfere with persons using any public street or improvement or to unnecessarily interfere with the use and enjoyment of property of any person. Lighting shall comply with section 21-278 of the zoning ordinance. 
(j)  Fencing. A solid fence at least six feet in height shall be required on all common property lines when any nonresidential parking facility abuts a residentially zoned property. 
(k)  [Bicycle racks and bus passenger shelters. ] Bicycle racks and bus passenger shelters shall be as required by the department of planning and development. 
(l)  Prohibited uses. No part of any required setback distance from a public road, other than a driveway in a residential district, shall be used for loading and unloading operations. No part of any parking or loading area shall be used for sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 01-14, § 2, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 02-20, § 10, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 10-06, § 4, 4-26-2010; Ord. No. 17-11, § 6, 6-26-2017) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 11-31 et seq. 
Sec. 21-276. - General landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Purpose. 
(a)  To improve the physical environment through the provision of open space, street trees and vegetation; 
(b)  To provide a transition between land uses through the use of well designed landscaping and/or buffers; 
(c)  To reduce noise, dust pollution and glare. 
(d)  To reduce impacts from impervious surfaces including heat island effect and disruption to the hydrologic cycle; 
(e)  To improve air quality; 
(f)  To provide shade for pedestrians and automobiles, and pavement; 
(g)  To provide privacy in residential settings; 
(h)  Provide for soil conservation, erosion control, flood control and pollutant mitigation; and 
(i)  To eliminate or reduce the need for irrigation by providing landscapes that are developed in accordance with best practices and are well-suited to the regional environment and climate. 
(2)  General standards. 
(a)  In residential developments, applicants shall provide plantings or landscaping elements throughout the development to promote the purposes of this ordinance in addition to the screening and street trees required; 
(b)  In nonresidential developments, all areas of the site not occupied by buildings and required improvements shall have been retained in their natural state as part of the site design process. If the property was cleared in the past and the current state of the property does not serve as an adequate buffer or natural area, a planting plan shall be submitted for this area of the site; 
(c)  Plant varieties shall be selected for long term resistance to drought, moisture, salt, urban conditions, or insects and other pests depending on the location of landscaping and the specific stressors anticipated for different areas of the site. Plants should be selected so that landscaping can be maintained with minimal care and the need for watering, pesticides, or fertilizers is minimized or eliminated; 
(d)  Landscape professionals are encouraged to reference Sustainable Trees and Shrubs, 3 rd ed ., 1999 as amended, URI Cooperative Extension - Landscape Horticulture, URI Sustainable Coastal Plant List 2007, URI Cooperative Extension, and Coastal Buffer Zone Planting Guide (CRMC 2008), as amended, Exhibit A in the Subdivisions and Land Development Regulations as well as other current standards for nursery stock/species when selecting plan varieties for landscaping to meet the intent of 21-276 (2) (c); 
(e)  Under no circumstances shall any plant be selected that appears on the most recent listing of invasive species as published by the Rhode Island Invasive Species Council. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 2010-06, § 5, 4-26-2010) 
Sec. 21-277. - Plan requirements and specific standards. 
(1)  Landscape plan required. A landscape plan prepared by a Rhode Island registered landscape architect shall be submitted for all projects requiring development plan review, subdivision, or land development approval as specified in the subdivisions and land development regulations. A landscape plan shall contain the elements listed below: 
(a)  Existing conditions plan. 
(i)  The general extent and types of vegetation, including notable or unique plant communities and mature unfragmented forests or areas of vegetation; 
(ii)  Notable natural features such as rock outcrops, and trees having a ten-inch caliper dbh or more; 
(iii)  General drainage paths throughout the site; 
(iv)  The location of any notable human-made features such as structures, stone walls, fences, utilities, etc.; and 
(v)  Planting details and specifications. 
(b)  Proposed landscaping. 
(i)  Proposed grading at two-foot contour intervals. The director of planning and development or planning commission may waive this requirement if the proposal will clearly not alter on site drainage patterns in a manner that affects adjacent properties or may compromise the performance of on-site stormwater or wastewater infrastructure; 
(ii)  Proposed location of retained vegetation; 
(iii)  Methods of protection for retained vegetation during the construction phase (limits of disturbance should be clearly shown on plans and delineated in the field using fencing, hay bales, silt fencing, or other means installed prior to land disturbance and maintained throughout the construction period); 
(iv)  List of proposed plantings and general locations; 
(v)  Identification of any landscaped areas that will be used for stormwater management including details and specifications vegetated practices such as swales, constructed wetlands, rain gardens, etc. (landscaping for rain gardens and other stormwater controls and revegetation of disturbed wetland buffers may be beyond scope of this provision and addressed separately in stormwater management plan and wetland protection standards, respectively); 
(vi)  Specifications for cultivation, loaming, seeding, and fertilization that demonstrate compliance with subsections (3) and (4) as applicable; 
(2)  Site protection. Protection of the site shall be in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Sediment and erosion control shall be addressed as part of the landscaping plan unless a separate soil and erosion control plan is prepared. 
(b)  Topsoil suitable for landscaping shall be retained on site in an amount as determined as part of the required landscape plan. To the maximum extent practicable, the developer shall minimize the areas of the site to be regraded or disturbed. Topsoil exposed during construction shall be protected through stabilization measures consistent with the Rhode Island Sediment Control Handbook and approved by the director of planning and development or the planning commission as applicable; 
(c)  All organic material, rubbish, potentially harmful materials or debris shall be removed from the site in a timely fashion. Disposal of cleared, grubbed and stripped materials shall be the responsibility of the developer. All roots, stumps, brush, foliage and other vegetation that have been cleared or excavated shall be removed and disposed of by the developer off the project site. This requirement may be modified for the dumping and landfilling of tree stumps as regulated by the subdivisions and land development regulations. 
(d)  No filling, excavation, or material storage shall occur within four (4) feet of any shrub or the dripline of any tree that will be retained. Protective barriers shall be installed to protect this area surrounding retained vegetation and shall be a minimum of three (3) feet high and constructed of durable material. Snow fences and silt fences are examples of acceptable barriers. 
(e)  Parking of construction vehicles, offices/trailers, stockpiling of equipment/materials, etc. shall take place in areas designated for permanent structures or other impervious surfaces and clearly shown on plans. 
(f)  Existing stone walls shall be retained and incorporated into the site design to the maximum extent possible. Where possible, they shall be used as property lines for proposed new interior lots, perimeter property lines or to delineate open space areas from development areas. If existing stone walls are to be moved or disassembled, the director of planning and development or the planning commission may require the stone wall to be reconstructed elsewhere within the proposed development site. 
(g)  Landscaping of all cut and fill areas and/or terraces shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway side slopes greater than 1:3 shall be planted with vegetated ground cover appropriate for the purpose of erosion control and for the soil conditions and environment. The use of erosion control fabric or mats shall be utilized when appropriate. 
(h)  Disturbed areas intended for natural re-growth should be, at a minimum, graded, loamed, and seeded with wildflowers, perennial rye grass, a meadow or "conservation" native grass mix or similar varieties. 
(3)  Plant specifications. 
(a)  Caliper and height measurements as well as root ball specifications for all trees and shrubs shall conform to the American Standard For Nursery Stock ANSI Z60.1-2004. 
(b)  Shade or canopy trees shall not be less than twelve (12) feet in planted height above grade; 
(c)  Small or minor shade trees shall not be less than ten (10) feet in planted height above grade; 
(d)  Flowering fruit trees shall not be less than ten (10) feet in planted height above grade; 
(e)  Evergreen trees used for screening shall not be les than six (6) feet in planted height above grade; 
(f)  Lawn seed mixes shall be drought resistant. To achieve a high level of drought tolerance, lawn mixes shall include, but shall not be limited to, a predominance of fine fescues. 
(4)  Planting and cultivation. 
(a)  Soil. 
(i)  In all areas where landscaping is to be provided and topsoil is to be removed for the purposes of site development and/or grading, topsoil shall be restored and shall contain a minimum of five percent organic matter for turf areas and ten percent for trees and shrubs. The minimum depth of any restored topsoil shall be six inches. 
(ii)  Where pre-existing topsoil will be used for landscaping, such soil shall be cultivated to a depth of six inches. All areas subject to compaction by vehicles, heavy equipment, materials storage or other activities shall be restored by tilling or plowing before replanting. 
(iii)  Cultivated areas shall be covered with not less than a two-inch deep layer of mulch after planting where weed control is required. Mulch should be natural, unpainted, unstained, and designed to retain moisture where applied. Mulching around plantings shall not be done in a manner that encourages damage from excessive moisture. Wood chip mulch shall not be allowed. 
(b)  Lawns. 
(i)  Lawn area for ornamental purposes in commercial or industrial development shall be limited to yards with frontage and ornamental turf shall be limited to areas within the front yard setback. The use of turf in yards without frontage shall be limited to areas reserved for utilities, grass swales, or alternative parking surfaces. 
(ii)  Lawn or turf areas shall not be planted in strips that are less than six feet in width. 
(c)  Trees. 
(i)  Deciduous shade trees along streets are required as part of all development activity in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(ii)  Trees shall be spaced approximately 30 to 40 feet on center along streets, but shall not be located within 30 feet of intersecting right-of-way lines. 
(iii)  Pits cultivations for all trees shall be 2.5 times the diameter of the root ball and a depth equal to the same. Holes for trees shall be prepared in a manner that facilitates grow-in of new trees through the use of best practices. 
(iv)  Trees and other landscaping shall be staked as necessary and provisions shall be made by the developer for adequate watering and maintenance until the plantings are established. 
(v)  No street trees shall be located in a manner that interferes with overhead or underground utility lines. 
(vi)  When planted closer than seven (7) feet from the edge of any pavement, vertical barriers shall be installed to discourage the growth of tree roots into and immediately under the pavement area. Alternative tree planting methods such as the use of "CU-structural soil TM" to prevent damage to pavements and enhance tree growth are encouraged. 
(5)  Landscaping for buffers, parking lots, and loading areas. 
(a)  Every development that has a potentially adverse effect on adjacent property or streets due to noise, size or any conditions shall provide sufficient buffering when topography, existing vegetation or other barriers do not provide reasonable screening to shield neighboring properties. 
(b)  No building, structure, storage of materials, trash receptacles, or parking shall be permitted within the buffer area unless specifically allowed as an exception elsewhere within the Zoning Ordinance. Buffer areas shall be maintained in a manner commensurate with the approved landscape plan and kept free of all debris, rubbish, and weeds and tall grasses unless they were specifically identified in the planting/landscape plan. A buffer may be intersected by a sidewalk, a driveway, a shared driveway, a driveway used to connect adjacent properties with complementary uses, a pedestrian path, bike path, or utility easement. 
(c)  The minimum standards for buffering are provided below. The director of planning and development or the planning commission, as part of development plan review, land development projects or subdivisions, may require applicants to comply with stricter buffer requirements if the project would otherwise create large-scale negative impacts to abutting or adjacent properties such as dust, noise, and glare. The director of planning and development or the planning commission may also reduce these requirements along non-residential property lines within the same zoning district.: 
(i)  Unless otherwise specified, a minimum ten-foot wide landscaped strip of vegetation is required around the entire perimeter of a site, except for development in the neighborhood business district, the Wickford Village Center district, and the Post Road district. 
(ii)  Where a property zoned or used as a business, commercial or institutional use abuts a property which is zoned or used as a residential, educational, recreational or religious use, a 25-foot wide buffer strip shall be required on the property zoned or used for business, commercial, mixed use or institutional use. This requirement shall not apply to development in the Post Road, neighborhood business, or Wickford Village districts. 
(iii)  Buffering shall provide a year-round, dense, and virtually opaque screen of not less than six feet in height in order to minimize adverse impacts and limit visibility and noise. The buffer shall be comprised of a mix of plantings and site elements which may include a mixture of groundcover, understory vegetation and canopy trees, evergreens, berms, walls and/or fences to effectively achieve screening objectives. Earthen berms may be used in the buffer design, provided such side slopes are adequately stabilized by vegetation. Such berms may be used to calculate effective buffer height. The use of tall, monoculture, and uniformly planted rows of evergreens or other similar species shall be discouraged. 

Figure 4. Buffering 
(iii)  Plantings shall provide adequate screening but shall not be overcrowded and shall be installed in a manner that provides enough space for shrubs and trees to remain viable at maturity. 
(iv)  Where a property contains a stand-alone parking lot and abuts a property zoned or used exclusively as a residential, educational, recreational or religious use, a 25-foot wide buffer shall be required on the property line(s) that abut the residential, educational, recreational or religious use on the property zoned or used for business, commercial, mixed use, or institutional use. This requirement shall not apply to development in the Post Road, neighborhood business, or Wickford Village districts. 
(v)  Where a property zoned or used for an industrial use abuts a property zoned for residential, educational, or religious use, a vegetated buffer of 50 feet in width shall be installed and maintained on the industrial use. 
(vi)  Where residential development is located on the corner of streets with two different size classifications as defined in the subdivisions and land development regulations (i.e., "local" vs. "collector" vs. "arterial" roads), frontage shall be located along the road with the smaller classification to the extent practicable. A buffer shall be provided between the residential development and the road with the larger street classification. The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide. Additional width may be required where necessary to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the residents. The director of planning and development or the planning commission may waive these requirements in the Post Road, neighborhood business, or Wickford Village districts in order to further the goals of these districts. 
(vii)  Garbage collection, recycling areas, utility areas and any other outside storage areas designated for discarded items shall be screened by a buffer strip with a minimum width of three (3) feet along the sides and back of the area and shall be planted with evergreen trees and shrubs. Where the location of a garbage collection or similar area is effectively screened on any side by another structure such as a building, fence, or retaining wall, the director or the planning commission may waive or reduce this buffering requirement. The director of planning and development or the planning commission may waive these requirements in the Post Road, neighborhood business or Wickford Village districts in order to further the goals of that district. Dumpsters shall not be located in front yards as defined by this zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Parking lot and loading area landscaping shall be provided, in addition to the required buffer, to minimize direct views of parked vehicles from streets and public sidewalks, provide the parking area with a reasonable measure of shade and avoid spillover light, glare, noise or exhaust onto adjacent properties. The planning commission and director of planning and development may modify any of the minimum standards associated with parking lot landscaping where deviating from these standards would facilitate an effective use of landscaping to manage stormwater runoff. The following minimum standards shall apply: 
(i)  Interior landscaping shall be provided as follows: 
i.  The minimum required amount of interior landscaping shall be ten percent of the parking area, which includes driveways, borders, sidewalks, parking stalls, and travel lanes. 
Parking lots with 20 or fewer spaces may not require interior landscaping if the planning commission or director of planning and development determines that there is adequate perimeter landscaping and that the objectives of this article have been met. 
ii.  Each double row of parking spaces shall be terminated by landscaped islands which measure not less than ten feet in width. For islands with a tapered design, the width shall be measured at the island's widest point. The island shall be designed to border the entire length of the adjacent parking stall. 

Figure 8. Typical Landscaped Islands 
iii.  The interior of parking lots shall have, at a minimum, landscaped center islands at every other double row. Pedestrian paths may be incorporated within center islands provided a minimum width of four feet is maintained for vegetated areas. 
iv.  The interior of parking areas and all internal circulation areas to the site shall be shaded by deciduous trees either retained or planted by the developer. At maturity, each tree shall provide a canopy with a radius of at least 15 feet. There shall be a sufficient tree canopy to cover 30 percent of the parking area. 

Figure 9. Shade Trees in Commercial Developments 
v.  Shade trees shall be located so that they are surrounded by at least 25 square feet of evenly distributed unpaved area, which may be counted towards calculating the required landscaped area. Trees located in sidewalks shall be located in a protected enclosure level with the sidewalk capable of allowing the trunk to grow to maturity. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 02-20, §§ 11, 12, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-8, § 10, 6-9-03; Ord. No. 08-18, § 7, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 10-06, § 6, 4-26-2010) 
Sec. 21-278. - Lighting requirements. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, lighting for safety shall be provided at intersections, along walkways, at entryways, between buildings and in parking areas and shall be coordinated with stall and aisle layouts. 
(b)  The maximum height of standards in commercial and industrial districts shall not exceed 25 feet. 
(c)  Where there is a mix of residential and commercial uses, light standards shall not exceed 20 feet in height. 
(d)  The height and shielding of lighting standards shall provide proper lighting without hazard to drivers or nuisance to residents. 
(e)  The design of lighting standards shall be of a type appropriate to the development and the town. 
(1)  Illumination levels within parking lots and on pedestrian walkways should generally not exceed one footcandle. Higher levels should be maintained at vehicular entrances and exits, but typically shall not exceed two footcandles. 
(2)  Cutoff luminaries are desirable with at least a 90-degree cutoff. 
(3)  Bulbs such as incandescent, halide or halogen which produce white/clear cast are preferred. 
(f)  Spotlights, if used, shall be placed on standards, pointing toward the building and positioned so the light will not wash onto residential areas. 
(g)  For properties bounding residentially zoned or used properties, light cast by parking and/or security lights shall not exceed one-half footcandle. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-279. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Generally. Performance standards shall regulate noise, vibration, smoke, particulate matter, odor, gas, fire and explosive hazards, glare and heat, waste and radiation. 
(b)  Application of performance standards. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, any use established or changed to and any building, structure or land developed or constructed for any permitted principal use or any use permitted as a special use permit or any accessory use shall comply with all of the performance standards set forth in this section for the district involved. If any existing use or building or other structure is expanded or enlarged, the performance standards for the district involved shall apply with respect to such expanded or enlarged portion of such use, building or other structure. 
(c)  Enforcement of standards. If there is a determination of a probable violation of the performance standards subsequent to the granting of a permit, the building official shall send a written notice of the probable violation by certified mail to the property owner. The notice shall further state that, upon the continuation of the probable violation, a technical determination as described in this chapter shall be made by the town engineer or other qualified personnel, and that if violations as alleged are found, costs of such determinations, including the costs of hiring qualified experts, shall be charged against those responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate. If it is determined that no violation exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by the town. 
(d)  Performance standards. Specific performance standards shall be as follows: 
(1)  Noise. 
a.  Noise shall be measured from the nearest property line or zone boundary as shown in table 1 of this subsection. At the specified points of measurement, the sound pressure level of noise radiated continuously from other than background noises produced by nonindustrial sources such as vehicular traffic or other transportation shall not exceed the values given in table 1 in octave bands of frequency. The sound pressure level shall be measured by a sound level meter and an octave band analyzer that conform to specifications published by the American Standards Association. American Standard Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, S1.4-1961 and American Standard Specification for an Octave Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.10-1963, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, New York, shall be used. 
b.  The maximum permissible sound pressure levels at specified points of measurement for noise radiated continuously from a facility shall conform with the values in table 1. 
c.  The limits mentioned in this subsection are intended for normal continuous day-to-day operations. A variance to exceed these limits by a reasonable amount may be granted for temporary and shortterm operations during construction, maintenance or emergency conditions. 
TABLE 1. ZONING DISTRICT NOISE STANDARDS 
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE OCTAVE BAND SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS 
Residential Business Industrial Octave Band Center Frequency of Measurement (Hz) Daytime All Other 
Times Daytime All Other 
Times Any 
Time Any 
Time 31.5 76 68 79 72 79 83 63 75 67 78 71 78 83 125 69 61 73 65 73 77 250 62 52 68 57 68 73 500 56 46 62 51 62 67 1,000 50 40 56 45 56 61 2,000 45 33 51 39 51 57 4,000 40 28 47 34 47 53 8,000 38 26 44 32 44 50 Single Number Equivalent 60 dB(A) 50 dB(A) 65 dB(A) 55 dB(A) 65 db(A) 70 dB(A)  
  
d.  If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., one or more of the corrections in table 2 following shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in table 1. 
TABLE 2 
Type of Operation or Character of Noise Correction in Decibels Noise source operates less than 20 percent of any one-hour period plus  5* Noise source operates less than 5 percent of any one-hour period plus 10* Noise source operates less than 1 percent of any one-hour period plus 15* Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.) minus 5 Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.) minus 5  
*Apply one of these corrections only. 
e.  If the noise occurs between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday or holidays, seven shall be subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in table 1. 
(2)  Vibration. For the purposes of this subsection, certain terms are defined as follows: 
    Frequency means the number of oscillations per second of a vibration. 
    Impact vibrations means earthborne oscillations occurring in discrete pulses at or less than 100 per minute. 
    Steady-state vibrations means continuous earthborne oscillations occurring more than 100 times per minute. 
    Three-component measuring device means a device for the intensity of any vibration in three mutually perpendicular directions. 
a.  Method of measurement generally. For the purpose of measuring vibration, a three-component measuring system recognized as a standard for such purpose shall be used. Location and timing of measurements shall be used. Location and timing of measurements shall be arranged insofar as possible to exclude vibrations emanating from off the premises involved, or a correction factor reasonable under the circumstances shall be applied to compensate for off-premises vibrations. 
b.  Method of measurement for industrial districts. In industrial districts, steady-state or impact vibrations from any use shall not exceed at any point at or beyond district boundaries the levels set out in the table in subsection (d)(2)d of this section. 
c.  Method of measurement for all other districts. In all other districts, steady-state or impact vibrations from any use shall not exceed at any point at or beyond lot lines the levels set forth in the table in subsection (d)(2)d of this section. 
d.  Maximum permitted steady-state and impact vibration displacement. The maximum permitted steady-state and impact vibration displacement (in inches) shall be as follows: 
Vibration Displacement 
(In Inches) Frequency (Cycles Per Second) Steady State Impact Under 10 0.0055 0.0010 10-19 0.0044 0.0008 20-29 0.0033 0.0006 30-39 0.0002 0.0004 40 and over 0.0001 0.0002  
  
(3)  Smoke. Emissions shall not exceed the standards of the state department of environmental management. 
(4)  Particulate matter. Emissions of particulate matter shall meet the minimum standards of the state department of environmental management. Any handling, transfer or storage of materials shall use the best available technology to control fugitive emissions of dust or other particulate matter migrating to off-site locations in any amount which may be injurious to human health, animals, vegetation or other forms of property or which cause any visible deposits or soiling at any point beyond the property lines. Such technology may include dust collection/suppression systems, wind guards and spraying of stockpiles with surfactants. 
(5)  Odor. Open storage of materials capable of becoming odoriferous either by bacterial decomposition or chemical reaction in such amounts as to be offensive to abutters shall be prohibited. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary control system, so that control will be maintained if the primary system should fail. No odorous emission shall be permitted which is determined to be obnoxious or which unduly interferes with or prevents the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. The emission of noxious odorous matter in such manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be unlawful. 
(6)  Gas. No use shall emit noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases in concentrations or amounts causing discomfort or injury to humans or harmful to vegetation or in excess of the maximum allowable concentrations permitted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the state department of environmental management. 
(7)  Fire and explosive hazards. All industrial uses and storage facilities shall be approved by the town fire marshall with regard to fire and explosive hazards. 
(8)  Glare and heat. Any operation or use producing heat or glare, as differentiated from interior illumination, shall be shielded so that no heat or glare can be recorded from the property boundary. Exterior lights shall reflect away from other properties and highways. 
(9)  Waste. 
a.  Wastewater. Effluent which is discharged into either the ground or sewers shall at all times comply with the standards of the state department of environmental management. Effluent from any industrial or commercial uses shall be collected by the public sewer system when such sewer passes or abuts the property on which the use is located. No effluent can be discharged into the sewer system which will in any way impair the functioning of the sewage treatment plant. 
b.  Waste management. All storage and transportation of hazardous waste, as defined by the U.S. EPA, shall be in accordance with the laws, rules and regulations of the state department of environmental management and town ordinances. The applicant shall indicate on development plans materials which will be used, stored, transported or generated which will be controlled by these regulations. Material safety data sheets for each compound shall accompany the application. The application shall indicate the location, amount and chemical composition of all such wastes. All hazardous waste shall be contained in appropriate vessels in fully enclosed structures. 
(10)  Temperature. No discharge shall raise the temperature of a receiving water in excess of 83 degrees Fahrenheit or above the normal temperature more than 1.6 degrees Fahrenheit from June 16 through September or more than 4 degrees Fahrenheit from October through June 16. All measurements shall be made at the boundary of the mixing zones, as defined by the state department of environmental management. In no case may a mixing zone cause a loss of or impair any existing or designated use. 
(11)  Groundwater, stormwater and surface water. Where deemed necessary by the town engineer, permanent groundwater monitoring wells shall be so specified. Such groundwater monitoring well installation shall include a provision for access, including any dedicated easements required, provided to the town for sampling purposes. The cost of all monitoring, sampling and analysis shall be borne by the property owner. 
(12)  Hazardous materials. All use, storage and transportation of extremely hazardous materials as defined by the EPA shall be in accordance with the laws, rules and regulations of the state department of environmental management and town ordinances. The applicant shall indicate on the development plans materials which will be used, stored, transported or generated which will be controlled by these regulations. Material safety data sheets for each compound shall accompany the application. The application shall indicate the location, amount and chemical composition of all such materials. All hazardous materials shall be contained in appropriate vessels in fully enclosed structures. 
(13)  Storage. 
a.  Generally. 
1.  Except where open storage is permitted, storage of all vehicles, equipment, materials, supplies and products shall be stored in a fully enclosed structure complying with this article. 
2.  Emergency response plans shall be prepared for all facilities handling or storing hazardous materials or materials deemed by the town to be a threat to the town's drinking water supply. 
3.  No commercial buses, vehicles, trailers, cargo containers, or truck bodies shall be used for storage purposes. Motor vehicles or trailers used for temporary loading and unloading purposes, which are removed from the premises within five days from the vehicles' and trailers' arrival date, may be permitted. 
4.  Interior storage of chemicals and fuel (stored in tanks, drums or other containers) shall be on an impermeable surface and surrounded by a dike or the floor sloped so that spilled material is collected in a holding tank. The capacity of the dike or tank shall be sufficient to contain 110 percent of the total volume of the containers or the volume of the largest container, whichever is greater. 
b.  Open storage. Where the open outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, materials, supplies and products are permitted, the following shall apply: 
1.  The open storage shall not occur within any required minimum front, side or rear setback. This shall not apply in the waterfront industrial district. 
2.  The open storage shall not exceed the maximum height limitation of the district. 
3.  All open storage areas shall be secured from unauthorized access. 
4.  All open storage shall be contained and/or covered as necessary so as to prevent its movement or transport by act of nature, including leaching into the ground. Materials which are subject to erosion by water or leaching shall be contained within an impermeable barrier. Materials which are subject to erosion by wind shall be protected by effective cover or other treatment. 
5.  Open storage shall be in such a manner that materials are not attractive to vermin. 
6.  All open storage of any substance that can be moved or damaged by water or that is wholly or partly soluble in water shall be prohibited in the special flood hazard overlay district. 
c.  Open storage in waterfront industrial district. Open storage in the waterfront industrial district shall also comply with the following conditions: 
1.  Open storage shall not exceed 35 feet in height. Stacked containers shall not exceed 35 feet in height. This shall not apply to cranes. 
2.  Open storage of the following specific items is a permitted use: 
i.  Containers and motor vehicles. 
ii.  Construction materials such as lumber, plywood, particle board, wall board, roofing materials, cut stone, brick and other masonry products. 
iii.  Primary metal products such as iron or steel plates, beams, coils, rods, ingots and billets; copper or zinc slaps, ingots and wire; aluminum sheet, coils and wire. 
iv.  Forest products such as rolled paper, newsprint, Kraft paper, liner board and logs. 
v.  Riprap. 
vi.  Machinery and industrial equipment. 
vii.  Baled wastepaper or scrap paper. 
3.  Open storage shall comply with all applicable regulations of the Federal Emergency Management Agency National Flood Insurance Program. 
4.  The following materials may be stored in a waterfront industrial district, but must be stored in an enclosed environment and subject to the other sections of this chapter: 
i.  Dry bulk cargo, being loose, particulate or granular matter. 
ii.  Wood pulp, wood chips and unbaled wastepaper or scrap paper. 
iii.  General cargo not otherwise enumerated. 
iv.  LNG or LPG, in compliance with the National Fire Protection Association standards. 
5.  Bulk storage of the following materials is prohibited in a waterfront industrial district: 
i.  Material subject to spontaneous decomposition or combustion. 
ii.  Solid waste, as defined by the state department of environmental management. 
iii.  Hazardous waste and hazardous substances as established by the United States Department of Transportation. 
d.  Exterior aboveground storage of liquid materials. 
1.  All bulk storage of liquid materials shall be contained in a tank or vessel designed for the purpose and shall be located within an impervious containment structure and diked area conforming to the following: 
i.  The volume of the diked area shall be at least 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank contained therein, excluding the volume below the dike level occupied by any other tanks. 
ii.  The dikes and the entire area enclosed by the dikes including the area under the tanks shall be made permanently impervious to the types of products expected to be stored in the tanks. A tank cannot be switched from one product to another unless the containment and diked barrier is impervious to the new material being stored. 
iii.  Drainage of precipitation from within the containment and diked area shall be controlled in a manner that will prevent any toxic or hazardous or waste material from entering the ground, groundwaters or surface waters. Containment structures shall be separately drained, where practicable, to prevent accumulation of precipitation within the dike. Where roofing is not practical, the diked area should be designed with an additional capacity that is sufficient to contain precipitation from a 25-year rainfall event. 
2.  Containers (e.g., drums) should be stored in a roofed containment structure within an impermeable base and dike. The containment structure should have sufficient capacity to contain 110 percent of the total volume of the containers. The base of the containment structure should be sloped or the containment system should be otherwise designed and operated to safely drain and remove liquids from leaks and spills. Where roofing is not practical, the containment structure should be designed with an additional capacity for accumulated precipitation from a 25-year rainfall event and the containers themselves covered with a weatherproof covering. Materials loading areas shall be inside the facility with drainage from the loading areas directed to the containment system. 
3.  Storage of chemicals and fuel products should be in an area secured from vandalism. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 02-14, §§ 5, 6, 10-7-2002) 
Sec. 21-280. - Other design standards. 
(a)  Railroad construction. All construction of rail lines, sidings or switching facilities shall be indicated on the development plans. All construction shall be in accordance with the American Railroad Association, the Federal Railroad Administration, and the state department of transportation specifications. The department of planning and development and/or the town engineer may require additional vehicular and/or pedestrian crossings. Rail crossings shall be signed, and pavement markings shall be provided in accordance with current standards as established in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(b)  Bulkheads, piers, wharves, jetties, seawalls and riprap construction. All new and all proposed changes to or additions of bulkheads, piers, wharves, jetties, seawalls and riprap shall be indicated on the plans. All such construction shall follow acceptable engineering practices and shall conform to the regulations of the state department of environmental management, the state coastal resources management council, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the U.S. Coast Guard and all other appropriate agencies. 
(c)  Water supply system. Plans shall indicate the complete water supply system with estimated daily average and peak water consumption. The plan shall indicate wells, pumping facilities, water tanks, cisterns, water lines, hydrants, fire control siamese connections and sprinkler systems. If private wells or other private water supply is to be used, proof shall be provided as to the quality and quantity of water available. The water supply system shall meet the standards set by the state department of health and the town fire chief and department of water supply. If the water supply is deemed to be inadequate in quantity or quality, an alternative source of supply will be required. If private wells are used, proof shall be supplied that the proposed drawdowns will not adversely impact any existing wells. If the municipal water system is incorporated in the subdivision design, the developer/contractor shall provide the town engineer with accurate as-built drawings showing the water line extensions. 
(d)  Site engineering and construction specifications. All site construction shall be in accordance with the state standard details and state standard specifications, as amended, issued by the state department of transportation, division of public works. 
(e)  Underground utilities. Electric and communication lines shall be installed underground, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-281. - Public access to the water. 
    Where a recorded, deeded, public right-of-way to the water exists, the town may require public access consistent with safety, parking and pedestrian passage. The access shall be appropriately signed and maintained so that the right-of-way is known and accessible. Where a signage standard has been adopted by the town, such signage shall be erected by any applicant for development approval. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Cross reference- Harbors, wharves and public waters, ch. 7. 
Secs. 21-282, 21-283. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-284. - Development plan review. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the development plan review is to insure compliance with the comprehensive plan and protect the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town by providing a review of plans for uses and structures which may have significant impacts on traffic, municipal and public services and utilities, environmental quality, community economics and public health. 
B.  Approval required. Procedures for approval are as follows: 
(1)  Administrative approval required. Any construction of a structure, group of structures, alteration, improvement or change of use of a building or property which does not meet the criteria for planning commission review shall require development plan approval by the director of planning and development including: 
(a)  Any structure or group of structures proposed for commercial or industrial use containing less than 50,000 square feet of total floor area under the same ownership or contiguous lots; 
(b)  Any structure or group of structures proposed for a mixed use development less than 100,000 square feet of total floor area under the same ownership or contiguous lots; and 
(2)  Planning commission approval required. Any construction of a structure, group of structures, any alteration or improvement or change of use of property for commercial or industrial use as described in B.(1)(a) of this section which is located in a groundwater recharge and wellhead overlay district shall require development plan review and approval by the planning commission. 
(3)  Activities exempt. The administrative officer may determine that developments that meet the following criteria are exempt from the requirements of the development plan review, except where the approval of the zoning board of review is required or for multifamily developments or developments in a groundwater recharge or wellhead area where planning commission approval is required: 
(a)  Alterations or enlargements, individually or collectively, of an existing structure where the expansion or change is less than 25 percent of the original footprint as of the date of passage of this ordinance or 2,500 square feet from the original footprint, whichever is less; and 
(b)  A change or expansion in use where an increase in required parking results in the addition of no more than five spaces. 
(4)  Quonset Business Park. Pursuant to section 21-100(c) of the zoning ordinance, development proposals in the QBP are not subject to development plan review but shall be reviewed under the procedures and standards located in the Quonset Business Park Development Package (September 2005, amended in September 2008, and as subsequently amended) consistent with the memorandum of agreement (dated December 15, 2010, and as subsequently amended). 
C.  Approval required prior to building permit. Approval shall be required prior to building permit issuance in accordance with the following: 
(1)  No building permit shall be issued for and no person shall undertake any use or improvement subject to this section until development plan approval has been granted by the planning commission or the administrative officer. 
(2)  For all properties and uses subject to development plan review, new accessory off-street parking and truck loading areas shall be located and established only as indicated on a development plan duly approved by the planning commission and/or administrative officer. Any changes, alterations, improvements or additions to the parking areas shall require further review by the planning commission and/or administrative officer. 
(3)  For uses which require off-street parking and loading provisions where no building is proposed for construction, a development plan showing all other required site elements, as indicated in the submission requirements, shall be provided to the town. 
D.  Administration. Administration of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Application/inspection fee. No application shall be considered complete unless accompanied by the required application fee. If applicable, an inspection fee shall be paid by the applicant as a condition of approval of a development plan. The fee shall be an amount based on the value of improvements as determined by the town engineer. 
(2)  Expiration of development plan review approval. A development plan review granted pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of filing of the decision, during which time application for a building permit shall be made. The approving agency may grant up to an additional year as a condition of approval, when such is requested in writing. 
(3)  Interpretation. The planning commission or administrative officer, as appropriate, shall be responsible for deciding the meaning and intent of any section of this article which may be unclear or in dispute. 
(4)  Appeals. An appeal to a decision by the planning commission or administrative officer with regard to development plan review approval may be taken by an aggrieved party to the zoning board of review in accordance with section 21-17. 
(5)  Inspections. Upon the request of the building official, the engineering department shall inspect all site work required as part of the development plan review approval and shall report its findings to the building official. 
E.  Application, review and decision procedures. Procedures for the application, review and decisions shall be as follows: 
(1)  Applicants for development plan review will follow the procedures and submission requirements set out in the subdivision and land development regulations, appendix A of this Code, as amended. 
(2)  In granting development plan approval, the planning commission shall require evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
a.  The requested action will not alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or purpose of this chapter or the comprehensive plan upon which this chapter is based. 
b.  The grant of the approval will not pose a threat to the drinking water supply. 
c.  The use will not disrupt the neighborhood or the privacy of abutting landowners by noise, light, glare or air pollutants. 
d.  Sewage and waste disposal into the ground and the surface water drainage from the proposed use will be handled on site. 
e.  The traffic generated by the proposed use will not cause congestion or introduce a traffic hazard to the circulation pattern of the area. 
f.  Accessory signs, off-street parking and loading areas and outdoor lights are designed and located in a manner which complements the character of the neighborhood. 
(3)  In granting development plan approval, the planning commission or administrative officer, as appropriate, may apply such special conditions that may, in the administrative officer's or planning commission's opinion, be required to promote the intent and purposes of this chapter. Failure to abide by any special conditions attached to a grant shall constitute a zoning violation. Those special conditions shall be based on competent credible evidence on the record, shall be incorporated into the decision, and may include but are not limited to provisions for the following: 
a.  Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon adjacent land, including the type, intensity, design and performance of activities; 
b.  Controlling the sequence of development, including when it must be commenced and completed; 
c.  Controlling the duration of use or development and the time within which any temporary structure must be removed; 
d.  Ensuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required public improvements; 
e.  Designating the exact location and nature of development; 
f.  Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats or specifications; 
g.  Requiring the merger of lots included in the development plan review application; and 
h.  Vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian connections where feasible and appropriate. 
(4)  If the proposed development may generate 100 or more additional peak hour trips, based on the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Handbook, or if the department of planning and development determines that a safety or capacity deficiency exists, a traffic impact analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer shall be submitted by the applicant of existing conditions and future conditions with the proposed development. 
(5)  Other such material as deemed appropriate by the planning commission or administrative officer, including but not limited to wetland mitigation analysis, water supply analysis (domestic and fire), nitrate loading analysis, environmental impact analysis and municipal service impact analysis may be required. The determination of additional studies by the administrative officer or planning commission shall be made prior to the issuance of a certificate of completion. 
(6)  The planning commission or administrative officer is authorized to require an applicant to pay a consultant fee for the reasonable costs and expenses, in an amount not to exceed actual costs incurred by the town, for specific expert engineering and other consultant services deemed necessary by the planning commission or administrative officer to come to a final decision on the application. 
(7)  For properties within Quonset Point/Davisville, a letter from the state economic development corporation, indicating that it has reviewed and approved the development plan, shall be presented to the town. 
(8)  The planning commission or the administrative officer is authorized to require an applicant to pay a consultant fee for the reasonable costs and expenses, in an amount not to exceed actual costs incurred by the town, for architectural review of plans as deemed necessary by the planning commission or administrative officer to come to a final decision on the application. Such architectural review shall be limited to a determination as to plan consistency and conformance with the design guidelines contained within this section. Applicants are advised to meet with the planning department to discuss design guidelines prior to submitting plans. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 01-1, § 15, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 08-18, § 7, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 11-01, §§ 4, 5, 1-10-2011) 
Secs. 21-285-21-304. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, adopted May 8, 1995, substantially amended former article XII to read as herein set out. Repealed sections 21-307-21-309 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Rev. Ords. of 1974, §§ 17-12-2-17-12-4; Ord. No. 89-10, § 6, 3-27-1989; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994. 

Sec. 21-305. - Road classifications. 
(a)  Limited access and divided highways. Limited access and divided highways include new Route 138, Colonel Rodman Highway (Route 4), Tower Hill Road south of the intersection of Routes 1 and 4, and any new limited access roads built in the future. 
(b)  Arterial roads. Arterial roads are Bridge Road, Quaker Lane, South County Trail, Ten Rod Road, Post Road, Boston Neck Road, Davisville-Devil's Foot Road, Frenchtown Road, Quonset Access Road, Phillips Street, and Tower Hill Road north of the intersection of Routes 1 and 4. 
(c)  Collector roads. Collector roads are Essex Road, North Quidnessett Road, Forge Road, Harrison Street, Fletcher Road, Potter Road, Newcomb Road, Chadsey Road, Camp Avenue, Shore Acres Avenue, West Main Street, Brown Street, Stony Lane, Old Baptist Road, School Street, Lafayette Road, Fish Hatchery, Dry Bridge Road, Exeter Road, West Allenton Road, Slocum Road, Indian Corner Road, Hamilton-Allenton Road, Waldron Avenue, Gilbert Stuart Road, Shermantown Road, Snuff Mill Road, Oak Hill Road, Namcook Road, Huling Road, Annaquatucket Road, Prospect Avenue, Beach Street, Austin Road and Potowomut, Congdon Hill Road, and Pendar Road. 
(d)  Subdivision roads and new roads. As new roads are developed, the planning commission shall determine the classification of such roads and forward a recommendation to the council for the roads' inclusion in this chapter. All roads not named are classified as subdivision roads. 
(Ord. No. 11-11, § 1, 5-23-2011) 
Sec. 21-306. - Setback and corner clearance. 
(a)  Setback. All structures shall be set back from the access road by the following distances: 
(1)  On a subdivision road, 25 feet from the front lot line. 
(2)  On a collector road, 35 feet from the front lot line. 
(3)  On an arterial road, 50 feet from the front lot line. 
(4)  On a limited access or divided highway, 200 feet from the front lot line. 
Roadway classifications are defined by section 21-305 of this chapter. 
A structure on a corner lot shall maintain the required setback from the property line on both streets. 
(b)  Front lines. Along a street in a residential district in which the predominant setback of the buildings on the same side of the street within 500 feet of the site in both directions are set back less than the required setback, the front line for a building erected may extend to the alignment of such existing buildings, except that no building shall have a front yard of less than five feet in depth. 
(c)  Vision clearance. On any corner lot on which a front yard is required, no wall, fence or other structures shall be erected and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained in such location within the required front yard space as to cause danger to traffic by obstructing the view. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-21-1; Ord. No. 11-11, § 1, 5-23-2011) 
Sec. 21-307. - Nonconformance. 
(a)  Generally. A nonconformance is a building, structure, sign or parcel of land or use thereof, which was lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter, and not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter or amendment. 
(b)  Lawfully existing or established. A building, structure, sign or parcel of land or use thereof was lawfully existing or established if it was in existence prior to May 8, 1995, or was established in conformance with the zoning ordinance in effect at the time the use was first established. For the purposes of this chapter, the placement or use of a sign, with or without any other structure or use, is considered a use of land. 
(c)  Illegal nonconforming uses and structures. Any use or structure illegally established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or any amendment thereto shall not be granted legal nonconforming status. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nonconforming by dimension means a building, structure or parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of this chapter. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of this chapter, other than those pertaining to permitted uses. A building, structure, parcel of land or use thereof not in compliance with the parking regulations of this chapter is also nonconforming by dimension. A lot that is not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of this chapter, including but not limited to those regulations for minimum lot size, lot width and lot frontage, is also nonconforming by dimension. 
    Nonconforming by dwelling units means a building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of this chapter. A building or structure containing a permitted number of dwelling units by the use regulations of this chapter, but not meeting the lot area per dwelling unit regulations, shall be nonconforming by dimension. 
    Nonconforming by use means a use of land, building or structure which is not a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(e)  Compliance with regulations. A building, structure or parcel of land nonconforming by more than one factor, such as by use, dimension, area or parking, shall comply with all regulations of this section. 
(f)  By variance or special use permit. A nonconforming building, structure, sign or parcel of land or the use thereof, which exists by virtue of a variance or special use permit (previously known as special exception) granted by the board shall not be considered nonconforming for the purposes of this section. Such building, structure, sign, parcel of land or use thereof shall be considered a use by variance or a use by special use permit, and any moving, addition, enlargement, expansion, intensification or change of such building, structure, sign, parcel of land or use thereof to any use other than a permitted use or other than in complete conformance with this chapter shall require a further variance or special use permit from the zoning board. 
(g)  Continuance of nonconformance. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use of any building or structure or the use of any building or structure nonconforming by dimension for any purpose to which such building was lawfully established. 
(h)  Maintenance and repair. A building or structure containing a conforming use or a building or structure conforming by dimension may be maintained and repaired, except as otherwise provided this section. 
(i)  Abandonment. If a nonconforming use is abandoned, it may not be reestablished. Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of some overt act or failure to act, which indicates that the owner of the nonconforming use neither claims nor retains any interest in continuing the nonconforming use unless the owner can demonstrate an intent not to abandon the use. The involuntary interruption of a nonconforming use, such as by fire or natural catastrophe, does not establish the intent to abandon the nonconforming use. However, if a nonconforming use is halted for a period of one year, the owner of the nonconforming use will be presumed to have abandoned the nonconforming use, unless the presumption is rebutted by the presentation of sufficient evidence of intent not to abandon the use. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-308. - Building or structure nonconforming by use. 
(a)  Generally. Nonconforming uses are incompatible with and detrimental to permitted uses in the zoning districts in which they are located. Nonconforming uses cause disruption of the comprehensive land use pattern, inhibit present and future development of nearby properties, and confer upon the owners a position of unfair advantage. It is intended that existing nonconforming uses shall not justify further departures from this chapter for themselves or for any other properties. Due to the disruption which nonconforming uses cause to the peace and tranquillity of a residential zone, nonconforming uses therein should be eventually abolished or reduced to total conformity over time. 
(b)  Moving, addition and/or enlargement. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part on site nor shall it be enlarged unless the use contained within such building or structure, including but not limited to such addition and enlargement, is made to conform to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located or a special use permit is granted by the zoning board of review subject to section 21-308(f). The movement of a building or structure containing a nonconforming use off site shall be permitted only if the use contained within such building or structure conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is relocated. 
(c)  Expansion. A nonconforming use of a building or structure shall not be expanded into any other portion of the building or structure which contains a conforming use or which is unoccupied or unused. 
(d)  Intensification. A nonconforming use of a building, structure or land shall not be intensified in any manner. Intensification shall include but not be limited to increasing the number of dwelling units or increasing the seating capacity of a place of assembly. However, this subsection shall not prohibit the interior reconfiguration of existing dwelling units within a building or structure so long as such reconfiguration complies with the dimensional requirements for the zone in which it is located. 
(e)  Change of use. A nonconforming use shall only be changed to a permitted use. A nonconforming use, if changed to a permitted use, may not be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
(f)  Special use permit for enlargement. The zoning board of review may grant a special use permit for the enlargement of an existing building or structure which constitutes a nonconforming use, provided the work complies with all of the following applicable development standards: 
(1)  The reconstructed building does not result in an increase in the existing degree of any dimensional nonconformity; 
(2)  The footprint of the building or structure is not enlarged by greater than 25 percent of the existing building footprint as of the date of adoption of this amendment; 
(3)  The exterior appearance of the reconstructed building remains substantially the same or is changed to enhance its appearance on the site and harmony with the surrounding area; 
(4)  It must be demonstrated that the site can accommodate the proposed level of use. Consideration shall include, but not be limited to, safety, traffic, parking, sewage disposal capacity, utilities, noise levels, adequate buffering, odors and quality of water and air. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 08-05, §§ 1, 2, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 21-309. - Building or structure nonconforming by dimension. 
(a)  Generally. Buildings or structures nonconforming by dimension are likely to cause overcrowding and congestion and contribute to unhealthy conditions and are contrary to the purposes of this chapter. Buildings or structures that are nonconforming by dimension cause disruption to the comprehensive land use pattern and confer upon the owners a position of unfair advantage. It is intended that existing buildings or structures nonconforming by dimension shall not justify further dimensional departures from this chapter for themselves or for any other property. 
(b)  Moving. A building or structure that is nonconforming by dimension shall not be moved in whole or in part on site such as to create further nonconformity. A building or structure that is nonconforming by dimension shall not be moved off site to any other lot unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all of the dimensional regulations of the zone in which it is relocated. 
(c)  Addition and enlargement. A building or structure nonconforming by dimension shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner, unless such addition or enlargement conforms to all the dimensional requirements of the zone in which the building or structure is located. 
(d)  Expansion. A conforming use within a building or structure that is nonconforming by dimension, other than by lot area per dwelling unit, may be expanded into any other portion of the building or structure which is unoccupied or unused. 
(e)  Change of use. A conforming use within a building or structure that is nonconforming by dimension may be changed to any other conforming use. 
(f)  Demolition. A building or structure nonconforming by dimension, if voluntarily demolished, shall not be reconstructed unless it conforms with the dimensional regulations of the zone in which it is located. If such building or structure is involuntarily demolished, destroyed or damaged, it may be repaired or rebuilt to the same size and dimension as previously existed. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-310. - Land nonconforming by use. 
(a)  Continuance. The lawfully established nonconforming use of land, where no building is involved, may be continued, provided that no such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or intensified. 
(b)  Change of use. The nonconforming use of land shall not be changed to a different use, unless such use conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-311. - Land nonconforming by area or other dimensional requirements. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, a nonconforming lot is a lot which does not meet one or more of the minimum dimensional requirements for size, frontage or depth required by this chapter and which is a lot of record, the dimensions of which have not been altered since its creation by a voluntary conveyance which rendered such lot more nonconforming and which was created by the following: 
(1)  A deed or plat recorded on or after July 18, 1947, and was in full compliance with the minimum dimensional requirements for size, frontage and depth of the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of such recording; or 
(2)  A deed or plat recorded prior to July 28, 1947. 
(b)  Lawfully established lots which have less than the minimum area or other dimensional requirements may be enlarged by adding additional land to such lots. Such enlargement shall not provide a basis upon which to expand a nonconforming use. 
(c)  If two or more abutting nonconforming lots are held in the same ownership as of May 8, 1995, or subsequent thereto, such lots shall be combined for the purposes of this chapter in order to conform or more nearly conform to the minimum area or any other dimensional requirements of this chapter for the district in which the lots are located, and such lots shall not be sold separately. 
(d)  A lot which has been created by the merger of two or more nonconforming lots may be subdivided or combined with other lots and subdivided, provided that the following requirements are met and, further, that approval is given by the planning commission: 
(1)  In all zones where any portion of the lot is within the coastal zone as defined by the state coastal resources management council or within a wetlands as defined by the state department of environmental management, all dimensional requirements for the zone, including without limitation area, frontage and lot width, shall be met. 
(2)  In village residential and neighborhood residential zones, all dimensional requirements for the zone, including without limitation area, frontage and lot width, shall be met. 
(3)  In rural residential zones, where public water is available, the minimum lot area, frontage and lot width of the resulting lot may be reduced to not less than 80 percent of the requirements of the zone. If public water is not provided, all dimensional requirements for the zone, including without limitation area, frontage and lot width, shall be met. 
(e)  With respect to two or more contiguous lots which are all nonconforming as to size and where all such lots are located in the same zoning district and are or were in common ownership at any time on or after June 23, 1980: 
(1)  If the combined area of all such lots is equal to or less than the minimum size requirement for a lot in the zoning district in which such lots are located, all such lots shall be combined and considered an undivided tract of land for the purposes of this chapter; or 
(2)  If the combined area of all such lots exceeds the minimum size required by this chapter for a lot in the zoning district in which such lots are located, all such lots shall be replatted into as many lots which fully conform with the minimum size of this chapter for a lot located in the zoning district in which such lots are located without in turn retaining or creating a nonconforming lot as to size. 
(f)  Subject to subsection (g) of this section, in any zoning district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling may be erected on a nonconforming lot as to size or on a lot resulting from the combining or the combining and replatting of two or more contiguous lots in accordance with subsection (e) of this section in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Where such lot contains less than 10,000 square feet, a single-family dwelling may be erected thereon, provided that no interior side yard on such lot shall be less than 12 feet and that building setbacks and rear yards shall be in conformity with this chapter. Any accessory structure may be constructed on site provided that no interior side yard on such lot shall be less than 12 feet and that building setbacks and rear yards shall be in conformity with this chapter; or 
(2)  Where such a lot contains between 10,000 and 30,000 square feet, a single-family dwelling may be erected thereon, provided that no interior side yard on such lot shall be less than 15 feet and that building setbacks and rear yards shall be in conformity with this chapter. Any accessory structure may be constructed on site provided that no interior side yard on such lot shall be less than 15 feet and that building setbacks and rear yards shall be in conformity with this chapter. 
(g)  Notwithstanding subsection (f) of this section, if a nonconforming lot or a lot resulting from the combining or the combining and replatting of two or more contiguous lots in accordance with subsection (e) of this section is nonconforming as to frontage and/or depth, no single-family dwelling may be erected thereon unless the lot meets the following applicable minimum requirement for frontage and depth: 
Zoning District Frontage (feet) Depth (feet) Village Residential 70 70 Neighborhood Residential 90 100 Rural residential 100 125 Low density residential 100 125 Very low density residential 100 125  
(h)  If a nonconforming lot or a lot resulting from the combining or the combining and replatting of two or more contiguous lots in accordance with subsection (e) of this section does not comply with the applicable frontage and/or depth requirements of subsection (g) of this section or if a lot created or altered prior to January 1, 1980, in reliance on a decision of the zoning board of review purporting to authorize the creation or alteration thereof, complies with the size requirement of this chapter but does not comply with the frontage and/or depth requirements of this chapter, the zoning board of review may grant a special exception authorizing the erection of a single-family dwelling on such lot in accordance with section 21-15 only if, in addition to the findings required by such subsection, it is also established by specific finding that: 
(1)  The siting of the dwelling and any accessory building proposed to be erected on such lot, together with the means of access to the dwelling site, will be in accordance with a site plan which has, prior to the granting of such special exception, been approved by the department of planning and development, to ensure that the findings made in accordance with section 21-15 will be implemented; and 
(2)  There is an adequate means of vehicular and utility access to such dwelling site from a public road either over the lot itself or by virtue of an easement conveyed to the owner or former owner thereof for the benefit of such lot and all subsequent owners and occupants thereof. 
However, this subsection shall not be construed to authorize the zoning board of review to grant relief from the size, frontage or depth requirements of this chapter with respect to any lot created or altered by a plat or deed recorded on or after July 28, 1947, which was not when created or after such alteration in full compliance with the size, frontage and depth requirements of the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of such recording other than a lot created or altered prior to January 1, 1980, in reliance on a decision of the zoning board of review, which purported to authorize the creation or alteration of such lot and which was predicated upon a petition to the zoning board of review which covered the tract of land out of which such lot was created or such lot prior to alteration. Further, this subsection shall not be construed as indicating that the zoning board of review, prior or subsequent to January 1, 1980, was or is authorized to allow the creation or alteration of a lot which was not or is not in full compliance with the size, frontage or depth requirements of the zoning ordinance in effect at the time such lot was created or altered. 
(i)  Where a legal nonconforming lot of record, zoned for business or industrial use, has less than the minimum required frontage, but more than 100 feet of frontage, a use or structure may be erected, enlarged or altered thereon without approval from the zoning board of review being necessary, provided that such alteration, enlargement or construction complies with all other requirements of the district in which such lot is located; otherwise a variance will be required as described in subsection 21-14(b)(2). 
(j)  Subsections (c) and (e) of this section shall not apply to unimproved abutting or unimproved contiguous lots which were created by a recorded subdivision or land development project which was approved by the planning commission after April 8, 1974. 
(k)  Subsections (c) and (e) of this section shall not apply to lots which each have structures located thereon unless such structures constitute or are related or accessory to a principal use which is located on one of such lots. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 98-8, §§ 1, 2, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 01-18, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 03-13, § 3, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 14-04, § 2, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 21-312. - Buildings and structures nonconforming by parking. 
(a)  A building or structure is considered nonconforming by parking if the lawfully established use of the building or structure does not meet the applicable parking requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Any residential, commercial, business or industrial land uses in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives is exempt from meeting the requirements of this article. However, if any existing structure is expanded, that amount of new area created by an expansion is bound by the requirements of this article. This requirement shall not include alterations to the interior of existing structures which do not change the parking or loading requirements of the uses therein. 
(c)  A building or structure nonconforming by parking, if changed to a different conforming use, pursuant to all other sections of this chapter, shall meet the parking requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-313. - Nonconformance as to landscaping requirements. 
    Any existing nonresidential use that is nonconforming as to the minimum landscaped open space requirements of this chapter or the landscaping and screening requirements may be enlarged in terms of gross floor area, volume or use without satisfying such landscaping requirements, provided that such enlargement is less than or equal to a 25-percent increase of the structure or use of the lot. Any enlargement exceeding 25 percent shall comply with the landscaping requirements for the lot and use. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Sec. 21-314. - Completion of existing buildings. 
    Nothing in this article shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building pursuant to a valid building permit on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995) 
Secs. 21-315-21-319. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-320. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to permit residents a broad choice in the use of such residents' homes as a place of livelihood and the production of supplemental personal and family income, to maintain and preserve the character of residential neighborhoods by protecting them from adverse impacts of activities associated with commercial uses, and to establish criteria and development standards for home occupations conducted in dwelling units in residential zones. 
(b)  Conditions. Home occupations, as defined in section 21-22, are allowed subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The use of the dwelling unit or, where permitted, an accessory structure by the resident for a business is incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes and occupies 25 percent or less of the floor area within the dwelling unit on the premises. 
(2)  No more than two nonresident employees are permitted on site. 
(3)  There is no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or any visible or audible evidence detectable from the property line of the conduct of such business, except that one sign not larger than two square feet in area bearing only the name of the practitioner and occupation shall be permitted (words only). The sign shall be flush-mounted to the dwelling unit and shall not be illuminated internally. 
(4)  Traffic, including traffic by commercial delivery vehicles, shall not be generated in greater volumes than would normally be anticipated in a residential neighborhood. 
(5)  No hazard or nuisance, including noise, dust, odors, heat, glare, noxious fumes or vibrations, shall be created to any greater or more frequent extent than would normally be expected in the neighborhood under normal circumstances wherein no home occupation exists. 
(6)  There shall be no display of goods, outside storage, stockpiling of materials or retail sales on the premises. 
(7)  Parking for the home occupation shall be met on site. 
(8)  Permitted home occupations include but are not necessarily limited to the following, provided, however, the occupations do not violate subsections (b)(1) through (b)(7) of this section: dressmaking, sewing and tailoring; telephone solicitation work; photography studio; tutoring; home crafts; studios for artists or craftworkers; single-operator hairdresser; offices for doctors, dentists, attorneys, real estate agents, insurance agents, accountants, stockbrokers, engineers, architects, landscape architects, musicians, writers, data programming, and sales representatives; and family day care. 
(9)  There shall be no storage of commercial equipment on the property except as allowed under section 21-321. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 14-03, § 1, 1-16-2014) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 9. 
Sec. 21-321. - Parking and storage of commercial or recreational vehicles in residential areas. 
(a)  Commercial vehicles . The parking or storage of commercial vehicles with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) of more than 26,000 pounds, shall not be permitted except where such parking or storage is directly related and accessory to a permitted use or legal nonconforming use on the premises. Storage of commercial vehicles in excess of 26,000 pounds may be allowed with a special use permit issued by the zoning board of review. All storage of commercial vehicles allowed above shall be subject to the following development standards: 
(1)  All commercial vehicles shall be properly buffered or screened through appropriate landscaping or other measures. 
(2)  The operation or running of equipment shall conform to all town noise ordinances. 
(b)  Major recreational vehicles and equipment. In any residential zone, the parking or storage of major recreational vehicles and equipment, including travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats, boat trailers and similar equipment, but not mobile homes, must comply with the following: 
(1)  Not more than one travel trailer, pickup camper or coach, motorized dwelling or tent trailer may be parked or stored per dwelling unit. Any such equipment stored pursuant to this section shall be no more than 13 feet in height. 
(2)  No major recreational vehicle or equipment, while parked or stored, shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes. 
(3)  The storage of derelict or irreparably damaged major recreational vehicles, equipment or boats is prohibited in all residential zones. 
(4)  Outside storage of boats with accessory trailer or cradle shall, in addition, conform to the following: 
a.  Storage of boats shall wherever possible take place in rear or side yard areas except where terrain, topography or existing site features render such storage impractical. 
b.  Boats shall be set back a distance at least equal to one-third the side, rear or front yard dimension specified in article IV of this chapter, except that no boat or portion thereof shall be stored within four feet of an adjoining side or rear lot line or 15 feet from a front lot line. 
c.  Storage of boats 16 feet or less is exempted from this section. 
(5)  Parking or outside storage of any major recreational vehicle and related equipment as defined in section 21-321(b) of this section shall be prohibited from on-street parking and front yard setback areas and shall take place in the side or rear yard areas, avoiding storage in setback areas where possible, except where terrain, topography or existing site features render such storage impractical as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 07-12, § 8, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 14-03, § 2, 1-16-2014) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 11-31 et seq. 
Sec. 21-322. - Wind energy systems. 
    As of the effective date of the passage of the ordinance from which this section derived [November 21, 2011], WES shall not be allowed in any zoning district. Any WES that was approved prior to the date of this ordinance shall be subject to the applicable ordinances and regulations that were in place at the time of its approval. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 3, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 11-22, § 3, 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 21-323. - Solar energy systems. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to permit and facilitate appropriately scaled solar energy systems and to establish criteria and development standards that maximize their effectiveness and efficiency. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Freestanding accessory solar energy system means a solar energy system that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use(s) of a parcel. 
    Freestanding solar energy system means a solar energy system that is not attached to a structure and is ground mounted. 
    Roof mounted solar energy system means a solar energy system mounted on the roof of a structure, including a principal or accessory structure. 
    Solar energy system means a device to provide for the collection, conversion, storage and distribution of energy derived from solar radiation for space heating or cooling, electricity generation, or water heating. 
(c)  Roof mounted solar energy systems. Roof mounted solar energy systems are permitted in all zones as accessory uses subject to the following development criteria: 
(1)  Roof mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed the height limitations prescribed by the zoning district in which they are located. 
(2)  All roof mounted solar energy systems shall be designed and located to prevent reflective glare toward any adjacent properties. 
(3)  With the exception of the solar panels, all equipment associated with roof mounted solar energy systems, including but not limited to controls, energy storage devices, heat pumps, exchangers, or other materials, hardware or equipment necessary to the process by which solar radiation is converted into another form of energy shall be screened from street view. 
(d)  Freestanding solar energy systems. If the following development standards can be met, freestanding accessory solar energy systems shall be permitted as accessory uses to the single-family or multi-family nature of a property as indicated within article III of this chapter, entitled "land use table." Any exceptions to the development standards shall require a special use permit. Freestanding solar energy systems proposed as a principal use within a residential zone are prohibited. 
(1)  Any freestanding solar energy system that requires a special use permit pursuant to article III and section 21-13 shall adhere to the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Properties with freestanding solar energy systems shall provide adequate emergency vehicle access and a minimum of two parking spaces for routine maintenance or monitoring. 
(3)  No individual panel within a freestanding solar energy system installation shall exceed 16 feet in height, as measured from predevelopment lot grade at the location of the panel to its highest point. 
(4)  All panels, equipment and structures included with freestanding solar energy system installations shall meet the setback requirements prescribed by the zoning district in which they are located. 
(5)  a.  Single-family or multi-family zones. All solar panels and equipment associated with freestanding solar energy systems, including but not limited to controls, energy storage devices, heat pumps, exchangers, or other materials, hardware or equipment necessary to the process by which solar radiation is converted into another form of energy shall be screened with a six-foot tall privacy fence and prevent unauthorized access. 
b.  All other zones. With the exception of solar panels, equipment associated with freestanding solar energy systems, including but not limited to controls, energy storage devices, heat pumps, exchangers, or other materials, hardware or equipment necessary to the process by which solar radiation is converted into another form of energy shall be designed to be screened from street view and prevent unauthorized access. 
(6)  The freestanding solar energy system shall not interfere with the view of, or from, sites of significant public interest such as public parks or national, state or locally designated scenic byways. 
(7)  All freestanding solar energy systems shall be designed and located to prevent reflective glare on any adjacent properties. 
(8)  Electrical lines and connections shall be installed underground to the extent permissible by the utility company. 
(e)  Town-owned property and assets. Nothing contained within this section shall preclude the town from operating or leasing any solar energy system on town-owned properties or assets, subject to the provisions contained within the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 3, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 18-11, § 3, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 21-324. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-325. - Development standards for certain uses. 
    The uses in this section are allowed subject to the standards and conditions specified in addition to those specified elsewhere in this chapter. An applicant should demonstrate compliance with the development standards associated with a use requiring a special use permit and should also meet the requirements of section 21-15. Where allowed, an applicant may request a waiver of a particular standard or condition of a development standard by an application to the zoning board of review for a special use permit. The development standards and conditions are as follows: 
(1)  Drive-in windows. Development standards for drive-in windows shall be as follows: 
a.  Vehicular entrances and exits shall be controlled by curbing. 
b.  There shall be adequate off-street parking and loading spaces to serve the proposed use. There must be sufficient on-site stacking areas to accommodate at least ten queued vehicles for a drive-in/drive-through lane and at least three queued vehicle(s) exiting the site. If two or more drive-in/drive through lanes are proposed for a single use on a property, there must be sufficient on-site stacking areas to accommodate at least five queued vehicle(s) for each drive-in/drive-through lane per drive-in/drive through lane and at least four queued vehicles exiting the site regardless of the number of drive-in/drive through lanes. 
c.  Any accessory drive-in/drive-through lane shall be properly located within the parking and circulation plan to avoid any effect on off-site vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and in no case shall a drive-in/drive-through window be located on any building facade which faces a public street. 
d.  For a freestanding, single-use building proposed with a drive-in/drive through lane the minimum lot area shall be no less than 40,000 square feet in the neighborhood business, general business, heavy business or planned business zoning districts. 
(2)  Hotel or motel. Development standards for a hotel or motel shall be as follows: 
a.  Minimum lot area exclusively utilized for this use shall be two acres of land suitable for development. 
b.  Hotel or motel use is permitted as an accessory use to a water-dependent use. 
c.  The maximum number of guest units per buildable acre shall be one rooming unit per 3,000 square feet of land suitable for development. This limitation shall not apply to a hotel or motel which is connected to and utilizes the sewage treatment plant of the QBP. 
d.  Where an application increases public access to the water at least 30 percent the length of the bulkhead, an increase of 25 percent of the number of guestrooms is permitted, subject to meeting all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  Institutions for higher learning. Development standards for institutions for higher learning, including colleges, universities, junior colleges, technical schools, along with accompanying service and administrative buildings, dormitories and customary indoor and outdoor recreation facilities such as playfields, gymnasiums and stadiums, shall be as follows: 
a.  The minimum lot area shall be ten acres of contiguous land suitable for development. This minimum shall not apply to educational institutions where buildings are used for classrooms with no accompanying services or uses. 
b.  Any associated recreational facility and/or dormitory shall be operated primarily as an adjunct to some educational, cultural, social or athletic activity of such institution of higher learning and not leased or otherwise operated primarily for the purpose of gain or profit. 
c.  No building, parking or loading area or recreational facility shall be nearer than 200 feet to any residential use. 
d.  There shall be no outdoor public address or music system, except for those customarily associated with a stadium, provided that such stadium is located at least 500 feet from any residential property line. 
(4)  Marinas. Development standards for marinas shall be as follows: 
a.  The sale of fuel and or bottled gas on a marina site must conform with the following conditions: Fuel storage facilities shall be adequately containerized so as to prevent spillage, leakage or damage from storms and shall be set back no less than 50 feet from the mean high water line. However, gasoline pumps may be located conveniently to serve boats, provided that precautions are taken to prevent spillage in the waters of the town. The vessel containing the fuel or gas must comply with Federal Emergency Management Agency flood hazard regulations and the National Fire Protection Association regulations. 
b.  Pumpout facilities for boats shall be provided. 
c.  There shall be provisions made for the collection and disposal of boat-generated solid wastes. 
(5)  Hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes. Standards for hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes shall be as follows: 
a.  The site shall contain no less than ten acres of land suitable for development. 
b.  The project shall have received a certificate of need from the state department of health. 
c.  The maximum density shall be based on a minimum of 10,000 square feet of suitable land area per bed. 
d.  Access to the development site shall be from either an arterial or collector road and shall not exceed 1,000 feet without a second means of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles. This second access may enter onto any class road and shall be reserved for emergency vehicle use by means of a suitable barrier in accordance with the standards of the fire department. 
e.  In lieu of the required minimum side yard and rear yard setbacks in a residential district, a minimum 150-foot transitional yard setback shall be provided along the side and rear property lines. At least 75 feet of this area shall be planted and maintained to provide a yearround visual screening of the development from abutting and adjacent land uses. 
(6)  Day care and nursery school. For a day care and nursery school, the site shall contain no less than one acre of land suitable for development. 
(7)  Accessory dwelling units. 
a.  Conditions and requirements applicable to all accessory dwelling units. 
1.  An accessory dwelling unit shall not be permitted on the same lot on which exists a rooming house or boarding house, preexisting accessory dwelling unit, two-family dwelling, multi-family dwelling, mobile home park, or hotel or motel. 
2.  No more than one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on a lot unless otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter. 
3.  The accessory dwelling unit shall not contain more than two bedrooms. 
4.  At least one additional off-street parking space shall be provided on the lot for the accessory dwelling unit. 
i.  Each parking space and the driveway leading thereto shall be paved or shall have an all-weather gravel surface. No motor vehicles shall be regularly parked on the premises other than in the parking spaces. 
ii.  There shall be no more than two outdoor parking spaces on the lot for the new accessory dwelling unit. 
5.  Prior to issuance of a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit proposed in a business district within the groundwater overlay zone, development plan review must be approved by the planning commission. The planning commission shall find that the proposed mixture of residential and business activities will not result in conditions which are unhealthy or harmful to the community welfare. 
6.  An accessory dwelling unit and the principal dwelling unit shall be in the same ownership with a deed restriction recorded in the land evidence records, as appropriate, with documentation of the recording provided to the building official, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the accessory dwelling unit. 
7.  The owner(s) of the property in which the accessory dwelling unit is created must continue to occupy at least one of the dwelling units as their residence. 
8.  The appearance of the principal structure must remain that of a single-family residence. 
i.  All stairways to second or third stories shall be enclosed within the exterior walls of the dwelling. 
ii.  Any new entrance shall be located on the side or in the rear of the dwelling. 
iii.  Where two or more entrances already exist on the front façade of a dwelling, modifications made to any of the entrances shall result in one entrance appearing to be the principal entrance and other entrances appearing to be secondary. 
9.  The lot that the accessory dwelling unit is located on shall contain not less than the minimum lot size required for the principal dwelling per article IV, in a conservation development section 21-216, in a cluster development section 21-221, or in a residential compound development section 21-429(b)(2). 
10.  The maximum gross floor area for an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 40 percent of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling, excluding areas of the structure used for parking or 1,000 sq. ft., whichever is the lesser amount. 
11.  The application for a special use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan containing: 
i.  Floor plans, drawn to scale, of the accessory dwelling to be created and the structure where it is to be located. 
ii.  Where exterior changes are proposed, an elevation, or other visual representations of the façade to be changed sufficient to show the architectural character of the dwelling. 
iii.  An off-street parking plan. 
b.  Where an accessory dwelling unit in an owner occupied, single-family residence is to be constructed for a family member(s) with disabilities, RIGL 45-24-37(e) and (f) shall apply. 
(8)  Commercial establishments for coin-operated mechanical amusement devices. Standards for commercial establishments whose principal purpose is the furnishing for use and for a profit coin-operated mechanical amusement devices, as defined in chapter 9, shall be permitted, provided it is established to the satisfaction of the zoning board and the zoning board finds that: 
a.  The existence of such an establishment will not create a traffic and/or parking problem; 
b.  The existence of such an establishment will not create a nuisance to surrounding property owners; 
c.  Adequate precautions will be taken by the establishment to prevent disorderly conduct as defined by section 12-6 on the establishment premises or in the immediate area of the establishment premises; and 
d.  The granting of such a special use permit is in accordance with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and in accordance with the general and special rules as set forth in subsection 21-6(2). 
(9)  Churches, synagogues and temples. Access to the site shall be directly from either an arterial or collector road. 
(10)  Noncommercial clubs and fraternities. Access to the site shall be directly from either an arterial or collector road. 
(11)  Animal hospitals. Development standards for animal hospitals shall be as follows: 
a.  There shall be a 100-foot setback from the side and rear lot lines. 
b.  There shall be no outside boarding. 
(12)  Travel trailer parks. Development standards for travel trailer parks shall be as follows: 
a.  The site shall contain no less than ten acres of land suitable for development. 
b.  Each trailer lot site shall be provided with suitable connections to a potable water supply system, sewage disposal system and electrical distribution system. Wherever possible, these facilities shall be connected to the appropriate public facilities. 
c.  In lieu of the required minimum side and rear yard setbacks in the district, a minimum 100-foot transitional yard setback shall be provided along the rear and side property lines. At least 50 feet of this area shall be appropriately landscaped to screen the use from adjoining and abutting uses. 
(13)  Bed and breakfast. A bed and breakfast may be conducted in any single-family residential dwelling by the owner-occupant, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Breakfast shall be the only common meal provided. 
b.  There shall be not more than three bedrooms or more than five persons. 
c.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the activity other than a sign permitted pursuant to article X of this chapter. 
d.  There shall be sufficient off-street parking spaces conforming to article XI of this chapter or no less than one per rented bedroom in addition to that required of the dwelling. 
e.  The bed and breakfast use shall be clearly subordinate to the principal use of a single-family dwelling. 
f.  No dwelling unit shall be used as a bed and breakfast unless a permit has been issued by the building official. Such permits shall be valid for a period of one year and shall be issued only after the building official has certified that the residence meets all the requirements of this chapter and any conditions set out by the zoning board of review. 
g.  The building shall be in compliance with all applicable zoning, building, fire, electrical and plumbing codes. 
h.  No guest may be registered for more than 21 consecutive nights. The owner shall maintain a guest register and shall reserve registration records for a minimum of three years. The register and all records shall be made available for inspection by the building official or designee. 
(14)  Mobile home parks. Development standards for mobile home parks shall be as follows: 
a.  There shall be a minimum of ten acres of land suitable for development. 
b.  Along all exterior property lines of a mobile home park, a landscaped buffer strip shall be maintained. Such buffer strip shall be no less than 100 feet wide and planted and maintained in order to provide yearround visual obstruction of the mobile home lots from abutting land and streets. Such buffer strip may be used for recreation of a nonintensive character; provided, however, that no structure is located thereon. 
c.  The minimum mobile dwelling unit lot size for a mobile dwelling unit lot located within a mobile home park shall be 6,000 square feet. 
d.  The minimum dimensional standards for mobile home parks are as follows: 
1.  All mobile dwelling units located within a mobile home park subsequent to the adoption of this subsection shall conform to the following: 
i.  Minimum internal roadway exclusive of parking lanes which may be located thereon: 18 feet. 
ii.  Minimum spacing from another mobile dwelling unit or structure: 
Side to side: ten feet 
End to side: eight feet 
End to end: six feet 
2.  No additional mobile dwelling unit lots shall be located in a preexisting nonconforming mobile home park unless the additional mobile dwelling unit lots conform to all of the development standards for mobile home parks. 
3.  The replacement of a mobile dwelling unit or replacement of a mobile home dwelling unit on a licensed unoccupied mobile home dwelling unit lot within a mobile home park shall be allowed only where the minimum dimensional standards of this subsection (14)d can be met. 
(15)  Telecommunications towers. Development standards for telecommunications towers shall be as follows: 
a.  Telecommunications towers shall be prohibited in any historic district and in or within 500 feet of any scenic overlay district except by a use variance from the zoning board of review. A certificate of approval from the historic district commission is required for locations within a historic district. Impact mitigation is required for locations in or within 500 feet of a scenic overlay district. 
b.  Applications for a use variance or a special use permit shall be accompanied by evidence that the proposed tower cannot be located in a permitted district. Such evidence shall consist of the following information for a minimum of three potential sites: 
1.  Site plans; 
2.  Photographs of the site and surrounding areas; and 
3.  Written documentation of the lack of a site in a permitted district. 
c.  The following standards shall apply to all applications: 
1.  A reasonable effort shall be made to utilize existing structures for telecommunications antennas. If an existing structure is not utilized, evidence as to why not shall be submitted. 
2.  Town-owned sites which are located in the prospective development area and which could potentially accommodate the proposed antennas and communications towers shall be identified. 
3.  Communications towers shall be set back from all property lines a minimum of one foot for each one foot of tower height. When the property abuts a residential district or historic district, the setback distance shall be 1.5 feet for each one foot of tower height. All guy wires and guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times, and all guy wires shall be set back from all property boundaries the minimum of the zoning district in which they are located. 
4.  All communications tower supports and peripheral anchors shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the development site and shall be set back from all property boundaries the minimum of the zoning district in which the communications tower is located, but no less than 25 feet. When located in or abutting a residential district or historic overlay district, the minimum distance shall be 35 feet. Supports and/or peripheral anchors shall not encroach upon the minimum landscaped screening requirement. All supports and anchors shall have at a minimum a ten-foot horizontal setback from any overhead utility line. 
5.  Communication equipment buildings and structures shall be considered accessory uses and shall comply with the following setbacks: 
i.  One hundred square feet or less shall be set back from all property boundaries a minimum of 15 feet, unless located within or abutting a residential district or historic overlay district which shall require a minimum of 25 feet. 
ii.  Greater than 100 square feet shall be set back from all property boundaries a minimum of 25 feet, unless located within or abutting a residential district or historic overlay district which shall require a minimum of 35 feet. 
6.  Communications towers shall be constructed and situated in such a manner as to fit in with the topography and features of the surrounding environment. Towers shall be completely screened from all adjacent properties and streets and appropriately camouflaged if required. Plantings shall be of such a height and density to ensure complete screening. Screening shall consist of plant and/or tree material accepted by the town's subdivision regulations or as accepted by the director of planning and development. Screening shall comprise ten percent of the minimum established setback requirement, but shall not be less than five feet in width unless located in or abutting a residential district or historic overlay district which will require that it not be less than ten feet in width. Screenings may be waived by the zoning board of review on those sides or sections which are adjacent to undevelopable lands or lands not in public view. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible and may be used as a substitute for or supplement towards meeting the landscaped screening requirement. The owner of the property shall be responsible for all maintenance and shall replace any dead plantings within 30 days. 
7.  Communications towers shall be enclosed by a fence no less than eight feet in height or no more than ten feet in height from finished grade. Access shall be through a locked gate. Communications towers in or abutting a residential district or historic overlay district shall have fencing comprised of wood or stone. 
8.  Communications towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required for public safety purposes by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or by the town. 
9.  No signs shall be allowed on any communications tower except as required for public safety purposes by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or by the town. 
10.  Communication antennas not attached to a communications tower shall be permitted as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, office, institutional, multifamily or public utility structure, provided that: 
i.  The antennas are not higher than 20 feet above the highest point of the structure; 
ii.  The antennas comply with applicable Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation Administration regulations; and 
iii.  The antennas comply with all applicable zoning requirements and building codes. 
11.  Communications towers shall be located so as to comply with the following standards for the minimum separation distance from existing communications towers and/or communications towers that have received a valid special use permit, use permit or building permit: 
MINIMUM SEPARATION BETWEEN TOWERS (BY TOWER TYPE) 
Proposed Tower Types Self- 
Supporting Guyed Monopole, 75 Feet in Height or Greater Monopole, Less than 75 Feet in Height Self-supporting 3 miles 3 miles 1.5 miles 2,500 feet Guyed 3 miles 3 miles 1.5 miles 2,500 feet Monopole 75 feet in height or greater 1.5 miles 1.5 miles 1.5 miles 2,500 feet Monopole less than 75 feet in height 2,500 feet 2,500 feet 2,500 feet 2,500 feet  
i.  Separation distances shall be calculated and applied irrespective of jurisdictional boundaries. 
ii.  Separation distances shall be measured from the global positioning system location of the existing, approved or proposed communications tower. A certified survey showing the global positioning system location of the proposed communications tower shall be submitted with any application for a special use permit, use permit or building permit to demonstrate conformance with setback requirements. 
(16)  Adaptive apartment units. The intent of adaptive apartment unit provisions is to provide opportunities for currently unpermitted apartment units to be brought into compliance, and gain affordable housing. As a subsidy to facilitate that end, local fees for the inspection and monitoring as it relates to the affordable component of these properties identified under these provisions will be waived, and to the extent allowable by law any negative effect entailed by the deed restriction involved will be reflected in the property tax assessment. This provision does not waive any building permit or other associated town fees. 
a.  A dwelling unit that does not qualify as a lawful nonconforming use or structure may be granted a special use permit for occupancy as an adaptive apartment unit if in compliance with all of the following. 
b.  The unit has been documented to have existed on January 1, 2014. 
c.  The maximum gross floor area for an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 40 percent of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling, excluding areas of the structure used for parking or 1,000 sq. ft., whichever is the lesser amount. 
d.  The unit must meet all requirements of RIGL 23-27.3, the state building code; of RIGL 45-24.3, the housing maintenance and occupancy code; and of all applicable fire codes prior to issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy. 
e.  The unit must be made subject to a land lease and/or deed restriction which assures for at least 99 years that: 
1.  The units shall be affordable to households having an income of no more than 80 percent of the area median income (AMI), as specified in RIGL 42-128-8.1(d)-1; 
2.  Occupant households or individuals shall have incomes not exceeding that same level; 
3.  The units shall be offered through a marketing, tenant selection and monitoring plan that meets local preferences and state and federal fair housing requirements. 
4.  The 99-year deed restriction shall reset and begin as a new 99-year deed restriction at the time of the sale of the unit or property. 
f.  One parking space per adaptive apartment unit must be provided unless, in acting upon the special use permit, the zoning board of review determines that a lesser requirement will serve all needs owing to the nature of the occupancy. 
g.  Not more than two such unpermitted units on any one lot may qualify for lawful occupancy through a special permit granted pursuant to these provisions. 
(17)-(20)  Reserved. 
(21)  Farmers' markets. Development standards for farmers' markets shall be as follows: 
a.  Produce, plants, animal products and other products sold at the market must be sold by the producer or by their authorized agent. Wholesale vendors who purchase products from other producers are prohibited. Any products not from the state must be labeled as such. 
b.  Vendors must adhere to all state laws regarding sales of produce and/or food. 
c.  Proof of insurance may be required of the organization requesting to hold a farmers' market. 
d.  Only demonstrations featuring growing and agricultural related products are allowed. 
e.  The use shall not adversely impact neighboring properties. Review may include factors such as the hours of operation, traffic and noise. 
f.  A maintenance plan may be required that provides for preservation of landscaping and cleanup and litter removal. The organization requesting to hold a farmers' market will be responsible for maintenance, clean-up and litter and trash removal. 
g.  Adequate off street parking must be available and a traffic control plan may be required that provides for the orderly flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
h.  No registered farms located within the town shall be excluded from participating in any farmers' market located on public property. 
(22)  Outdoor sales, display and/or storage with standards to include the following: 
a.  No activity shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. 
b.  No activity shall obstruct building exits, fire lanes, or handicap parking spaces. 
c.  No activity shall obstruct pedestrian flow through the site or from abutting properties. 
d.  "Open storage" shall comply with section 21-279(d)(13)b. 
e.  Pedestrian access to outdoor display and sales areas shall be clearly delineated and separated from any traffic flow or movements on the property either by permanent walls, barriers or vegetation, or removable barriers that are capable of creating a safe barrier between pedestrians and vehicles. 
f.  Total of outside sales, storage and display not to exceed 25 percent of total building retail area accessible to the public including vestibules, entrances, exits, and permanent approved structures attached to the main building and in no event shall it exceed 20,000 square feet. 
g.  All outdoor storage areas shall be adequately buffered from the front and side property lines. 
h.  Any and all storage shall be either on the side or rear of the building except in the Post Road zone. In the Post Road zone, outdoor storage shall only be allowed at the rear of the structure. 
i.  Outdoor sales and display shall only be allowed within an envelope around the building defined by a perimeter which is one-half the distance between the building and the property line. Additionally, in a Post Road zone, no outdoor sales or display shall be allowed in front of any building or in any area which is an extension of the front line of the building extending to the property line. 
j.  Outdoor sales and display shall not exceed 15 percent of the total retail floor area for that use or business including vestibules, entrances, exits, permanent approved structures attached to the main building and all areas accessible to the general public. 
k.  Outdoor storage shall not exceed 15 percent of the total retail floor area for that use or business including vestibules, entrances, exits, permanent approved structures attached to the main building and all areas accessible to the general public. 
l.  Outdoor storage or display shall not encroach on to any building set-back as such set-backs are defined in article IV. 
m.  If all of the development standards can be met, then outdoor sales, display, and/or outdoor storage will be allowed by right on the property. Any exceptions to these development standards will require the issuance of a special use permit, if allowed in the land use table. 
(23)  The raising of chickens (Gallus domesticus) shall have the following requirements: 
a.  The owner of any dwelling in a residential zone may keep a maximum of six chickens per acre, with a maximum of 12, provided that: 
1.  No person shall keep any rooster on lots without the issuance of a special use permit; 
2.  All chickens must be provided with both a hen house (coop) and a fenced outdoor enclosure, subject to the following provisions: 
i.  The hen house must be covered, predator resistant, and well-ventilated; 
ii.  The hen house must provide a minimum of two square feet for each bird; 
iii.  The hen house must be kept clean, dry, and sanitary at all times; manure must be composted in enclosed bins; 
iv.  The hen house must be located at a minimum of 20 feet from any dwelling; 
v.  The hen house and the fenced outdoor enclosure shall be within the accessory structure setback; 
vi.  Manure shall not be stored or composted within 50 feet of a lot line, within 100 feet of a well, or within 200 feet of a wetland or stormwater drainage feature. Areas where manure is stored or composted shall be visually screened from dwellings on adjacent lots. 
3.  No chickens may be kept or raised within the dwelling; 
4.  No chickens may be harvested in plain view of abutting residential structures; 
5.  The raising of chickens shall be restricted to back yards or side yards; 
6.  All feed must be stored, secured and covered in a predator resistant container or area; 
7.  All poultry are subject to the nuisance provisions set forth in sections 8-11 and 8-12 of the North Kingstown Code of Ordinances; 
8.  If all of these development standards can be met, then the allowance of raising chickens will be allowed by right on the property. Any exceptions to these development standards will require the issuance of a special use permit, if allowed in the land use table. 
9.  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any legal use existing at the time of the adoption of this amendment. 
(24)  Medical marijuana cultivation center. 
a.  The use of butane, propane or other compressed flammable gasses used for the purposes of marijuana extraction shall be strictly prohibited in all districts. 
b.  The location of the cultivation center shall meet the requirements of the Rhode Island General Laws and regulations. The cultivation center shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any property line of an existing public or private school. 
c.  Any structure that is used for cultivation of medical marijuana shall not be located within 400 feet of an existing residential structure. 
d.  Lighting shall adequately illuminate the cultivation center, its immediate surrounding area, any accessory uses, including storage areas, the parking lots, the medical marijuana cultivation center's front façade, and any adjoining public sidewalk or walkway. 
e.  The proposed medical marijuana cultivation center shall implement the appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas containing marijuana and shall ensure that each location has an operational security alarm center. Security shall meet the requirements of the Rhode Island General Laws and regulations. Proof shall be submitted to the planning department at application. 
f.  Medical marijuana cultivation centers shall comply with the parking and loading requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
g.  If the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, the owners of the subject property shall provide written acknowledgement and approval of the proposed use, which shall be appropriately notarized prior to review and approval by the town. 
h.  The applicant shall provide confirmation that the fire chief, police chief, and building official have received notice of intent to operate a medical marijuana cultivation center at the subject property. 
(25)  Nonresidential cooperative cultivation. 
a.  The use of butane, propane or other compressed flammable gasses used for the purposes of marijuana extraction shall be strictly prohibited in all districts. 
b.  The location of the nonresidential cooperative shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any property line of an existing public or private school. 
c.  Any structure that is used for nonresidential cooperative cultivation of marijuana shall not be located within 400 feet of an existing residential structure. 
d.  Lighting shall adequately illuminate the nonresidential cooperative cultivation center, its immediate surrounding area, any accessory uses, including storage areas, the parking lots, the medical marijuana cultivation center's front façade, and any adjoining public sidewalk or walkway. 
e.  The proposed nonresidential cooperative cultivation center shall implement the appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas containing marijuana and shall ensure that each location has an operational security alarm center. Security shall meet the requirements of the Rhode Island General Laws and regulations. Proof shall be submitted to the planning department at application. 
f.  Nonresidential cooperative cultivation shall comply with the parking and loading requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
g.  If the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, the owners of the subject property shall provide written acknowledgement and approval of the proposed use, which shall be appropriately notarized prior to review and approval by the town. 
h.  The applicant shall provide confirmation that the fire chief, police chief, and building official have received notice of intent to operate a nonresidential cooperative cultivation at the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 96-20, § 1, 11-18-1996; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 01-1, § 13, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-7, § 1, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 01-18, § 2, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 07-22, § 2, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 07-23, §§ 8, 9, 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 08-17, § 3, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-19, § 4, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 10-06, § 7, 4-26-2010; Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 5-10-2010; Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 10-16, § 4, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 11-01, § 6, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 11-18, § 4, 6-27-2011; Ord. No. 12-03, § 2, 2-27-2012; Ord. No. 12-13, § 7, 10-22-2012; Ord. No. 13-20, § 2, 12-9-2013; Ord. No. 14-08, § 1, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 15-04, §§ 2, 3, 3-30-2015; Ord. No. 17-07, § 3, 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 21-326. - Septic system setback. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, no part of a subsurface wastewater disposal system or other facility designed to leach liquid wastes into the soil shall be located within 150 feet of any river, stream, surface water body (including a seasonal surface water body), coastal or freshwater wetland, or within 150 feet of the line of mean high water of any tidal water body. This section shall not be interpreted to require a 150-foot setback from a perimeter wetland or coastal feature as that term is defined by the State Department of Environmental Management and the State Coastal Resources Management Council. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any replacement, repair, alteration or modification of a system or facility which exists on February 12, 2001. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the location of such a system on a residential lot which was in existence prior to February 12, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 14, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 12-13, § 8, 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 21-327. - Off-site improvements. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is intended to ensure that subdividers/developers of subdivisions or land development projects provide off-site infrastructure improvements in order to mitigate the impacts which are directly or indirectly attributable to new development. As part of the approval of any subdivision or land development project, such improvements may be required by the planning commission if the commission finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the requested improvement and the proposed new development. Off-site improvements may include, but are not limited to improvements to the following: 
(1)  Sanitary sewers; 
(2)  Water supply systems; 
(3)  Streets and roadways; 
(4)  Sidewalks; 
(5)  Bicycle paths; 
(6)  Drainage systems. 
(b)  Definition and principles. As a condition of final approval, the planning commission may require a subdivider or developer to construct reasonable and necessary improvements located off of the proposed land being developed. "Necessary" improvements are those clearly and substantially related to the subdivision or land development being proposed. The planning commission shall provide in its resolution of final approval the basis for requiring such off-site improvements. 
In its resolution, the commission must find that a significant negative impact on existing conditions will result if the off-site improvements are not made, and are clearly documented in the public record. The mitigation required as a condition of approval must be related to the significance of the identified impact. All required off-site improvements must reflect the character defined for that neighborhood or district by the comprehensive community plan. 
(c)  Approvals required. If off-site improvements are proposed to be made to any town, state or federally-owned street, utility or other facility, the approval of the town council or appropriate state or federal agency shall be received in writing and shall be made a part of the record. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 5, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 21-328. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  No structure shall be constructed, erected, expanded, placed or moved and no land use shall be commenced or continued within the town unless in conformity with the regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which it is located, except as may be otherwise provided for by this chapter. 
(b)  No lot, minimum setback, yard, open space or off-street parking area shall be so reduced, diminished or maintained such that the yard, open space, total lot area or off-street parking area shall be smaller than prescribed by this chapter. 
(c)  No part of a minimum setback, yard, parking space or open space required for any building or use for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a minimum setback, parking space or open space required under this chapter for another use or building, except as expressly provided for in this chapter with regard to parking. 
(d)  In no case shall there be more than one residential building and its accessory buildings on one lot except as otherwise may be expressly permitted by this chapter. 
(e)  No structure shall be erected on or moved on the lot which does not have frontage on a public street equal to or greater than the required minimum frontage for the district in which it is located except as permitted by section 21-311. 
(f)  A temporary building for construction materials and/or equipment for a permitted use on a construction site and a temporary office for the sale or rental of real property shall be permitted in connection with and incidental and necessary to a real estate development use. 
(g)  All other temporary and mobile facilities for residential, commercial or industrial use are prohibited in all districts, except as allowed in section 21-330. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 08-08, §§ 1, 2, 6-9-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-08, § 1, adopted June 9, 2008, amended the Code by renumbering former § 21-24 as a new § 21-328. 
Sec. 21-329. - Location of accessory uses and structures. 
    With the exception of signs permitted by this chapter, no accessory use or structure shall be located between the principal use or structure and a street right-of-way, unless, in a residential district only, a special use permit has been first obtained from the zoning board of review in accordance with section 21-15 and the following additional criteria: 
(1)  The principal use of the subject lot is residential; and 
(2)  The proposed location of the accessory use or building is the most suitable location for the proposed accessory use or building on the subject lot. 
(Ord. No. 00-9, § 2, 3-13-2000; Ord. No. 08-08, § 1, 6-9-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-08, § 1, adopted June 9, 2008, amended the Code by renumbering former § 21-25 as a new § 21-329. 
Sec. 21-330. - Temporary portable residential storage containers. 
(1)  Definition. Any container used for the storage of personal property that is typically rented to owners or occupants of real residential property for their temporary use and which customarily is delivered and removed by truck. 
(2)  Permit. No person shall place a container on private property without first obtaining a permit from the building official. A permit shall not be required if a unit is stored for 30 days or less. 
(3)  Size. There shall be no more than one container allowed per dwelling unit. The maximum size of said container shall not be larger than eight feet wide, 20 feet long and eight feet high. 
(4)  Duration. No container shall remain on a property with a residential use in excess of 90 consecutive days or in excess of 120 days in any calendar year. Provided however, that the building official shall have the authority to grant a one time extension of up to 30 days. 
(5)  Location. Containers shall be located, where practical, within driveways and not in required parking spaces, fire lanes, loading zones or public rights-of-way. Discretion on location of containers shall be given to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 3, 6-9-2008) 
ARTICLE XIII. - HISTORICAL ZONING[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Historical and archaeological burial sites, § 12-15. 

Sec. 21-331. - Purpose of article. 
    The regulations set forth in this article are adopted in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 45-24.1-1 et seq., entitled "Historic Area Zoning," to safeguard the heritage of the town by preserving districts which reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic and political and architectural history; foster civic beauty; strengthen the local economy; and promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the town. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-23-1990) 
Sec. 21-332. - Districts. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the boundaries of historic districts are established as shown on the map entitled "Historic District Map," filed at the office of the town clerk. Such map is made part of this article. 
(b)  That portion of a parcel of land known as B.O.R. South Parcel, deeded to the town by the United States of America, Bureau of Outdoor Recreation, recorded in the town land evidence records, book 271, page 275, within 200 feet of the northerly boundary of West Main Street, so called, bounded easterly in part by Green Street, and land now or formerly of Stanford E. et ux Paula Cashdollar, lot #26, and Charles et ux Carol D. Kaufman, lot #25, assessor's plat 118, and westerly by the easterly boundary of assessor's plat 118, lot #34, now or formerly of Residential Mortgage Corporation, which is shown on a map entitled "Historic District Map," filed in the office of the town clerk, with such map, as amended, is made a part of this article. 
(c)  Assessor plat 117, lot 277. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-23-1990; Ord. No. 02-20, § 13, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 21-333. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alteration means an act that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure or its appurtenances, including but not limited to the erection, construction, reconstruction or removal of any structure or appurtenance. 
    Appurtenances means features other than primary or secondary structures which contribute to the exterior historic appearance of a property, including but not limited to paving, doors, windows, signs, materials, decorative accessories, fences and historic landscape features. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a certificate issued by the historic district commission indicating approval of plans for alteration, construction, repair, removal or demolition of a structure or appurtenances of a structure within a historic district. Appropriate for the purposes of passing upon an application for certificate of appropriateness means not incongruous with those aspects of the structure, appurtenances or the district which the commission has determined to be historically or architecturally significant. 
    Construction means the act of adding to an existing structure or appurtenances to a structure, including but not limited to buildings, extensions, outbuildings, fire escapes and retaining walls. 
    Demolition means an act or purpose of destroying a structure or its appurtenances in part or in whole. 
    Historic district means a specific division of the town as designated by section 21-332. A historic district may include one or more structures. 
    New construction means any new structure and/or substantial alteration or addition to an existing structure affecting the exterior appearance of the structure. 
    Removal means a relocation of a structure on its site or another site. 
    Repair means a change meant to remedy damage or deterioration of a structure or its appurtenances. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including but not limited to buildings, gazebos, billboards, outbuildings, decorative retaining walls and swimming pools. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-23-1990) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-334. - Historic district commission generally. 
(a)  Established. In order to carry out the purposes of this article, there is established a historic district commission. 
(b)  Membership and appointment. The commission shall consist of five qualified members, all of whom shall be residents of the town, not less then two of whom shall be residents of the historic district. The membership of the commission may increase as new historic zoning districts are added in order to allow for representation by the new districts. The membership of the commission shall not exceed seven members. The town shall have the right to name an auxiliary member of the commission appointed in addition to the regular members of the commission. The auxiliary member shall sit as an active member upon the request of the chair when and if a regular member of the commission is unable to serve at any meeting of the commission. Appointed members of the commission shall be eligible for reappointment and upon the expiration of such members' term shall continue to serve until replaced. If a vacancy occurs on the commission, interim appointments of appointed members may be made by the town council to complete the unexpired term of such position. Duly organized and existing preservation societies may present a list of qualified citizens to the town council from which list the town council may select members. 
(c)  Election of officers; rules of procedure. The commission shall organize annually by electing from its membership a chair and secretary and may adopt rules of procedure deemed necessary in discharging its duties. 
(d)  Terms of membership. Members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-23-1990) 
Sec. 21-335. - Powers and procedures of historic district commission. 
(a)  The historic district commission shall, within 12 months of the date the historical zoning takes effect: 
(1)  Adopt and publish all rules and regulations necessary to carry out its function under this article; provided, however, any such rules and regulations shall be approved by the town council; and 
(2)  Publish such standards as necessary to inform historic district residents, property owners, and the general public of those criteria by which the commission shall determine whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness. The commission may amend these standards as reasonably necessary, and it shall publish all amendments. 
(b)  Before a property owner may authorize or commence construction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition affecting the exterior appearance of a structure or its appurtenances within the historic district, the owner must apply for and receive a certificate of appropriateness from the commission. In applying, the owner must comply with application procedures as established by the commission pursuant to RIGL 1956, § 45-24.1-1 et seq., and this article. The commission shall require the owner to submit information which is reasonably necessary to evaluate the proposed construction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition, including but not limited to plans, drawings, photographs or any other information set forth in the application procedures. The owner of the property must obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the project, whether or not state law requires a permit from the building inspector. The building inspector shall not issue a permit until the commission has granted a certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)  In reviewing plans, the historic district commission shall give consideration to the following: 
(1)  The historic and architectural significance of the structure and its appurtenances; 
(2)  The way in which the structure and its appurtenances contribute to the historical and architectural significance of the district; and 
(3)  The appropriateness of the general design, arrangement, texture, materials and siting proposed in the plans. 
The commission shall pass only on exterior features of a structure and its appurtenances and shall not consider interior arrangements. 
(d)  All decisions of the commission shall be in writing. The commission shall articulate and explain the reasons and bases of each decision on a record, or if the decision is not to issue a certificate of compliance, the commission shall include the bases for its conclusion that the proposed activity would be incongruous with those aspects of the structure, appurtenance or the district which that commission has determined to be historically or architecturally significant. The commission shall send a copy of the decision to the applicant. 
(e)  If an application is submitted for construction, repair, alteration, removal or demolition affecting the exterior appearance of a structure or its appurtenances which the commission deems so valuable to the town, state or nation that the loss thereof will be a great loss to the town, state or nation, the commission shall endeavor to work out with the owner an economically feasible plan for the preservation of such structure. Unless the commission is satisfied that the retention of such structure constitutes a hazard to public safety, which hazard cannot be eliminated by economic means available to the owner, including sale of the structure to any purchaser willing to preserve such structure, or unless the commission votes to issue a certificate of appropriateness for such proposed construction, alteration, removal or demolition, the commission shall file with the building inspector its rejection of such application. 
(f)  If any structure is deemed so valuable for the period of architecture it represents and important to the neighborhood within which it exists, the commission may file with the building inspector its certificate of appropriateness for such application if any of the circumstances under which a certificate of appropriateness might have been given under subsection (e) of this section are in existence or if: 
(1)  Preservation of such structure is a deterrent to a major improvement program which will be of substantial benefit to the community; 
(2)  Preservation of such structure would cause undue or unreasonable financial hardship to the owner, taking into account the financial resources available to the owner including sale of the structure to any purchaser willing to preserve such structure; or 
(3)  Preservation of such structure would not be in the interest of the majority of the community. 
(g)  When considering an application to demolish or remove a structure of historic value, the commission shall assist the owner in identifying and evaluating alternatives to demolition, including sale of the structure in its present site. In addition to any other criteria, the commission also shall consider whether there is a reasonable likelihood that some person or group other than the current owner is willing to purchase, move and preserve such structure and whether the owner has made continuing, bona fide and reasonable efforts to sell the structure to any such purchaser willing to move and preserve such structure. 
(h)  In circumstances where historic district commission review may overlap with historic reviews of the state historic preservation commission, it shall be the obligation of the historic district commission to arrange a coordinated review process with the state agency. This coordinated review shall be arranged within the time limitations established through the local commission's rules of procedure for its own review of an application. The purpose of the coordinated review shall be to minimize the potential for conflicting opinions on matters related to historic preservation on the part of the local and state authorities. The historic district commission shall solicit the written comments of the state historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-23-1990) 
Sec. 21-336. - Meetings and actions of historic district commission. 
(a)  Meetings. All meetings of the historic district commission shall be open to the public, and any person or such person's duly constituted representative shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before the commission before its decision is reached. The commission shall keep a record, which shall be open to public view in the town clerk's office and a copy shall be kept in the department of planning and development, of its resolutions, proceedings, findings, decisions and actions. The commission shall provide notice of its meetings and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the open meeting law. 
(b)  Actions. The commission shall file with the building inspector its certificate of appropriateness or rejection of all plans submitted to it for review. No work shall begin until such certificate shall have been filed, but in case of rejection, such certificate shall be binding upon the building inspector, and no permit shall be issued in such case. The failure of the commission to act within 45 days from the date of application filed with it, unless an extension is agreed upon mutually by the applicant and the commission, shall be deemed to constitute approval. If, however, the historic district commission shall make a finding of fact that the circumstances of a particular application requires further time and information than can be obtained within the period of 45 days, the commission shall have a period of up to 90 days within which to act upon such application. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-23-1990) 
State Law reference- Open meetings law, RIGL 1956, § 42-46-1 et seq. 
Sec. 21-337. - Exceptions from article. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of any structure within the historic districts, provided that such maintenance or repair does not result in any change of design, type of material or appearance of the structure or its appurtenances, nor shall anything in this article be construed to prevent the construction, alteration, repair, moving or demolition of any structure under a permit issued by the building inspector prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-23-1990) 
Sec. 21-338. - Appeals. 
    A person jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission shall have the right to appeal the decision to the zoning board of review. When appealing from a commission decision, the zoning board of review shall not substitute its own judgment for that of the commission, but must consider the issue upon the findings and record of the commission. The zoning board of review shall not reverse a commission decision except on a finding of prejudicial procedural error, clear error or lack of support by the weight of the evidence in the record. The zoning board of review shall put all decisions on appeal in writing. The zoning board of review shall articulate and explain the reasons and bases of each decision on the record, and the zoning board of review shall send a copy of the decision to the applicant and to the historic district commission. Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the zoning board of review on a matter of appeal under this article may appeal to the state superior court in the same manner provided in RIGL 1956, § 45-24-20 and from the superior court to the supreme court by writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-23-1990) 
Sec. 21-339. - Enforcement. 
    The building inspector may bring an action against any property owner who fails to comply with the requirements of this article. Such action shall be brought to the superior court having jurisdiction where the violation occurred or is likely to occur. Plaintiffs may seek restraining orders and injunctive relief to restrain and enjoin violations or threatened violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-23-1990) 
Sec. 21-340. - Town recordation of evidence of historic district zoning designation. 
(a)  The tax assessor shall cause to be inserted on all assessor's cards in the historic district a statement that the particular parcel is located in a historic district and is subject to the rules and regulations of the historic district commission. 
(b)  The recorder of deeds shall cause a notation in the land evidence records on each parcel under the name of the present owner that the parcel is located in a historic district and is subject to the rules and regulations of the historic district commission. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-23-1990) 
Sec. 21-341. - Avoiding demolition through owner neglect. 
(a)  The town council in consultation with the historic district commission may identify structures of historical or architectural value whose deteriorated physical condition endangers the preservation of the structure or its appurtenances. The council shall publish standards for maintenance of properties within historic districts. Upon the petition of the historic district commission that a historic structure is so deteriorated that its preservation is endangered, the council may establish a reasonable time not less than 30 days within which the owner must begin repairs. If the owner has not begun repairs within the allowed time, the council shall hold a hearing at which the owner may appear and state his or her reasons for not commencing repairs. If the owner does not appear at the hearing or does not comply with the council's orders, the council may cause the required repairs to be made at the expense of the city or town and cause a lien to be placed against the property for repayment. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, property owners shall be required to maintain structures on their property in accordance with the maintenance provisions set forth in RIGL Title 23, Chapter 27.3, State Building Code and Title 45, Chapter 24.3, Housing Maintenance and Occupancy Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-14, § 7, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-8, § 11, 6-9-2003) 
Secs. 21-342-21-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ZONING DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS 

Sec. 21-361. - Abbreviations. 
    Abbreviations used in this article are as follows: 
Res.-Residential Ind.-Industry Bus.-Business Dev. Dist.-Development District Ne. Res.-Neighborhood Residential C.C.-Corporate Compound Vill. Res.-Village Residential P.P.R.-Pojac Point Residential Rural Res.-Rural Residential VLDR-Very Low Density Residential M-F-Multifamily LDR-Low Density Residential PVD-Planned Village District I/O-Institutional/Office Ne. Bus.-Neighborhood Business GI-General Industrial Ge. Bus.-General Business LI-Light Industrial Wf. Bus.-Waterfront Business WI-Waterfront Industrial Hvy. Bus.-Heavy Business OS-Open Space Pl. Bus.-Planned Business P-Public Land WVC-Wickford Village Center PR-Post Road District  
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-14-1; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 02-20, § 14, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 08-25, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 21-362. - Zoning map. 
(a)  The boundaries of the zoning districts described in sections 21-34 through 21-112, section 21-186, and section 21-332, in addition to being delineated in sections 21-363, 21-366, and 21-367, are also established and shown on the Town of North Kingstown Official Zoning Map, as it may be amended from time to time, filed at the office of the town clerk. The official zoning map, which together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted and made part of this Code. 
(b)  The official zoning map of the town shall be maintained by the town clerk and shall consist of: 
(1)  197 plat maps including all zoning districts and overlay zoning districts shown thereon; and 
(2)  Any supplementary maps cited within the body of the zoning ordinance including, but not limited to, the transfer of development rights (TDR) map and the QBP zoning district map. 
(c)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the president of the town council, in office at the time of adoption, attested by the town clerk and bearing the seal of the town. 
(d)  Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries. 
a.  Where zoning districts (except overlay districts) are separated by highways, streets, alleys, railroads, watercourses or bodies of water, the boundaries of the zoning districts shall be construed to be the centerline or middle of such highway, street, alley, railroad, watercourse or body of water. 
b.  Boundaries shown as approximately following lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
c.  Boundaries shown as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shorelines as defined by the mean high water mark. 
d.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of natural or manmade features shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
e.  Boundaries shown as following physical features or culturally and historically significant features shall be construed to follow such features. 
(2)  Interpretation. For any other circumstance not covered by subsection (d)(1) of this section, the director shall interpret the zoning district boundaries. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-14; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 01-14, § 3, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 02-20, § 14, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 03-12, § 1, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-13, § 1, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 04-18, § 1, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 04-19, § 1, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 04-26, § 1, 12-12-2004; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 05-14, § 1, 6-13-2005; Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 5-8-2006; Ord. No. 06-13, § 2, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 07-10, § 1, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-16, § 1, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 3-10-2008; Ord. No. 08-25, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 08-20, § 1, 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 11-01, § 7, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 12-15, § 1, 11-30-2012; Ord. No. 12-16, § 1, 11-30-2012; Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 8-26-2013; Ord. No. 13-19, § 7, 12-9-2013; Ord. No. 14-15, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 3-23-2016; Ord. No. 16-08, § 1, 3-23-2016; Ord. No. 17-08, § 1, 5-1-2017; Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 18-10, § 1, 3-26-2018; Ord. No. 18-31, § 1, 11-26-2018; Ord. No. 18-33, § 1, 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 21-363. - Assessor's plats. 
    Zoning districts by assessor's plats are as follows: 
Plat 1-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 1, 2, 9, and portions of 10, 12, 13, 14 and 15 not described as neighborhood business. 
Neighborhood business: lots 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 30, 31, 32, 33, 37, falling within a parallelogram 500 feet wide at the northern edge of the plat and 850 feet long parallel to Boston Neck Road, centered at the middle of Boston Neck Road where plats 1 and 18 meet, and 151. 
Open space: lots 3, 18. 
Public land: lot 34. 
Village residential: lot 11. 
Plat 2-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 2, 3, 44. 
Very low density residential: lot 42. 
Plat 3-very low density residential. 
Plat 4-rural residential. Except: 
Open space: lots 6, 8, 11. 
Plat 5-very low density residential. Except: 
Corporate compound: lots 7, 8. 
Plat 6-very low density residential. 
Plat 7-rural residential. Except: 
Village residential: lots 1-8, and that portion of lot 11 north of a line perpendicular to Shady Lea Road beginning at the northern corner of lot 10. 
Industrial: lots 10, 16. 
Planned business district: The remainder of lot 11. 
Plat 8-very low density residential. 
Plat 9-very low density residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 7, 8. 
Plat 10-rural residential. 
Plats 11 to 13-very low density residential. 
Plat 14-very low density residential. Except 
Rural residential: lot 2. 
Plat 15-rural residential. 
Plats 16 to 18-open space. 
Plat 19-neighborhood residential. 
Plat 20-rural residential. 
Plat 21-rural residential. Except: 
Open space: lot 10. 
Plat 22-rural residential. 
Plat 23-very low density residential. 
Plat 24-very low density residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lot 4. 
Plat 25-very low density residential. 
Plat 26-village residential. Except: 
General business: lot 43. 
Plat 27-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Village residential: lots 2-7, 15, 17, 22, 23, 35, 36, 37, 39. 
Open space: lots 12, 14, 24, 31. 
Planned business: lots 20, 21, 32, 40, 41. 
General business: lot 25. 
Neighborhood business: lots 1, 8, 9, 10, 18, 19. 
General industrial: lot 38. 
Plat 28-very low density residential. 
Plat 29-rural residential. 
Plat 30-rural residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 1, 2. 
Plat 31-open space. Except: 
Very low density residential: lots 47, 49. 
Rural residential: lot 48. 
Plat 32-rural residential. Except: 
Pojac Point residential: lot 1. 
Plats 33 and 34-rural residential. 
Plat 35-rural residential. Except: 
Open space: lot 4. 
Plats 36 and 37-rural residential. 
Plat 38-rural residential. Except: 
Open space: lot 8. 
Public land: lot 9 
Plat 39-rural residential. Except: 
Low density residential: lot 20. 
Open space: lots 11, 12. 
Public land: lot 10. 
Plat 40-rural residential. 
Plat 41-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Neighborhood business: lots 128, 164 and that portion of lot 196 commencing at a point in the northerly boundary line of land now or formerly of Enoch L. Dwelly, et ux, such point being 100 feet easterly of Boston Neck Road; thence easterly bounding southerly on such Dwelly land 70 feet to a point; thence northerly bounding easterly on land of DeBlois Oil Company 100 feet to land now or formerly of Sea View Cliffs, Inc.; thence westerly bounding northerly on such Sea View Cliffs, Inc., land 70 feet to a point; thence southerly bounding westerly on land of DeBlois Oil Company 100 feet to the point and place of beginning. 
Public land: lots 10, 11, 22, 23. 
Plat 42-village residential. Except: 
Low density residential: lots 188-197, 199, 200, 201. 
Neighborhood business: lots 166-170. 
Plat 43-low density residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 2, 6, 8, 17, 19, 31. 
Public land: lot 7. 
Plat 44-very low density residential. 
Plat 45-village residential. Except: 
Multifamily: lots 14, 17. 
Neighborhood business: lots 18, 19. 
General business: lots 86, 96, 164. 
Public land: lot 4. 
Plat 46-rural residential. Except: 
Low density residential: lots 4, 5, 7. 
Open space: lots 1-3, 6. 
Plat 47-rural residential. Except: 
Low density residential: lot 3. 
Open space: lot 2. 
Plat 48-rural residential. 
Plat 49-rural residential. Except: 
Village residential: lots 15-17, 19, 20, 41, 55. 
Neighborhood business: lots 13, 14. 
Plats 50 to 52-rural residential. 
Plat 53-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 1-4, 7, 8, 13-23, 30-46, 61-70, 81, 82. 
Plat 54-rural residential. Except: 
Village residential: lots 1, 2. 
Neighborhood residential: lots 3-11, 51. 
Plat 55-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 24-29. 
Plat 56-rural residential. 
Plat 57-rural residential. Except: 
Village residential: lot 15. 
Neighborhood business: lot 4. 
General business: lots 13, 16. 
Plat 58-rural residential. 
Plat 59-rural residential. Except: 
Village residential: lot 2. 
Light industrial: lot 5. 
General industrial: lots 1, 4. 
Plat 60-village residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 2, 3, 27, 36, 86, 107-111. 
Plat 61-rural residential. 
Plat 62-village residential. Except: 
Open space: lots 1, 4, 8, 13. 
Rural residential: lots 16-18. 
Neighborhood residential: those portions of lots 14, 15 and 60 more than 325 feet from Pendar Road. 
Plat 63-village residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lot 13; those portions of lots 6, 8 and 18 more than 400 feet from Tower Hill Road; and that portion of lot 17 more than 1,000 feet from Tower Hill Road. 
Plats 64 and 65-rural residential. 
Plat 66-rural residential. Except: 
Open space: lot 3. 
Plat 67-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 15, 16, 20, 22 and a portion of lot 17 within 500 feet of Hamilton-Allenton Road. 
Rural residential: lot 6, all of lot 17 not in the neighborhood residential district and that portion of lot 4 west of a line connecting the intersection point of lots 4, 14 and 17 and a point where lots 4, 21 and 6 intersect. 
Neighborhood business: lots 1, 8. 
Heavy business: that certain parcel of land laid out and designated as lot 2, located at 901 Boston Neck Road containing 1.12 acres more or less of land, with the following conditions: 
1.  The heavy business use of the premises is limited to sale of motor vehicles with repair and outside storage. The nonconforming use of the premises for a machine ship for automotive purposes may continue in conjunction with the limited heavy business use pursuant to the variances granted by the zoning board of review on November 10, 1981, and February 27, 1996. 
2.  No more than 30 motor vehicles for sale shall be located on the premises at any time. The type of motor vehicle to be sold on the premises is limited to passenger vehicles other than buses. The hours of operation of the limited heavy business use shall be only from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and all exterior lighting shall be extinguished between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
3.  The uses of the premises described in subsections 1 and 2 of this parcel shall be conducted only in accordance with a development plan approved pursuant to section 21-284 which shall be generally consistent with the plans prepared by Beckman-Weremay dated January 19, 2001, and submitted to the town council on May 7, 2001, which shall include provision for the following: 
(i)  Reduction of existing impervious surface by 360 square feet; 
(ii)  Retention of existing vegetation, trees and stone wall; 
(iii)  An evergreen buffer along Weaver Road property line; 
(iv)  The premises to have vehicular access to and egress from only Boston Neck Road; and 
(v)  Standards for exterior lighting not to exceed 12 feet in height. 
Plat 68-village residential. Except: 
General business: lots 1, 4, 15, 273, 326 and portions of lot 325 within 250 feet of Boston Neck Road. 
General industrial: lots 283, 286. 
Neighborhood business: lots 8-14. 
Plat 69-neighborhood residential. Except: 
General business: lots 19, 20, 22-25 and that portion of lot 14 within 200 feet of Boston Neck Road. 
Open space: lot 56. 
Neighborhood business: lots 1, 47. 
Village residential: lot 21. 
Plat 70-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Village residential: lots 10-12, 22, 23, 25-28. 
Open space: lot 24. 
Public land: lot 1. 
Plat 71-rural residential. Except: 
Village residential: lots 1, 6-10, 15, 17-21, the remainder of lots 3 and 4, and that portion of lot 11 within 1,000 feet of Tower Hill Road. 
General business: lots 2 and 22, that portion of lot 3 located at 1100 Tower Hill Road (conditional-see Ordinance No. 99-16), and that portion of lots 3 and 4 within 200 feet of Tower Hill Road. 
Public land: lot 5. 
Plat 72-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 6-26, 29-38, 49-54. 
Rural residential: lots 42, 88, 96 and portions of lots 39, 40 and 121 more than 400 feet from Tower Hill Road. 
General business: lot 89. 
Open space: lots 27, 28, 48, 81-83. 
Plat 73-village residential. Except: 
General business: lot 32, lot 119 and a portion of lot 31 north of a line 200 feet south of and parallel to the West Allenton Road right-of-way. 
Open space: lots 7, 8. 
Public land: 18, 57. 
Plat 74-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Village residential: lots 1, 2, 223, 226, 227, 229-252. 
Open space: lots 3-9, 22-58, 74-76, 94, 110-113, 116-119, 134-137, 148-153, 156-165, 170-176, 188, 191, 192, 196, 204-206, 209, 210, 222, 228. 
Plat 75-village residential. Except: 
Public land: lot 11. 
Rural residential: lots 7, 8, 9. 
Plat 76-village residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 1, 2, 3, 10, 13, 67. 
Public land: lot 12. 
Plat 77-rural residential. Except: 
Open space: lot 3. 
Plat 78-rural residential. 
Plat 79-village residential. Except: 
Light industrial: lots 16, 24, 25, 45-54, 56-58. 
Rural residential: lot 1, that portion of lot 3 within the Annaquatucket Wellhead, and lots 4, 10, 14, 18-22, 43. 
Public land-lots 13, 14. 
Plat 80-rural residential. Except: 
Public land: lot 1. 
Plat 81-village residential. Except: 
Light industrial: lot 2. 
Open space: lot 43. 
Plat 82-rural residential. Except: 
Light industrial: portion of lot 2, and lot 6. 
Plat 83-rural residential. Except: 
Public land: lot 6. 
Plat 84-rural residential. 
Plat 85-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 10-12, 24-43, 45-47, and that portion of lot 48 more than 200 feet from Oak Hill Road. 
Neighborhood business: lot 56. 
General business: that portion of lots 80 and 62 within 250 feet of Tower Hill Road, and lots 87 and 88. 
Open space: lots 44, 90, 92 and 118. 
General industrial: lots 49, 93. 
Public land: lots 75-78, 92, 97. 
Plat 86-village residential. Except: 
General business: lots 14-16, 32, and that portion of lot 34 within 500 feet of Tower Hill Road, and south of a line perpendicular to Tower Hill Road at a point 300 feet north along the road from the northwest corner of lot 32; and lots 63 and 71. 
Neighborhood business: lot 33. 
Plat 87-village residential. 
Plat 88-village residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lot 1. 
Public land: lot 21. 
Plat 89-village residential. 
Plat 90-village residential. Except: 
Open space: lot 23. 
Public land: lots 1-4. 
Plat 91-village residential. Except: 
Waterfront business: lots 124 and 127 north of a line 150 feet north of and parallel to the southern lot line of lot 127, and lots 126, 142. 
Open space: lot 137. 
Public land: lots 150, 151. 
Plat 92-village residential. Except: 
General business: lots 49, 54, 64, 219, 231-242. 
Neighborhood business: lots 28, 56. 
Village residential: lot 243. 
Wickford Village Center: lots 27, 29, 32, 40, 41, 227. ;b1; Wickford Village Design Guidelines Overlay (does not exempt from underlying zoning): lots 27, 29, 227. 
Plat 93-village residential. Except: 
General business: lots 94, 118, 119. 
Plat 94-village residential. Except: 
Open space: lots 70, 81, 82, 83, 104, 105. 
Plat 95-rural residential. Except: 
General industrial: lots 3, 7, 9. 
Open space: lot 1, 2. 
Plat 96-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 5, 14-17. 
Open space: lots 1, 4. 
Plat 97-rural residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: that portion of lot 11 north of Oak Hill Brook; and lots 12, 13, 16, 20-22, 24, 28, 29, 33, 38-54. 
Public land: lots 1, 2, 3, 18. 
Plat 98-rural residential. 
Plat 99-neighborhood residential. 
Plat 100-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Village residential: lots 16-22, that portion of lot 23 more than 100 feet from Ten Rod Road, and lots 24-30. 
Neighborhood business: that portion of lot 23 within 100 feet of Ten Rod Road. 
Open space: lots 14, 31. 
Public land: lots 33, 34. 
Plat 101-rural residential. Except: 
General business: lots 1, 4, 12, 18. 
General business: lot 78 (use limitations-See Ordinance No. 90-7), that certain parcel of land owned by Paul F. Lischio and Marguerite Lischio, 1130 Ten Rod Road, Building E, Suite 207 North Kingstown, Rhode Island, and laid out and designated as lot 78 on assessor's plat 101, located at 1130 Ten Rod Road, with such parcel containing approximately 55,349 square feet of land. 
Planned business: lot 19. 
Neighborhood residential: lots 5, 8. 
Plat 102-village residential. Except: 
Compact village district: lots 6, 7, 8, 25. 
General business, use limited: that certain 14.731 acre portion of a parcel of land laid out and designated as Lot 11, on Assessor's Plat 102, located on South County Trail. 
Open space: lot 41. 
Public land: 130, 131. 
Plat 103-village residential. Except: 
Rural residential: that portion of lot 7 lying north and east of a line drawn as follows: beginning at the most easterly corner of lot 13 on such plat and running due east (true meridian) 350 feet to a point; thence angling and running southeasterly 1,100 feet, more or less, to the northeasterly end of the southeasterly boundary of lot 7 on plat 103 and a point in the brook leading from the state fish hatchery. 
Plat 104-rural residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 9-12, 14, 16-23, 27. 
Public land: lots 4, 29. 
Plat 105-light industrial. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 1, 3. 
Plat 106-village residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 2, 3. 
General business: lot 16. 
Plat 107-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Planned village development: lots 3, 7-32, 34. 
Plat 108-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 1, 2, 104. 
Post Road: lots 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 41-43, 56, 57, 83-87, 103. 
Plat 109-rural residential. Except: 
Post Road: lots 2, 3. 
Plat 110-rural residential. Except: 
Compact village district: lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, and 11 with the following conditions: 
1.  The overall percentage of nonresidential to residential building coverage on these lots and in combination with assessor's plat 126, lot 5 shall be no more than five percent of nonresidential building coverage and no less than 95 percent of residential building coverage. 
2.  The total square footage of commercial building space shall not exceed 10,000 square feet. 
Plat 111-neighborhood business. Except: 
General business: lots 4-7, 21-24, and 109. 
Plat 112-village residential. Except: 
Multifamily: lot 14. 
General business: lots 1, 2, 3, that portion of lot 5 south of a line 200 feet north of and parallel of the southern lot line, lots 7 (use restriction-See Ordinance No. 89-9), 17, 18, 66, that portion of lots 70 and 19 within 100 feet of the northern lot line and 200 feet of Scrabbletown Road, lot 92 and lot 97. 
Heavy business: lots, 4, 34, 60, 65, and that portion of lot 67 within 200 feet of Quaker Lane. 
Wickford Junction district: lots 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 23, 61, 112, 113, 115-118. 
Plat 113-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood business: lot 2, subject to the following stipulations: 
1.  The existing original structures cannot be razed or substantially altered in appearance (unless the brick facade on the house is removed); if the brick front is removed and the front restored, then that square footage could be allocated to the rear of the structure allowing the applicants to have a 14,000 square foot building without going to the zoning board of review for variances. 
2.  The land development plan review will require planning commission approval as the site lies within a groundwater overlay zone. 
3.  The planning commission and the planning department address the concerns of the public pertaining to proper lighting, property buffers and traffic to include a traffic study. 
Neighborhood residential: lot 23 and portions of lots 8, 11, 20, 22 and 28, more than 600 feet from Ten Rod Road. 
Multifamily residential: lot 3. 
General business: lot 4, that portion of lot 20 within 600 feet of Ten Rod Road, and lots 21, 24. 
Plat 114-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: those portions of lots 9, 23 and 62 more than 600 feet from Ten Rod Road. 
Multifamily residential: lot 10. 
General business: lots 54-56. 
Open space: lot 74. 
Village residential: portion of lot 63. 
Plat 115-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 1, 6, 7, 27, 28. 
Plat 116-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 84, 104-106, 108, 110, 111, 114, 128. 
Neighborhood business: lots 89, 101, 102, 135, 136, 153, that portion of lot 8 north of a line 300 feet north of and parallel to the southern lot line, lot 7 (use restriction-see Ordinance No. 89-17). 
General business: lots 76, 93, 94. 
Open space: lot 127. 
Public land: lots 22-24, 73, 109. 
Wickford Village Center: lot 109. 
Planned village district: Lots 88 & 103, and such lots shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  That the proposed development will be in substantial conformance with the Wickford Woods Master Plan Submission plan set, in five sheets, prepared by DiPrete Engineering dated 9-25-15 and revised 10-2-15, 12-10-15, and 2-1-16, which received master plan approval at the March 15, 2016 planning commission meeting and amended through the land development review process. 
2.  If the permitted use (see condition 1) for which the land has been rezoned is abandoned or if the land is not used for the requested purpose for a period of two years or more after the zone change becomes effective, the town council may, after a public hearing as set forth in this section, change the land to its original zoning use before the petition was filed. 
Plat 117-village residential. Except: 
General business: lots 155, 202, 289-295. 
Waterfront business: lots 2-6, 16-18, 125, 258, 263. 
General industrial: lots 118-124. 
Open space: lots 194, 284. 
Public land: lots 117, 208, 210, 257. 
Wickford Village Center: lots 83, 148-151, 153, 154, 156-159, 177-179, 183-185, 187-193, 195-197, 199-201, 203-207, 209, 211 upon recording of the final subdivision approval creating lot 208, 212-219, 267, 274, 285, 287, 288; that portion of lot 152 from the intersection of lots 151 and 152 north along the lot line and an extension of the lot line for an additional 100 feet for a total distance of 200 feet, then east on a line parallel to West Main Street to the eastern lot line, then south along the lot line to Main Street, and then to the point of beginning; and that portion of lot 280 west of a line perpendicular to Main Street ten feet easterly from the southwest corner of the lot. 
Wickford Village Design Guidelines Overlay (does not exempt from underlying zoning): lots 177-179, 183-185, 187-193, 199-201, 203, 204, 207, 209, 211-218, 267, 274, 285, 287, 288. 
Plat 118-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood business: lot 24. 
General business: lots 28, 30, 33, 34. 
Open space: lots 35-38, 42-44, and those portions of lots 27, 39 and 40, less than ten feet above sea level, and within 250 feet of Post Road and plat 139. 
Public land: lot 32. 
Planned village development: the remainder of lots 27, 39, 40. 
Village residential historic: lot 1. 
Neighborhood business historic: portion of lot 25 located at 181 West Main Street (conditional-see Ordinance No. 99-17). 
Plat 119-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 10-16, 28, 34, 39, 50, 51, 63, 65. 
General business: lots 1 and 2. 
Open space: lots 18, 56, 57, 59-62. 
Public land: lot 5. 
Plat 120-village residential. Except: 
Rural residential: that portion of lot 1 west of the southerly extension of the western lot lines of lot 47, and lots 35, 36, 43, 45, 46, 48, 57-71. 
Neighborhood residential: lots 15, 44, 47. 
Post Road: lots 5, 6, 9, 10, 34, 54. 
Public land: lot 4. 
Open space: lots 3, 12, 13. 
Plat 121-open space. 
Plat 122-open space. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 1, 2, 4, 15, 16, 19-23. 
Plat 123-rural residential. Except: 
Open space: lots 5-7. 
Plat 124-rural residential. 
Plat 125-rural residential. Except: 
General business: lots 2, 6, 29, 32. Also that certain parcel of land laid out and designated as Lot 7 (as merged with Lot 31 and abandoned portion of Scrabbletown Road), located at 4001 Quaker Lane, North Kingstown, said parcel containing 22,536.30 square feet more or less of land. 
Plat 126-rural residential. Except: 
Compact village district: lot 5 with the following conditions: 
1.  The overall percentage of nonresidential to residential building coverage on these lots and in combination with assessor's plat 110, lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, and 11 shall be no more than five percent of nonresidential building coverage and no less than 95 percent of residential building coverage. 
2.  The total square footage of commercial building space shall not exceed 10,000 square feet. 
Public land: lot 10. 
Plats 127 and 128-rural residential. 
Plat 129-rural residential. Except: 
Open space: lot 1. 
General business: lots 2, 4, 9 (use restriction-see Ordinance No. 91-10), 10, 11, 13, 15. 
Neighborhood business: lot 3. 
Plat 130-rural residential. Except: 
General business: lots 8, 12, 15, 23, 64, 67, 68, a portion of lot 14, a portion of lot 65, and that portion of lot 71 southerly of the southerly line of lot 67 within 205 feet of Quaker Lane. 
Neighborhood business: lot 15. 
Rural residential: lot 13. 
Open space: lot 16. 
Plat 131-rural residential. 
Plat 132-rural residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 9, 56-70. 
Light industrial: lots 5, 14-16, 20, 25, 26, 28. 
Public land: lot 8. 
Plats 133 and 134-rural residential. 
Plat 135-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 9, 58-59. 
Rural residential: lots 3, 4, 5, 21, 41, 51, 55-57. 
Post Road: lots 1, 2, 6-8, 10-12, 14-19, 40, 52. 
Public land: lot 43. 
Plat 136-Post Road. 
Plat 138-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 83-89, 103, 119-123, 125. 
Post Road: lots 22, 24, 39, 81, 90-92, 102, 106, 108, 110-118. 
Open space: lot 94. 
Plat 139-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 2, 8, 34, 35, 39-41. 
Post Road: lots 6, 7. 
Open space: lot 4. 
Public land: lots 3, 36, 37, 43. 
Plat 140-planned village district. Except: 
Open space: lots 1, 84, 85, 87. 
Village residential: lot 2. 
Public land: lot 3. 
Plat 141-village residential. Except: 
Open space: lot 154. 
Plat 142-village residential. 
Plat 143-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 2, 123. 
Public land: lot 108. 
Plat 144-village residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 1, 3-5, 7, 43, 52, 53. 
Plat 145-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Village residential: lots 1, 10-21, 23-26, 37. 
Rural residential: lots 2, 42, 43. 
Public land: lot 22. 
Plat 146-village residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lot 57, 216. 
Post Road: lots 36 (use restriction-see Ordinance No. 01-20) that certain parcel of land laid out and designated as lot 36, plat 146, located at 1 Chadsey Road, a parcel containing 21,616 square feet more or less of land, 39-44, 47, 51, 53-55, 61-63, 65-67, 86, 131-133, 135, 202-210, 212. 
Plat 147-Post Road. Except: 
Village residential: lots 53, 54, 65. 
Plat 148-village residential. Except: 
Post Road: lots 31, 32, 115, 116, 119, 200, 201, 202, 204, 261. 
Open space: lots 104, 173, 174, 208, 211. 
Plat 149-village residential. Except: 
Open space: lots 87, 111. 
Public land: lots 119, 124. 
Neighborhood business: lot 86. 
Plat 150-rural residential. Except: 
Light industrial: lots 11, 18, 99-101. 
Plat 151-rural residential. Except: 
General business: lots 120, 123. 
Light industrial: lots 118, 119, 130. 
Open space: lots 103, 105. 
Public land: lot 104. 
Plat 152-rural residential. Except: 
Open space: lots 12, 45, 48. 
Plat 153-light industrial. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lot 10. 
Rural residential: lots 1, 13-39, 41-47. 
Plat 154-rural residential. Except: 
Village residential: lot 2. 
Light industrial: lots 1, 5. 
Plat 155-neighborhood residential. 
Plat 156-village residential. Except: 
Post Road: lots 8, 10-13, 16, 17, 19, 20, 22, 41-43, 47-49, 51-52, 54, 56, 59, 60, 73, 75, 76, 78, 79. 
Public land: lots 1, 3-7, 9, 55, 57. 
Plat 157-village residential. Except: 
Post Road: lots 17-22, 24, 35-37, 74, 75, 77, 95-97, 100, 108, 110, 143-151, 157, 158, 165, 169. 
Open space: lot 38. 
Public land: lots 13, 72, 73. 
Plat 158-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 6-12, 15-19, 21-24, 173-175, 209. 
Open space: lot 13. 
Public land: lot 76. 
Plat 159-neighborhood residential. 
Plat 160-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lot 2, portion of lot 3, and lots 4-10, 30, 88-91. 
Plat 161-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 3, 5, 7, 35-53. 
Public land: lot 8. 
Plat 162-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 3, 6-15, 92-94. 
Plats 163 to 165-rural residential. 
Plat 166-village residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lot 528. 
Plat 167-rural residential. Except: 
Pojac Point residential: portion of lot 1. 
Rural residential: portion of lot 1 (use restriction-see Ordinance No. 91-11). 
Plats 168 to 170-Pojac Point residential. 
Plat 171-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lot 6. 
Pojac Point residential: lots 3, 10, 13-15. 
Public land: lot 9. 
Plat 172-rural residential. Except: 
Pojac Point residential: lots 1-6, 9, 11, 13, 15-26. 
Plat 173-neighborhood residential. Except: 
Rural residential: lots 1-4, 10, 14, 15, 21, 40-44, 47, 48 and that portion of lots 36-39 and 45 north of a line which is the extension of the northern lot line of lot 19. 
Plat 174-village residential. Except: 
Neighborhood residential: lots 5, 6, 8, 13, 34, 58-68, 70 and that portion of lot 67 within 750 feet of North Quidnessett Road. 
Rural residential: lots 7, 70 and that portion of lot 67 more than 750 feet from North Quidnessett Road. 
Open space: lots 14, 52. 
Plat 175-village residential. Except: 
Post Road: lots 9, 106, 149, 150, 182, 183. 
Plat 176-village residential. Except: 
Post Road: lot 4, 6. 
Heavy business: lots 5 and 63. 
Plat 177-Post Road. Except: 
Heavy business: lot 4. 
Light industrial: lots 3, 17, 19, 29, 30. 
General business: lots 29, 30; and such lots shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  One building on the parcels may have a gross floor area of not more than 132,580 square feet; 
(2)  Notwithstanding section 21-306 all setbacks shall be as set forth in article IV, table 2B; 
(3)  One building may have a drive in/drive through window located on the building facade facing Frenchtown Road with less than the required vehicle stacking area; 
(4)  The buildings and signage throughout the development shall be required to have New England style architectural design; 
(5)  The proposed buildings on the parcel shall contain loading areas as provided on the plans "The Commons at Frenchtown Road Map 31 AP 17 Lot 10 East Greenwich, RI, AP 177 Lots 29 & 30 North Kingstown, RI" prepared for Frenchtown Partners, LLC by SFM Engineering Associates in six sheets (Sheet 1: Overall Site Plan, dated January 14, 2013 revised 2-19-13, 3-5-13, 3-12-13, 3-26-13; Sheet 2: Existing Conditions Plan, dated January 14, 2013 revised 2-19-13; Sheet 3: Site Plan 1, dated January 14, 2013 revised 2-19-13, 3-12-13, 3-26-13; Sheet 4: Site Plan 2, dated January 14, 2013 revised 2-19-13, 3-12-13, 3-26-13; Sheet 5: Site Plan 3, dated January 14, 2013 revised 2-19-13, 3-12-13, 3-26-13; Sheet 6: Landscape Master Plan prepared by Hali Beckman dated January 25, 2013 and amended throughout the development process. 
(6)  The proposed development will be in substantial compliance with the plans "The Commons at Frenchtown Road Map 31 AP 17 Lot 10 East Greenwich, RI, AP 177 Lots 29 & 30 North Kingstown, RI" prepared for Frenchtown Partners, LLC by SFM Engineering Associates in six sheets (Sheet 1: Overall Site Plan, dated January 14, 2013 revised 2-19-13, 3-5-13, 3-12-13, 3-26-13; Sheet 2: Existing Conditions Plan, dated January 14, 2013 revised 2-19-13; Sheet 3: Site Plan 1, dated January 14, 2013 revised 2-19-13, 3-12-13, 3-26-13; Sheet 4: Site Plan 2, dated January 14, 2013 revised 2-19-13, 3-12-13, 3-26-13; Sheet 5: Site Plan 3, dated January 14, 2013 revised 2-19-13, 3-12-13, 3-26-13; Sheet 6: Landscape Master Plan prepared by Hali Beckman dated 1-25-13 and amended throughout the development process. 
Plat 178-planned village district. 
Plat 179-light industrial. Except: 
Open space: portion of lot 1. 
Institutional/office: lot 3. 
Plat 180-general industrial. 
Plat 181-general industrial. Except: 
Post Road: lots 17, 19. 
Light industrial: lot 15. 
Multifamily residential: lot 5. 
Open space: lot 18, 21, portion of lot 6. 
Light industrial: That certain parcel of land laid out and designated as Lot 15 and a portion of Lot 6 on Assessor's Plat 181, located at Compass Circle, North Kingstown, said parcel contains 62.1 acres more or less of land as described below: 
Legal Description for Zone Change 
Assessor's Plat 181 Lot 15 and Portions of Lot 6 
Bonneau Road and Compass Circle, North Kingstown 
That certain parcel of land, with all buildings and improvements, situated southwesterly of Devils Foot Road and easterly of Bonneau Road and Compass Circle in the Town of North Kingstown, Washington County, State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations and shown on that plan entitled "Pre-Application Submission Existing Conditions Plan West Davisville Industrial Park Assessor's Plat 181 Lot 15 and Portions of Lot 6 North Kingstown, Rhode Island DiPrete Engineering Two Stafford Court Cranston, RI 02920 tel 401-943-1000 fax 401-464-6006 www. DiPrete-Eng.com Applicant/Owner (Lot 15) WDIC, LLC C/O Bob Carr P.O. Box 482 Saunderstown, RI 02874 Owner (Lot 6) RI Economic Development Corp SHEET 3 of 4 revision date 7-18-08" Scale: 1" = 150' and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point at the northwesterly corner of the herein described parcel; thence southeasterly a distance of 412 feet, more or less, to a point; thence southeasterly a distance of 489 feet, more or less, to a point; thence southeasterly a distance of 918 feet, more or less, to a point; thence southerly a distance of 1418 feet, more or less, to a point; thence southwesterly a distance of 1481 feet, more or less, to a point; thence northwesterly a distance of 183 feet, more or less, to a point; thence southeasterly a distance of 266 feet, more or less, to a point; thence northerly a distance of 565 feet, more or less, to a point; thence northeasterly a distance of 398 feet, more or less, to a point; thence northeasterly a distance of 123 feet, more or less, to a point; thence northeasterly a distance of 585 feet, more or less, to a point; thence northwesterly a distance of 382 feet, more or less, to a point; thence northwesterly a distance of 539 feet, more or less, to the point and place of beginning. 
The above described parcel contains 64.1 acres, more or less. 
Plat 182-general industrial. Except: 
Institutional/office: lot 5. 
Open space: lots 1, 6. 
General business: that certain parcel of land located on a portion of the former Davisville Naval Construction Battalion Center, such parcel being located on the northerly side of a road now or formerly called Gate Road and the easterly side of a road now or formerly called Post Road (Route 1). Such parcel comprises a portion of lot 10 and contains eight acres more or less, such parcel being further bounded and described as follows: 
Beginning at a point at the intersection of the southwesterly corner of a road now or formerly called Newcomb Road with the easterly line of a road now or formerly called Post Road (Route 1); thence running southerly along the easterly line of Post Road and Rhode Island State Highway Plat Number 2536, a distance of 50 feet more or less, bounded easterly by a buffer and bike path right-of-way and utility easement to a point, the point also being the northwesterly corner of the herein described parcel; thence continuing southerly along the easterly line of Post Road and Rhode Island State Highway Plat Number 2536, a distance of 266 feet more or less to a point; thence running southerly along the easterly line of Post Road and Rhode Island State Highway Plat Number 2536, a distance of 270 feet more or less to a point; thence running southerly along the easterly line of Post Road and Rhode Island State Highway Plat Number 2536, a distance of 76 feet more or less to a point; thence running easterly along the northerly line of Gate Road and Rhode Island State Highway Plat Number 2536, a distance of 140 feet more or less to a point; thence running easterly along the northerly line of Gate Road and Rhode Island State Highway Plat Number 2536, a distance of 503 feet more or less to a point, the point also being the southeasterly corner of the herein described parcel; thence running northerly, bounded easterly by land of the Rhode Island Economic Development Corporation (R.I.E.D.C.), a distance of 423 feet more or less to a point; thence running westerly, bounded northerly by other land of the R.I.E.D.C., a distance of 479 feet more or less to a point; thence running northerly, bounded easterly by land of the R.I.E.D.C., a distance of 77 feet more or less to a point; thence continuing northerly along the arc of a curve with a radius of 55 feet more or less and a length of 16 feet more or less to a point; thence running northerly, bounded easterly by land of the R.I.E.D.C., a distance of 105 feet more or less to a point on the southerly line of the buffer and bike path right-of-way and utility easement; thence running westerly, bounded northerly by the buffer and bike path right-of-way and utility easement; 275 feet more or less to a point marking the point and place of beginning. 
And, that certain parcel of land located on a portion of the former Davisville Naval Construction Battalion Center, such parcel being located northerly of a road now or formerly called Gate Road and easterly of a road now or formerly called Post Road (Route 1), such roads as depicted on Rhode Island State Highway Plat Number 2536. Such parcel comprises a portion of lot 10 and contains two acres or less, such parcel being further bounded and described as follows: 
Beginning at a point at the intersection of the southwesterly corner of a road now or formerly called Newcomb Road with the easterly line of Post Road (Route 1); thence running southerly along the easterly line of Post Road, along Rhode Island State Highway Plat Number 2536, a distance of 50 feet more or less, bounded easterly by a buffer and bike path right-of-way and utility easement to a point; thence running easterly along the southerly line of the buffer and bike path right-of-way and utility easement, a distance of 275 feet more or less to a point, the point being the northwesterly corner of the herein described parcel; thence continuing easterly along the southerly line of the buffer and bike path right-of-way and utility easement, a distance of 476 feet more or less to a point; thence running southerly, bounded easterly by land of the Rhode Island Economic Development Corporation (R.I.E.D.C.), a distance of 199 feet more or less to a point; thence running westerly, bounded southerly by land of the R.I.E.D.C., a distance of 479 feet more or less to a point; thence running northerly, bounded westerly by land of the R.I.E.D.C., a distance of 77 feet more or less to a point; thence continuing northerly along the arc of a curve with a radius of 55 feet more or less and a length of 16 feet more or less to a point; thence running northerly, bounded westerly by land of the R.I.E.D.C., a distance of 105 feet more or less to a point marking the point and place of beginning. 
Such described parcels to be subject to the following conditions: 
1. The permitted general business uses of the premises are limited to hotel; restaurant; bank or credit union; professional offices; public or private park; conservation or recreation; museum; and libraries, art galleries and art centers. 
2. In addition to such specified uses, the following general business uses may be permitted on the premises if, but only if, the zoning board of review grants a special use permit therefor after finding that the criteria set forth in section 21-15 of this Code have been met: sale of food (excluding fish and shellfish), drugs, clothing, jewelry, stationery, or similar personal or specialty items; theater, auditorium, lecture hall or conference center; indoor commercial recreation; or drive-in windows (accessory) other than for food services. 
3. Any construction of a structure, group of structures on the premises, any alteration improvement, alteration or change of use for a building on the premises or the premises shall require development plan review and approval in accordance with section 21-284 of this Code; provided, however, that the review and approval required shall be by the planning commission rather than the administrative officer. 
Plat 183-general industrial. Except: 
Public land: lots 17, 25. 
Open space: lot 24. 
Institutional office: lot 30. 
Plat 184-general industrial. Except: 
Open space: lots 13, 14. 
Plat 185-general industrial. Except: 
Light industrial: lots 8, 9. 
Plat 186-general industrial. Except: 
Public land: lots 9-12. 
Plats 187 and 188-public land. 
Plat 189-open space. Except: 
General business: lot 7; use limited to hotel and motel use and eating and drinking establishments. 
General industrial: lot 3. 
Public land: lot 2. 
Plat 190-general industrial. Except: 
Institutional/office: lot 4. 
Plat 191-open space. Except: 
Light industrial: lots 2-4. 
General industrial: lots 1, 5. 
Plat 192-open space. Except: 
Waterfront industrial: lots 2-4. 
Plat 193-waterfront industrial. 
Plat 194-public land. Except: 
Waterfront business: portion of lot 1. 
Plat 195-open space. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-14.1; Ord. No. 83-8, 6-27-1983; Ord. No. 83-9, 6-27-1983; Ord. No. 84-7, 3-26-1984; Ord. No. 85-11, 6-10-1985; Ord. No. 85-12, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 85-14, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 86-7, 4-14-1986; Ord. No. 86-8, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 86-9, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 86-10, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 86-11, 6-9-1986; Ord. No. 86-13, 7-28-1986; Ord. No. 86-17A, 8-25-1986; Ord. No. 87-1, 1-26-1987; Ord. No. 87-5, 3-9-1987; Ord. No. 87-14, 6-8-1987; Ord. No. 87-15, 6-8-1987; Ord. No. 87-22, 10-26-1987; Ord. No. 87-23, 10-26-1987; Ord. No. 87-24, 12-14-1987; Ord. No. 88-1, 1-11-1988; Ord. No. 88-6, 2-8-1988; Ord. No. 88-7, 3-14-1988; Ord. No. 88-8, 3-14-1988; Ord. No. 88-14, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 89-7, 3-13-1989; Ord. No. 89-9, 3-27-1989; Ord. No. 89-17, 8-15-1989; Ord. No. 90-3, 3-12-1990; Ord. No. 90-7, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 91-10, 8-13-1991; Ord. No. 91-11, 8-13-1991; Ord. No. 91-15, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 92-3, 3-9-1992; Ord. No. 92-4, 3-9-1992; Ord. No. 92-8, 5-11-1992; Ord. No. 92-10, 6-8-1992; Ord. No. 92-12, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 92-17, 10-19-1992; Ord. No. 92-19, 11-16-1992; Ord. No. 93-6, 4-12-1993; Ord. No. 94-6, 4-11-1994; Ord. No. 94-16, § 1, 9-12-1994; Ord. No. 94-22, § 1, 11-14-1994; Ord. No. 94-4, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 95-14, § 1, 11-13-1995; Ord. No. 96-15, § 1, 9-16-1996; Ord. No. 97-3, § 1, 2-10-1997; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 6-7-1999; Ord. No. 99-16, § 1, 7-12-1999; Ord. No. 99-17, § 1, 7-12-1999; Ord. No. 99-21, § 1, 10-4-1999; Ord. No. 99-25, § 1, 12-13-1999; Ord. No. 00-5, § 1, 2-14-2000; Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 5-8-2000; Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 6-12-2000; Ord. No. 00-18, § 1, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 00-22, § 1, 12-11-2000; Ord. No. 01-5, § 1, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 01-9, § 1, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 01-17, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 02-10, § 1, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 02-12, § 1, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-13, § 1, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-20, § 14, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-04, § 1, 3-10-2003; Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 03-8, § 12, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 03-12, § 1, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-18, § 1, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 04-19, § 1, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 04-26, § 1, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 05-14, § 1, 6-13-2005; Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 5-8-2006; Ord. No. 06-13, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 07-10, § 1, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-16, § 1, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 3-10-2008; Ord. No. 08-25, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 08-20, § 1, 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 12-15, § 2, 11-30-2012; Ord. No. 12-16, § 2, 11-30-2012; Ord. No. 13-07, § 2, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 13-10, § 2, 8-26-2013; Ord. No. 13-19, § 8, 12-9-2013; Ord. No. 14-15, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 15-02, § 2, 1-12-2015; Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 3-23-2016; Ord. No. 16-08, § 2, 3-23-2016; Ord. No. 17-08, § 2, 5-1-2017; Ord. No. 17-12, § 2, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 17-16, §§ 1, 2, 8-28-2017; Ord. No. 18-10, § 2, 3-26-2018; Ord. No. 18-31, § 2, 11-26-2018; Ord. No. 18-33, § 2, 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 21-364. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-11, § 2, adopted May 23, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former § 21-364 in its entirety. Former § 21-364 pertained to road classifications, and derived from Rev. Ords. of 1974, § 17-14-1. 
Sec. 21-365. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 92-12, adopted July 13, 1992, amended the Code by deleting provisions contained in section 21-365. The provisions pertained to military lands and utility areas zoned in plat 200 and derived from the Revised Ords. of 1974, section 17-14. 
Sec. 21-366. - Historic zoning district description. 
    The description of historic zoning districts is as follows: 
Plat 116. Lots 5-7, 9, 11, 16-21, 118, 124, 129, 135 and that portion of lot 8 within 251.8 feet of West Main Street, that portion of lot 10 north of a line connecting points 250 feet south of West Main Street on the western lot line and 267 feet south of West Main Street on the eastern lot line. Those portions of lots 13 through 15 between West Main Street and an unnamed brook or drainage ditch running parallel to and approximately 440 feet from West Main Street. That portion of lot 113 within 325 feet of West Main Street, that portion of lot 23 within 355 feet of West Main Street. 
Plat 117. Lots 66-116, 122-151, 153, 155-163, 167-172, 174-176, 180-182, 186, 194-198, 219-266, 269, 272, 276 and that portion of lot 152 south of a line connecting points 100 feet north of West Main Street on the western lot line and 130 feet north of West Main Street on the eastern lot line, and that portion of lot 164 within 200 feet of Church Lane, and those portions of lots 273, 64 and 65 within 200 feet of Fowler Street. 
Plat 118. Lots 13-26, 31, 36. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-14-1) 
Secs. 21-367-21-380. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-07, § 3, adopted May 5, 2014, amended the Code by repealing former § 21-367 in its entirety. Former § 21-367 pertained to groundwater overlay district descriptions, and derived from Ord. No. 98-15, adopted October 5, 1998; Ord. No. 00-6, adopted February 14, 2000; Ord. No. 00-17, adopted July 10, 2000; and Ord. No. 04-13, adopted August 2, 2004. 
ARTICLE XV. - INTERIM RESIDENTIAL USE REGULATIONS 

Secs. 21-381-21-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - LIMITED RESIDENTIAL PARKING DISTRICT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 11-31 et seq. 

Sec. 21-401. - Creation and purpose. 
(a)  A limited residential parking district is created to: 
(1)  Reduce vehicular congestion and hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of streets within areas zoned for residential uses for the parking of vehicles by persons not residing in or having social or business dealings with the residents of the district; 
(2)  Protect the residents of the district from polluted air, excessive noise, and trash and refuse caused by the entry of such vehicles into the district; 
(3)  Protect the residents of the district from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to the residents' own residences; 
(4)  Preserve the residential character of the district; 
(5)  Promote efficiency in the maintenance of the streets within the district in a clean and safe condition; 
(6)  Preserve the value of the residential property in the district; and 
(7)  Preserve the safety and the peace, good order, comfort, convenience and welfare of the residents of the district. 
(b)  The regulations in this article shall be in addition to the requirements and regulations of this chapter otherwise applicable to the land and buildings situated within the district. A limited residential parking district may be established by the town council pursuant to this article in any area zoned for residential uses. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-16-1) 
Sec. 21-402. - Standards for designation and establishment. 
    Before any residential area is designated and established as a limited residential parking district, a determination shall be made that on frequent occasions, at least as often as on two separate occasions during each calendar week for three successive calendar weeks, more than 75 percent of the available parking spaces on public streets in the area are occupied by parked vehicles and that on such occasions more than 50 percent of such parked vehicles were parked by persons who are not residents or owners of real property in the area or visiting or doing business in the area with residents or owners of real property in the area. The procedure for designating and establishing a limited residential parking district shall be in accordance with section 21-8, and a map delineating the area so designated and established shall be filed in the office of the town clerk. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-16-2) 
Sec. 21-403. - Posting of signs. 
    The public works department shall post and keep posted signs in each limited residential parking district designated and established under this article which give notice of the parking regulations in effect in such district by virtue of this article. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-16-3) 
Sec. 21-404. - Parking permits. 
    The police department shall issue a free parking permit to any person residing or owning real property in a limited residential parking district and to any person doing business in the district with the persons residing or owning real property therein. Such permit shall authorize the parking of the vehicle for which the permit was issued on the public streets within the district in a manner and at such locations as is not unlawful by virtue of any state law or any other town ordinance. A parking sticker issued by the police department with such permit shall be affixed to a window of the vehicle for which the permit is issued. Such permits and stickers shall be valid for the period stated thereon, not to exceed 12 months from the date of issuance, and the police department may require identification and other evidence or entitlement from any person requesting such a permit. The police department shall also issue to the head of each residential household located in the district two guest parking permits for use by social or business invitees of the holder's residential household. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-16-4) 
Sec. 21-405. - Parking without permit prohibited. 
    Except for an officer or employee of the United States, the state or the town or any agency thereof, while in the course of official business, no person shall park a vehicle on a public street in a limited residential parking district unless a permit is in effect which authorizes the parking of such vehicle in the district and a parking sticker is affixed to a window of such vehicle or a guest permit is displayed in a window of such vehicle while it is parked. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-16-5) 
Sec. 21-406. - Penalty for violation. 
    A person who shall violate this article shall be punished by a fine of $5.00 for the first offense, $15.00 for a second offense within 12 months of the first offense, and $25.00 for a third or any subsequent offense within 12 months of the first offense. Any such fine shall be paid in the manner specified in article I of chapter 11. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-16-6) 
Secs. 21-407-21-425. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - RESIDENTIAL COMPOUND DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 21-426. - Purpose of article. 
    This article is enacted to provide for the private conservation of undeveloped tracts of land or fragile natural resource areas for the purpose of open space preservation by permitting limited residential building on such tracts of land. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-17-1) 
Sec. 21-427. - General requirements. 
(a)  In a residential compound development, a compound shall include not less than two and not more than seven dwelling units having frontage in common on a public road and sharing a private access road held in common. 
(b)  Restrictive covenants shall prohibit the further division of land within the compound. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-17-2) 
Sec. 21-428. - Permitted uses. 
    The following are permitted uses in residential compound developments: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling. 
(3)  Uses customarily accessory to residences. 
(4)  Uses permitted in open space and public land districts. 
(5)  Community centers, recreation facilities and similar structures designed for the use of the residents of the compound development. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-17-3) 
Sec. 21-429. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  Density. The average density of dwelling units in a residential compound development shall not exceed the following in the district therein located: 
(1)  One-half that allowed in Pojac Point residential. 
(2)  One-half that allowed in rural residential. 
(3)  One-third that allowed in neighborhood residential. 
(4)  One-fourth that allowed in village residential. 
(5)  One-half that allowed in low density residential. 
(6)  One-half that allowed in very low density residential. 
Such densities shall be calculated only upon land suitable for development. Suitable land shall include only that land which has no development limitations, as defined in the subdivision and development regulations, appendix A of this Code. Water bodies may not be counted as suitable land. 
(b)  Dimensions. Dimensions shall be as follows: 
(1)  The minimum parcel size for development proposals shall be ten acres. After a preapplication conference between the applicant and the planning commission, the zoning board of review may grant a special use permit to this minimum size requirement. 
(2)  The minimum dimensions for lots within the compound shall be as follows: 
Type of Unit Area (sq. ft.) Yards (feet) Single-family 20,000 15 Two-family 20,000 15 One-story accessory - 10 Two-story accessory - 15  
(3)  The minimum frontage of the parcel for development proposals shall be at least 50 feet in all residential districts. Additional frontage may be required if more than one access road is deemed necessary by the planning commission. 
(c)  Open space criteria. Criteria for open space shall be as follows: 
(1)  Not less than one-half of the total land area, including land both suitable and unsuitable for development, shall be devoted to common open space. Open space may be in one or more parcels, the size, location, shape and character of which must be suitable for the designated uses. 
(2)  Open space shall be protected against building development and environmental damage by conveying to the town an open space easement restricting the area against any future building or use and against the removal of soil, trees and other natural features, except as is consistent with conservation, recreation or agricultural uses or uses accessory to permitted uses. 
(3)  Use of the open space as permitted in subsection (c)(8) of this section shall be subject to site plan review by the planning commission. All structural improvements shall be a part of the final submission plans approved by the commission, or may be included by amendment at any time prior to the conveyance of the first lot. Following the conveyance of at least 51 percent of the lots, such improvements may be permitted by the commission with the written concurrence of at least two-thirds of the homeowners' association membership. No structure on the open space may be located within 50 feet of residential property abutting the compound development. 
(4)  The planning commission may designate significant natural features of the property to be owned in common by the compound residents for the residents' own enjoyment. Common access shall be provided for all compound residents to all common land. 
(5)  Strips of common land shall be permitted only as usable access paths between residences, streets and open space; as drainage areas; and as buffers. 
(6)  Access areas to the open space shall be clearly marked with appropriate materials to distinguish commonly owned open space area from private property. 
(7)  At least one-half of the common open space or 25 percent of the total land area shall be usable for active recreation. Provisions shall be made to ensure that no more than 20 percent of the open space will be devoted to paved areas and structures devoted to open space uses or uses accessory to permitted uses. 
(8)  Open space may be issued for active recreation, passive recreation, conservation, forestry, agriculture, natural buffer, open space, structures accessory to approved uses including garages, and utilities owned and operated by the homeowners' association for its own use, including septic systems and package sewage treatment facilities. 
(9)  Land which has been environmentally damaged prior to final approval of the development by the planning commission as a result of soil and earth removal operations, harvesting of trees or other natural features or refuse disposal or other causes shall not be accepted as common open space unless and until the land is restored to a condition which the planning commission determines to be reasonable and appropriate to effect the purpose of this article. The planning commission may grant final approval for a compound development subject to such restoration of the common space, provided an appropriate performance bond is posted. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-17-4; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-430. - Ownership of common open space. 
(a)  Ownership of the common open space in a residential compound development shall be in accordance with the following: ownership by the individual lot owners as tenants in common. The deed to each lot shall include a proportionate share of the common open space. Each lot owner shall be required to be a member of a homeowners' association, which shall be formed prior to conveyance of the first lot. The assessment of dues and/or fees for structural improvements requires the affirmative vote of no less than two-thirds of the homeowners' association membership. 
(b)  Open space shall be protected against building development and environmental damage by conveying to the town an open space easement restricting the area against any future building and against the removal of soil, trees and other natural features, except as is consistent with conservation, recreation or agricultural uses or uses accessory to permitted uses. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-17-5) 
Sec. 21-431. - Required certificates or documents. 
    For a residential compound development, the following certificates or documents shall be submitted in accordance with the subdivision and development regulations: 
(1)  A written agreement or contract to be executed between the developer and the town stating the following: 
a.  The owner or developer will construct the development and install improvements both public and private in accordance with the approved plan and that a bond shall be posted to guarantee completion. 
b.  If the owners, successors or assigns fail to maintain any common open space, recreation areas, landscaping features or other required improvements, the town may enter into such development and perform such necessary maintenance work and charge the cost, including attorney's fees, to the owner, successors or assigns. 
c.  The contract shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, successors or receivers of the development and shall constitute a lien on the property in the development. 
d.  Any other conditions required by the planning commission. 
(2)  Copies of any proposed management policies and existing deed restrictions or covenants running with the land in the development if any exist or are proposed. 
(3)  A description of any existing easements, covenants or restrictions affecting land within the development and an instrument conveying any easements required as condition of approval to the town; such easements shall include that which is required by section 21-430. 
(4)  All other procedural requirements or supporting material set forth in the subdivision and development regulations not mentioned in this section, which are applicable to any compound development. 
(5)  The following disclosure shall be required: 
a.  Prior to approval by the planning commission, the developer must file and have approved by the planning commission the following documents: 
1.  A sample purchase and sale agreement which shall be used for the purchase of the individual lots and dwellings. Such agreement shall include in conspicuous type the following: That the property is part of a compound development subject to this article; that the purchaser and subsequent owners of the property are subject to the requirements therein contained; that the purchaser shall be required to be a member of a homeowners' association, shall be subject to rules and regulations of such association and shall be liable for any applicable assessment made by or against such association. The purchase and sale agreement shall further contain a statement by the seller that the purchaser has been provided with a copy of the rules and regulations of the homeowners' association, copies of any proposed management policies, copies of restrictions or covenants running with the land in the development and a prospectus which shall be a summarization in layperson's language of the information contained in the other documents. 
2.  Copies of any declaration of condominium or proposed declaration; the documents creating the homeowners' association; the bylaws, rules and regulations of the homeowners' association; any management policies or proposed management policies; copies of any restrictions or covenants running with the land in the development and the prospectus which shall be a summarization in layperson's language of the information contained in the filed documents. 
b.  It shall be clearly and conspicuously posted at all entrances to the compound development that it is a compound development subject to the bylaws, rules and regulations of the homeowners' association. 
c.  If any roads serving the compound development are owned in common by the homeowner and maintained as private rights-of-way, this fact, along with a statement that all the costs and expenses of repairing and maintaining such roads are the responsibility of the homeowners' association, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted on such roads. 
(6)  An agreement shall be filed that the town shall not at any time be held responsible for the maintenance or improvement of the private access. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-17-6) 
Sec. 21-432. - Approval required before construction of improvements. 
    No street and no public water supply or other improvements shall be constructed in a residential compound development unless a plat of such development has been approved by the planning commission. No building permit shall be issued for construction of any building within any compound development unless a plat of such development has been recorded in the office of the town clerk. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-17-7; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998) 
Sec. 21-433. - Previously approved developments. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall affect the validity of any residential compound development which was given final approval by the decision of the planning commission prior to May 10, 1982, and the validity of and uses permitted within such a compound shall be governed by the ordinances which were in effect on the date that such final approval was given only if the approved plat or plan and legal documents concerning such developments were and are recorded in the records of land evidence of the town no later than six months after May 10, 1982. Furthermore, nothing contained in this article shall prevent the planning commission from giving final approval to any compound development to which the commission gave preliminary approval prior to February 8, 1982. If such final approval is given, validity of and uses permitted within such a compound development shall be governed by the ordinances which were in effect on the date that such preliminary approval was given only if the approved plat or plan and legal documents concerning such development are recorded in the records of land evidence of the town no later than one year after May 10, 1982. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-17-8) 
Secs. 21-434-21-455. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - PROHIBITED USES 

Sec. 21-456. - Definitions. 
    The definitions included within RIGL 1956, § 23-19.7-1 et seq., "Hazardous Waste Management Facilities," as amended from time to time, are incorporated within this article for the purpose of interpreting this article. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-18-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-457. - Hazardous waste management facilities. 
    A hazardous waste management facility is prohibited in any zoning district within the town. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-18-2) 
Sec. 21-458. - Landfills and injection wells. 
    The use of landfills and/or injection wells as a means for hazardous waste disposal management is prohibited within the town limits. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-18-3) 
Sec. 21-459. - Siting of hazardous waste management facilities. 
    The siting of hazardous waste management facilities in the watershed of a public drinking water supply reservoir or in the recharge area of a groundwater aquifer which supplies or has been shown by competent hydrologic and water quality analysis to be capable of supplying a public drinking water system is prohibited within the town limits. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-18-4) 
Sec. 21-460. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined $100.00 for each day that the violation continues and shall be required to remove all such hazardous waste and restore the premises to its former condition. 
(Rev. Ords. 1974, § 17-18-4) 
Secs. 21-461-21-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - CORPORATE COMPOUND 

Sec. 21-481. - Purpose of article. 
    The corporate compound district is established for the purpose of allowing corporate headquarters to locate within areas of the town in which this activity will be compatible with surrounding uses. In residential areas, the corporate compound shall be allowed where it can conform with the rural character of the existing area and where it will preserve open space. Furthermore, it is the intent of this article to permit corporate headquarters in those areas where such location will not generate excessive traffic, noise or glare; where all proposed and existing structures can be effectively screened from public roadways and existing or future residences; and where the construction of new structures, roads, sewage disposal systems, parking areas and other accessory structures can exist without detriment to approved uses within those districts. It is not the intent of this district to allow uses that are prohibited in other districts or that are inconsistent with the master plan. Wherever possible, siting shall preserve prime agricultural or scenic areas. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 1 (17-19-1), 2-9-1987) 
Sec. 21-482. - General requirements. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in a corporate compound shall be limited to the conducting of corporate business and management. Services provided to the general public, such as real estate, banking, medical or legal or manufacturing, assembling, laboratory and the like are not permitted. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Guest accommodations. 
(2)  Storage sheds or maintenance facilities. 
(3)  Recreation facilities. 
(c)  Development standards. Development standards shall be as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot size ..... 25 acres 
(2)  Minimum frontage ..... 500 feet 
(3)  Minimum depth ..... 800 feet 
(4)  Minimum side yard ..... 150 feet 
(5)  Minimum setback from front lot line ..... 250 feet 
(6)  Minimum rear yard ..... 150 feet 
(7)  Maximum lot coverage including buildings, parking lots, roadways and accessory structures: eight percent or three acres, whichever is less. 
(8)  Height of structures (maximum): 
a.  All principal structures ..... 40 feet 
b.  All accessory structures ..... 25 feet 
(d)  Buffers. An office park district shall maintain a densely planted buffer of 200 feet in width on the front and 100 feet in width on the sides and the rear, to contain permanent plantings, restricted by covenants, which will fully screen structures, roadways and parking areas from abutting property owners and from public roadways yearround. The trees shall have a height at maturity which will fully screen structures from the road and abutting property. Trees must be a minimum of six feet in height at the time of planting. The planning commission is to have the discretion to vary the width and amount of planting required where the applicant is willing to make a permanent dedication of a lesser undisturbed buffer of mature trees, where natural features such as hills will act to screen proposed structures, and where these or other factors will, in the planning commission's judgment, provide the same protection to abutters or the public as would the required buffer. 
(e)  Open space criteria. All of the land within the minimum side, rear and front yard setbacks shall be designated as open space. Open space shall be protected against building development and environmental damage by conveying to the town an open space easement restricting the areas against any future building or use and against the removal of soil, trees and other natural features, except as is consistent with conservation or agricultural uses which are approved by the planning commission. Land which has been environmentally damaged prior to final approval of the development by the planning commission as a result of soil and earth removal operations, harvesting of trees or other natural features, or by refuse disposal or other means shall not be accepted as open space unless and until the land is restored to a condition which the planning commission determines to be reasonable and appropriate to effect the purpose of this article. The following required certificates and documents for open space shall be submitted at the time of planning commission review: 
(1)  A written agreement or contract to be executed between the developer and the town stating the following: 
a.  If the owners, successors or assigns fail to maintain any common open space, landscaping features or other required improvements, the town may enter into such development and perform such necessary maintenance work and charge the cost, including attorney's fees, to the owners, successors or assigns. 
b.  The contract shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, successors or receivers of the development and shall constitute a lien on the property in the development. 
c.  Any other conditions required by the planning commission. 
(2)  A description of any existing easements, covenants or restrictions affecting land within the development and an instrument conveying any easements required as a condition of approval by the town. 
(f)  Water. Adequate water supply shall be available to the site for domestic needs and fire protection where town water is unavailable. 
(g)  Groundwater reservoir. If the site is located in or is within 200 feet of a groundwater reservoir, a hydrological assessment for the proposed uses must be conducted. The results of such assessment must establish, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, that the proposed use will not have a significant adverse impact to the groundwater reservoir. 
(h)  Traffic. A traffic impact analysis will be performed to assess the impact of the proposed use on the safety of vehicular traffic on the adjacent roadways. The results of such analysis must establish, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, that the proposed use will not have a significant adverse impact on the existing traffic and roadways. 
(i)  Lights. Outdoor lighting shall not disrupt neighboring land uses by excessive glare. 
(j)  Signage. Signage shall be limited to two signs, no larger than 15 square feet each, bearing only the name and address of the corporation. One sign may be located at each entrance to the development, but in no event shall the total number of signs exceed two. Each sign may be indirectly illuminated. A freestanding sign must be erected so that the lowest portion of the sign, not including the support, is higher than seven feet, and the highest portion of the sign, including the support, is not above 12 feet. A ground-mounted sign shall not exceed five feet in height and must be at least 15 feet from the curbline and curb cut. Signs shall be constructed of wood or other similar material. 
(k)  Noise. There shall be no excessive noise generated by a corporate headquarters. Helicopters shall be limited to emergency or occasional use. 
(l)  Sewage and waste disposal. All sewage and waste disposal into the ground and all surface water drainage from the proposed use shall be adequately handled on site by an approved central sewage facility. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the applicant shall submit plans for sewage, waste and surface water drainage to the town engineer for the engineer's approval. 
(m)  Parking layout. For employees' convenience and safety, continuous paved parking areas shall not exceed two parallel tiers (rows) of parking spaces or 15,000 square feet, whichever is more suited to the site without a landscaped buffer or pedestrian walkway, and shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Parking surface. The planning commission, at its discretion, may approve a porous surface parking area at the request of the applicant. 
(2)  Location. Parking areas cannot be located in any designated buffer or open space areas. 
(3)  Number of off-street parking spaces. One and one-half parking spaces are required for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(n)  Conversion. An approved corporate compound that existed as of January 1, 2010 may be converted to single, duplex, and multi-family residential use. The density for the residential units shall be one unit per two acres of total land area to the compound. The footprint of any new residential dwelling structures shall not exceed 2,000 square feet. Existing structures shall not be increased beyond a 2,000 square foot footprint. Additional uses and structures accessory to residential dwellings shall be permitted, after development plan review pursuant to section 21-284 of this chapter, and may include but not be limited to cabanas, gazebos, garages, barns, community rooms, tennis courts, swimming pools and structures, facilities or areas for active recreation. If a corporate compound is converted to residential use, the requirements set forth in subsection 21-482(c)(4), minimum side yard shall be 35 feet instead of 150 feet; subsection 21-482(c)(6), minimum rear yard shall be 35 feet instead of 150 feet and subsection 21-482(d), buffers shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 1 (17-19-2), 2-9-1987; Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 9-18-2006; Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, 2-22-2010) 
Sec. 21-483. - Master plan. 
    A proposal for a corporate compound shall be accompanied by a master site plan for development at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, using the town's assessor plat maps as a base which shall indicate the following: 
(1)  The approximate location, size and number of business structures proposed and the existing structures and such structures' uses. 
(2)  The approximate location of parking areas and open space areas. 
(3)  The general pedestrian and vehicular circulation pattern. 
(4)  A soil overlay of the property. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 1 (17-19-3), 2-9-1987) 
Sec. 21-484. - Site plan review. 
    No building permit for a corporate compound shall be issued until the site plan has been reviewed and approved by the planning commission. All site plans shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet; shall be prepared, stamped and signed by either a registered professional engineer, registered land surveyor or registered architect; and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  North arrow, locus plan, title block, including scale, date, name of owner, name of development, name of designer, architect, engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Plat and lot numbers, dimension of lots, zoning district, plat and lot numbers and zoning of abutting properties. 
(3)  Existing and proposed contours at one-foot intervals, plus spot grades where required, along with a benchmark elevation and location of the benchmark. 
(4)  Location of all existing and proposed structures and the size and uses of the structures, exits from structures, adjacent lot structures, top of foundation elevation, and lowest opening of foundation elevation. 
(5)  Dimensions of existing and proposed structures along with designation and area in square feet of each proposed and existing use within the structures. 
(6)  Location of wells and water and gas lines. 
(7)  Location of septic tank, distribution box and leach field, with individual sewage disposal system compliance where needed. 
(8)  Location, dimension and number of parking spaces, loading areas and loading dock. 
(9)  Drainage plans and calculations with the plans showing scales, catchbasins, piping, French drains or subdrain location and outfalls. 
(10)  Location, type and implementation schedule for erosion controls. 
(11)  Location and type of curbs and curb cuts and physical alteration permit from the state department of transportation where needed (on all proposals along state highways). 
(12)  Location of fire exits, fire lanes, nearest hydrants and siamese connections. 
(13)  Proposed landscape features such as location, size and type of fences, walks, planting areas and planting materials. 
(14)  Location of dumpster, with dimensions, concrete slab and appropriate screening. 
(15)  Location and type of outside lighting. 
(16)  Location, dimension and type of proposed sign. 
(17)  Identification of all wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 1 (17-19-4), 2-9-1987) 
ARTICLE XX. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 21-485. - Purpose. 
    The town was originally settled in small villages, with people living close to a community center. The planned unit development (PUD) district is established as a zoning district designed to provide an alternative to suburban development standards and which is intended to: 
(1)  Encourage the development of traditional village centers that provide for a creative mixture of uses, including residential and business, that enhance the quality of community life through careful planning and development without compromising the protection of resources such as groundwater and open space. 
(2)  Reduce initial development costs and preserve areas for common use by reducing standard minimum lot size and setback requirements. 
(3)  Preserve the character of surrounding neighborhoods and enhance the physical appearance of the area by preserving natural features and existing vegetation. 
(4)  Provide for recreation and open areas. 
(5)  Promote economical and efficient land use which can result in smaller demands for public facilities, utilities and streets. 
(6)  Allow for the creative development of businesses that serve the planned unit development and surrounding areas and reduce the demand upon the automobile for access to businesses. 
(7)  Provide an appropriate and harmonious variety of housing and creative site design alternatives which encourages innovative development. 
(8)  Promote energy conservation by optimizing the orientation, layout and design of structures to take maximum advantage of solar heating/cooling schemes and energy-conserving landscaping. 
(9)  Provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout of development to a particular site and the particular demand for housing and other facilities in a manner consistent with the preservation of property values within established residential areas. 
(10)  Ensure that a large development will have adequate public services and facilities by coordinating and sharing costs with the developer. 
(11)  Comply with the town's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 94-2, § 1, 2-14-1994) 
Sec. 21-486. - Procedure for planned unit developments. 
(a)  Overview of process. Obtaining permission to develop a planned unit development is a four-stage process. The process has been designed to optimize the applicant's resources, professional staff and official input, and public involvement. The submission requirements for each stage are set forth in the subdivision and land development regulations. The stages are as follows: 
(1)  Staff conference and preapplication review. 
(2)  Zoning map amendment by the town council. 
(3)  Master plan approval by the planning commission. 
(4)  Site plan/subdivision plat approval by the planning commission. 
(b)  Staff conference and preapplication review. Prior to meeting with the planning commission for preapplication review, the applicant will meet with the planning department to review the suitability of the site for a planned unit development. Prior to the planning department meeting, the applicant will submit the required preapplication materials in accordance with article IV, section J(a), of the subdivision and land development regulations. The planning department will schedule the meeting with the planning commission within 30 days of the preapplication submittal. If, after review of the preapplication material, the planning commission finds that the proposal is consistent with the purpose of the planned unit development ordinance, a recommendation will be made to the applicant to submit a zoning map amendment application to the town council. 
(c)  Zoning map amendment application procedure. Procedures for application for a zoning map amendment are as follows: 
(1)  Application. A petition to the town council for zoning map amendment to establish a planned unit development district (PUD) shall be filed with the town clerk and administered in accordance with sections 21-8 and 21-9 pertaining to zoning and map amendments. The town clerk shall forward the application to the planning commission for an advisory opinion. The applicant, in addition to the materials submitted for the planning commission staff conference, shall provide those items listed in section 21-9 pertaining to zoning map amendments and article IV, section J(b), of the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(2)  Certification of materials. The planning department shall provide certification that the application and submission materials are complete. 
(3)  Planning commission meeting and hearing. A meeting will be scheduled with the planning commission to review the conceptual plan of the planned unit development upon receipt of all required submittal items. The planning staff and planning commission will prepare a report with recommendations to the town council during the zoning map amendment process. For the purpose of rendering an advisory opinion, a public hearing will be held by the planning commission prior to making its recommendation to the town council based on the criteria established in subsection (c)(5) of this section. 
(4)  Town council public hearing. Following the receipt of the planning commission recommendation, a public hearing shall be held by the town council in accordance with section 21-8. 
(5)  Criteria. The following shall be utilized by the town council and planning commission in evaluation of a rezoning petition to establish a planned unit development zoning district. In order to obtain the requested zone change, the applicant shall demonstrate and the town council shall find as a fact the following: 
a.  The proposed development will be in harmony with the stated purposes of this article. 
b.  The proposed site consists of at least 100 acres of suitable land for development as defined in subsection 21-214(a)(2). 
(6)  Zoning map designation. Following town council approval of a petition for a zoning map amendment, the property for which approval was granted by ordinance shall be labeled "PUD" on the town's official zoning map. 
(7)  Effect of approval. If the zoning map amendment is approved, the applicant may proceed to the master plan approval process. 
(d)  Master plan approval. Procedures for approval of the master plan are as follows: 
(1)  Application. Following zoning map amendment approval, the applicant shall submit the planned unit development application to the planning commission for master plan approval. 
(2)  Planning department meetings. The planning department shall meet with the applicant for the proposed development prior to discussion with the planning commission. (See article IV, section J(c), pertaining to master plan approval in the subdivision and land development regulations.) Subsequent to the completion of the planning department review and prior to any required public hearing, the applicant shall meet with the planning commission to review the proposed master plan. The purpose of the staff review will be to assess the following and to ensure compliance with the purposes of this article: 
a.  An inventory of the site's physiography and available infrastructure; 
b.  The carrying capacity of the land, especially as it relates to soils, groundwater and services; 
c.  The mix of residential types, commercial types, and major recreational amenities; and 
d.  A mitigation program to address all environmental and community impacts. 
(3)  Criteria. In approving a master plan for a planned unit development, the planning commission shall ensure that the plan complies with the following: 
a.  All of the submission requirements in the subdivision and land development regulations article 15.0, § 15.8, pertaining to master plan approval have been met. 
b.  There has been compliance with all of the general requirements in section 21-487. 
(4)  Public hearing. After the planning department and planning commission meetings described in this subsection, a public hearing will be held before the planning commission. Abutters within 500 feet of the site will be notified and the hearing advertised in a newspaper of local circulation. Advertising and all required notices shall be in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 45-23-40(D)(1), as amended. The cost of advertising and notification shall be borne by the applicant. The master plan shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied within 45 days of the close of the public hearing. The planning commission may grant an extension to the time period required for action at the request of the applicant. 
(5)  Permit conditions. As a condition of approval, the planning commission may require such changes in the proposed development plans and may impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to meet the purposes of this article. 
(6)  Subdivision/site plan approval application. Following master plan approval, the applicant may file for subdivision/site plan approval. If a planned unit development subdivision/site plan application is not filed with the planning commission pursuant to articles I through IV of the subdivision and land development regulations within one year of master plan approval, the town council shall reserve the right to rezone the property to any zoning classification that is consistent with the comprehensive plan after notice to property owners, abutters and a public hearing has been held in accordance with the provisions of RIGL 1956, § 45-24-53. 
(7)  Modification. Amendments to the approved master plan shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  Minor modification. Amendments to the approved master plan which do not substantially change the concept of the master plan may be approved by the planning director. The developer shall request such amendments in writing, clearly setting forth the reasons for such changes. If the change is approved, the master plan shall be amended. Appeal from the decision of the planning director may be taken to the planning commission. 
b.  Major modification. Amendments to the approved master plan which the planning department determines to be substantial deviations from the concept of the approved planned unit development shall require application to and review by the planning commission pursuant to subsection 21-487(f). 
(8)  Project phasing. If the developer anticipates a phased development, a proposed phasing plan and schedule must be submitted to the planning commission for its approval at the time of master plan submission as per subdivision and development regulation submission requirements. The phasing schedule, upon consultation and approval by the planning commission, may be amended from time to time. Amendment to the phasing schedule shall not be considered an amendment to the master plan. 
(e)  Subdivision/site plan approval. Procedures for approval of the subdivision/site plan are as follows: 
(1)  Review processes. The applicant shall submit a planned unit development plan or any phase thereof for subdivision/site plan approval following master plan approval. The review procedure for subdivision/site plan approval shall be undertaken in two distinct review processes: preliminary and final. Subdivision/site plan approval shall follow the preliminary and final submission requirements as set forth in article IV, sections B, C, F and J(d) of the subdivision and land development regulations. Additionally, where nonresidential uses are proposed, submission requirements as set forth in section F of article IV must also be provided. All administrative processes, notice and hearing requirements shall be in accordance with RIGL 1956, §§ 45-23-41, 45-23-42 and 45-23-43. 
(2)  Submission in phases. If the plan is to be submitted in phases, the applicant shall follow the requirements set forth in subsection 21-487(p) pertaining to phasing. 
(3)  Modifications. Amendments to the approved site or subdivision plan shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  Minor modifications. Amendments to the approved site or subdivision plan which do not substantially change the concept of the planned unit development may be approved by the planning director. Such minor changes may include but are not limited to small site alterations such as realignment of minor roads or relocation of utility lines due to engineering necessity. The developer shall request such amendment in writing, clearly setting forth the reasons for such changes. If the change is approved, the site plan or subdivision plan shall be so amended. Appeal from the decision of the planning director may be taken to the planning commission. 
b.  Major modifications. Amendments to the approved site/subdivision plan which the planning department determines to be a substantial deviation from the concept of the approved planned unit development shall require application to and review by the planning commission pursuant to subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Major modification procedures. Procedures for major modification are as follows: 
(1)  Major modification of master plan. Amendments to the approved master plan which the planning department determines to be substantial deviations from the concept of the approved planned unit development shall be considered a major modification. In order to seek a major modification, the developer shall request such modification in writing, clearly setting forth the reasons for such change. The planning department shall forward a copy of such modification requested to the planning commission along with any supporting information and the staff report to assist the planning commission in its decision-making. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed major modification. Notification and advertising of such hearing shall be in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 45-23-40(D)(1). In its deliberation, the planning commission may require any information as set forth in article IV, section J(c) of the subdivision and land development regulations which reflects the proposed modification. If the modification is approved by the planning commission, master plan amendments shall be prepared and reviewed by town staff prior to final authorization by the planning commission. Appeal from the decision of the planning commission shall be in accordance with applicable statutes concerning appeals from any decision of a planning commission. 
(2)  Subdivision/site plan. Amendments to the approved subdivision/site plan which the planning department determines to be substantial deviations from the concept of the approved planned unit development shall be considered a major modification. In order to seek a major modification, the developer shall request such modification in writing, clearly setting forth the reasons for such change. The planning department shall forward a copy of such modification requested to the planning commission along with any supporting information and staff report to assist the planning commission in its decision-making. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed major modification. Notification and advertising of such hearing shall be in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 45-23-42(B), (C), (D). In its deliberation, the planning commission may require any information as set forth in article IV, section J(d) of the subdivision and land development regulations which reflects the proposed modification. If the modification is approved by the planning commission, subdivision/site plan amendments shall be prepared and reviewed by town staff prior to final authorization by the planning commission. Appeal from the decision of the planning commission shall be in accordance with applicable statutes concerning appeals from any decision of a planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 94-2, § 1, 2-14-1994) 
Sec. 21-487. - General requirements. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in a planned unit development and must be in accordance with the delineated use areas as specified in the subdivision/site plan: 
(1)  Residential uses in locations as delineated in the subdivision/site plan: 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings (two or more attached dwelling units). 
(2)  Governmental, institutional and public service uses in locations as delineated in the subdivision/site plan: 
a.  Municipal uses. 
b.  Educational uses. 
c.  Religious uses. 
d.  Public or private utility facilities, except for those uses enumerated as special permit uses. 
e.  Day care center. 
f.  Museum. 
(3)  Business uses in locations as delineated in the subdivision/site plan: 
a.  Private club or lodge, section 21-12. 
b.  Neighborhood business, section 21-87. 
c.  Clinic, section 21-12. 
d.  Personal convenience service, section 21-12. 
e.  Commercial recreation. 
f.  Professional and business services, section 21-12. 
g.  Corporate offices. 
h.  Hotel and motel, including tourist cabins. 
(4)  Agricultural uses: farm, plant nursery and forestry. 
(5)  Accessory uses: 
a.  The sale of farm, garden or nursery products grown on site. 
b.  Storage space for not more than four vehicles. 
c.  One accessory dwelling unit in a single-family dwelling, provided that the overall number of bedrooms in both the primary dwelling and the accessory dwelling do not exceed four bedrooms, not less than ten square feet of lot area for each one square foot of floor area of the accessory dwelling unit is provided over the minimum lot size required for the principal dwelling, the accessory dwelling unit must be incidental to the single-family use, and the area devoted to the accessory dwelling unit does not exceed the area devoted to the single-family dwelling. 
d.  Not more than two rooms rented or table/board furnished incidental to a private residence use. 
(b)  Special use permit. Procedures for obtaining a special use permit are as follows: 
(1)  Uses requiring permit. The following uses, unless otherwise prohibited in an overlay district, require a special use permit from the zoning board of review: 
a.  Automotive services, including service stations. 
b.  Communications tower. 
c.  Electrical transfer station. 
d.  Wholesaling. 
e.  Research facilities. 
f.  Warehousing. 
g.  More than two rooms rented or table/board furnished incidental to a private residence use. 
(2)  Planning commission review and recommendation required. Prior to a zoning board public hearing, a special use permit application shall be reviewed by the planning commission for recommendation. The planning commission shall make a recommendation based on the following criteria: compatibility of the proposed use in relation to the surrounding area; the scale of the use in relation to the surrounding area; and consistency with the purposes of this chapter and this article. The planning commission in making a recommendation may also recommend appropriate special conditions that will bring the application into compliance with these criteria. 
(3)  Findings of fact for special use permit. The criteria for special use permits are established in subsection 21-6(2) for a special use permit and shall be consistent with the purposes and intent of this chapter and this article. 
(c)  Mix of uses. Residential uses shall comprise at least 70 percent of the net floor area of all buildings in a planned unit development. 
(d)  Screening along roadways. The following minimum standards for the development of landscaped areas shall govern the review of site plan/subdivision submittals for consistency with this article. A bufferyard may be located within the street right-of-way as appropriate and may be bisected by a sidewalk or other pedestrian ways. Applicants may submit alternative screening plans for planning commission review and approval. Uses within the planned unit development which abut public roadways shall be screened as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses. 
a.  Abutting arterial street. A bufferyard of 20 feet in width containing at least five canopy trees, ten understory trees and 15 shrubs per 100 feet of frontage as defined in the master plan submission requirements in the subdivision and land development regulations. 
b.  Abutting collector street. A bufferyard of 15 feet in width containing at least two canopy trees, four understory trees and six shrubs per 100 feet of frontage. 
c.  Abutting local street. A bufferyard of ten feet in width containing at least two canopy trees per 100 feet of frontage. 
(2)  Nonresidential uses. 
a.  Abutting arterial or collector street. A bufferyard of ten feet in width containing at least one canopy tree, two understory trees and three shrubs per 100 feet of frontage. 
b.  Abutting local street and facing nonresidential use. A bufferyard of ten feet in width containing at least one canopy tree per 100 feet of frontage. 
c.  Abutting local street and facing residential use. A bufferyard of 15 feet in width containing at least two canopy trees, four understory trees and six shrubs per 100 feet of frontage. 
(3)  Specific criteria for landscaped areas. Approval of the site or subdivision plan by the planning commission shall include specific criteria for the landscaped areas. 
(e)  Streets and roads. All streets in a planned unit development shall be improved in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the subdivision and land development regulations. At the discretion of the planning commission, some or all of the roads serving planned unit developments may be owned in common by the owners and maintained as private rights-of-way. A performance guarantee shall be required for all streets and private rights-of-way in the planned unit development. 
(f)  Parking. Parking shall conform to the applicable requirements of article XI of this chapter. 
(g)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with article 13.0 of the subdivision and land development regulations. In addition to such requirements, sidewalks shall be located along the frontage of any business and on at least one side of a street in any residential area. Sidewalks shall provide linkage to all areas of the development. 
(h)  Open space criteria. Criteria for open space shall be as follows: 
(1)  Within a planned unit development, no less than 25 percent of the land suitable for development, exclusive of land set aside for road area and accessory uses, shall be devoted to open space for recreational or conservation purposes. (See the definition of open space at section 21-12.) 
(2)  At least one-half of the open space, or 12.5 percent of the land suitable for development, shall be usable for active recreation. 
(3)  Provisions shall be made to ensure that no more than 20 percent of the open space will be devoted to paved areas and/or structures, both of which must be related to open space uses or uses accessory to permitted uses. 
(4)  Use of the open space as permitted in subsection (h)(8) of this section shall be shown on the master plan. All structural improvements shall be a part of the final submission plans approved by the commission. Following the conveyance of at least 51 percent of the lots in any phase, such improvements may be permitted by the commission with the written concurrence of at least two-thirds of the owners' association membership. No structure on the open space may be located within 50 feet of residential property abutting the planned unit development. 
(5)  Strips of common land shall be permitted only as usable access paths between residences, streets and open space; drainage areas; and as buffers. 
(6)  Access areas to the open space shall be clearly marked with appropriate signs to distinguish commonly owned open space area from private property. 
(7)  Open space may be in one or more parcels, the size, location, shape and character of which must be suitable for the designated uses. (See section 21-12 for the definition of open space.) 
(8)  Open space may be used for active or passive recreation, conservation, forestry, agriculture, natural buffers, utilities and associated storage facilities owned and operated by the owners' association for its own use including septic systems and package sewage treatment facilities. Passive recreation includes uses which require very little disturbance of the land, such as walking trails, picnic areas, etc. Active recreation includes uses which require more intensive alteration of the land, especially those uses requiring structures and impermeable surfaces such as golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, etc. 
(9)  Land which has been environmentally damaged, prior to final approval of the development by the planning commission, as a result of soil and earth removal operations, harvesting of trees or other natural features or refuse disposal or other causes shall not be accepted as open space unless and until the land is restored to a condition which the planning commission determines to be reasonable and appropriate to effect the purpose of this article. The planning commission may grant final approval for a planned unit development subject to such restoration of the open space, provided an appropriate performance guarantee is posted. 
(i)  Ownership of open space. Ownership of the open space shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  There may be different categories of open space ownership. Within such categories, ownership shall be by individual lot owners as tenants in common. The deed to each lot shall include the percentage ownership in each applicable category. Each lot owner shall be required to be a member of the owners' association, which shall be formed prior to conveyance of the first lot. The assessment of dues or fees for structural improvements and maintenance requires the affirmative vote of no less than two-thirds of the owners' association membership. 
(2)  All or part of the open space area used as a basis for calculation to determine density, if used for active recreation purposes, may be owned by a separate entity. In such case, the area shall be impressed with an open space easement as defined in subsection (i)(3) of this section running to the lot or unit owners, in addition to an open space easement which shall be granted to the town. 
(3)  An open space easement restricting the area against any future building and against the removal of soil, trees and other natural features, except as is consistent with conservation, recreation or agricultural uses or uses accessory to permitted uses, shall be conveyed to the town for all open space within the planned unit development. 
(j)  Traffic impacts. The applicant must demonstrate the feasibility of and agree to provide the road improvements and traffic control devices necessary to accommodate increased traffic generated by each phase of the planned unit development. 
(k)  Public utilities and service impacts. It shall be demonstrated that, at the completion of the planned unit development, adequate capacity exists or can be made available to support the development from the public water supply, stormwater management facilities, sewers, solid waste disposal facilities, public safety, emergency and educational services of the town. This demonstration must be shown for each phase of the development. Public facilities constructed in connection with the planned unit development shall be constructed and located so as to minimize costs of municipal operation and maintenance. 
(l)  Density. Density for the planned unit development shall be calculated as follows: 
Within Groundwater 
Overlay District Outside Groundwater 
Overlay District Residential Without sewers 1 du/2 acres 2 du/acre With sewers 1 4 du/acre Commercial Without sewers 10,000 sf/acre 2 10,000 sf/acre 2 With sewers 17,000 sf/acres 2 17,000 sf/acres 2  
Notes:  1 Four dwelling units/acre in no case to exceed five mg/l nitrate. 
  2 Square feet of floor area per acre of land suitable for development as defined in subsection 21-214(a). 
In calculating density, the volume of land used for calculating residential uses cannot be used for calculating nonresidential uses, and vice versa. Calculation for density shall be in the same manner as cluster development subsection 21-214(a)(1)-(a)(3) minimum requirements. These limits may be increased by the planning commission under the density bonus options contained in subsection (m) of this section. 
(m)  Density bonuses. A maximum density bonus of ten percent over the allowable base density for residential development, as set forth in subsection (l) of this section, may be approved in accordance with the standards set forth in this subsection. The density bonuses may be granted at the discretion of the planning commission if the proposed density bonuses promote the purposes of the planned unit development zoning district set forth in section 21-485. No density bonuses will be granted within groundwater overlay districts unless the area is sewered. All density in a groundwater recharge and wellhead overlay district is subject to a nitrate loading analysis. Standards for density bonuses are as follows: 
(1)  Dedicated open space. Increase the dedicated open space area by a minimum of ten percent of the net acreage of the tract. 
(2)  Active recreation. Develop facilities and areas for active recreation exceeding by 50 percent of the minimum requirement of subsection (h)(2) of this section. Active recreation facilities may include but are not limited to tennis courts, swimming pools, ballfields, picnic or cookout facilities and tot lots. 
(3)  Bikepaths/greenway systems. Create an integrated system of bikepaths or pedestrian greenways. The system should be linked to other open spaces outside of the development. 
(4)  Solar access. Provide solar access to at least 40 percent of the dwelling units and ensuring through appropriate deed restrictions that dwelling units may effectively utilize solar energy systems for water and space heating purposes, provided the design of the planned unit development meets the following: 
a.  The planned unit development shall be designed so that the buildings shall receive sunlight sufficient for using solar energy systems for water heating and/or space heating and cooling. Building and vegetation shall be sited so that unobstructed sunlight reaches the south wall or rooftop of the designated units employing the solar heating/cooling systems including active and/or passive systems. 
b.  The following criteria in addition to other design elements shall be evaluated in determining proper site design for the active and/or passive solar system utilized: 
1.  Site selection. 
2.  Street pattern. 
3.  Lot orientation. 
4.  Building orientation. 
5.  Building design. 
6.  Existing and proposed vegetation. 
7.  Shadow patterns. 
(5)  Moderate pricing. Provided that a minimum of ten percent of all dwelling units shall be marketed at moderate price, defined as 90 percent of the average area median sale price or the federal limit as determined by the Internal Revenue Service, whichever is lower, and reserved for sale to moderate-income buyers, the maximum qualifying income of whom shall not exceed 2.3 times 50 percent of the area median income, adjusted by family size, as established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. Designed moderately priced units shall be identical in external design and construction to the other units in the project and shall be integrated throughout the planned unit development. The developer must enter into a binding agreement with the town to maintain the affordability of these units for a minimum 30-year period. 
(6)  Rental units. Provide a minimum of 30 percent of all dwelling units as rental housing at rents 20 percent below market rate. The developer must enter into a binding agreement with the town to maintain the designated units at 20 percent below market rate. 
(7)  Day care. The developer must enter into a binding agreement with the town to dedicate a facility for day care and to provide a viable management and operations structure. 
(n)  Dimensional regulations. The following table shall apply to all buildings within the planned unit development unless approved otherwise by the planning commission. Building height and lot coverage by structure are maximums. 
Without Public Sewers 
Use Lot Size Setback Building Height 
(feet) Lot Coverage 
(percent) Frontage 
(feet) Single-family 10,000 1 36 40 75 Multifamily 10,000/du 1 40 30 150 Commercial 2 1 50 30 100  
With Public Sewers 
Use Lot Size Setback Building Height 
(feet) Lot Coverage 
(percent) Frontage 
(feet) Single-family 5,000 1 36 40 75 Multifamily 4 1 40 30 150 Commercial 3 1 50 30 100  
Notes: 
1  Minimum front yard setbacks shall be governed by subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section. Side and rear yard setbacks and/or building envelopes for each phase shall be determined by the planning commission. 
2  1,500/300 sq. ft. of building (10,000 sq. ft. minimum). 
3  1,000/300 sq. ft. of building (5,000 sq. ft. minimum). 
4  As determined by master plan. 
(o)  Signs. All signs in the planned unit development shall conform to the applicable requirements of article X of this chapter. 
(p)  Project phasing. The planning commission, in its evaluation of the phasing program, should consider the structuring and sequencing of the phases as to the viability of the project. Each phase is considered a part of the total master plan, and meaning within the master plan governs. Any major modifications at the subdivision level must effect an amendment to the master plan. The following shall be guidelines for phasing: 
(1)  Performance guarantees for each phase should be sufficient to meet the requirements of section J of appendix A, pertaining to subdivision and development regulations. 
(2)  The planning commission shall determine an acceptable level of commercial development for each phase including the cumulative effect of residential development. The percentage of commercial development can be lower in the early phases in order to develop the population base that will sustain the businesses. 
(3)  While not all roads need be built initially, any through road providing primary access to the development should be completed during the first phase. 
(4)  Each phase should have a contingency plan in case it is the last phase developed. This would include the minimum infrastructure requirements to satisfy the existing development. Performance guarantees must be sufficient to provide for the contingency plan. 
(5)  The planning commission shall determine the required transportation improvements, if any, for each phase of the development based on the anticipated traffic impact for each phase of the development and the cumulative effect of approved phases. 
(q)  Architectural design standards. The project will conform to the architectural standards set forth by the applicant in the environmental and community inventory and impact analysis (subdivision and development regulations, article 15.0, section 15.8, master plan approval, 6.f. Aesthetics, i. Architecture). Drawings and other specifications submitted to and approved by the planning commission shall become a part of and made a condition of the decision to approve the project. The planning commission shall determine appropriate front, side and rear setback requirements for each subdivision/site plan application in order to ensure continuity of building location for each phase. 
(r)  Required certificates or documents. The following certificates or documents shall be submitted with the final plans in accordance with the subdivision and development regulations: 
(1)  A written agreement or contract to be executed between the developer and the town stating the following: 
a.  The owner or developer will construct the development and install improvements both public and private in accordance with the approved plan; further, a performance guarantee by phases, as appropriate, shall be posted to guarantee completion in accordance with the subdivision and development regulations. 
b.  If the owners, successors or assigns fail to maintain any open space, recreation areas, landscaping features or other required improvements, the town may enter into such development and perform such necessary maintenance work and charge the cost, including attorney's fees, to the owners, successors or assigns. 
c.  The contract shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, successors or receivers of the development and shall constitute a lien on the property in the development. 
d.  All specific conditions required by the planning commission appropriate for inclusion in such agreement. 
e.  All unpaid assessments and charges of the homeowners' association against individual lot owners shall constitute a lien on the property of the lot owner and shall be enforceable and collectable according to the enforcement and collection procedures for condominium fees as provided in RIGL 1956, § 34-36.1-3.16. 
(2)  Copies of any proposed management policies and existing deed restrictions or covenants running with the land in the development, if any exist or are proposed. 
(3)  A description of any existing easements, covenants or restrictions affecting land within the development and an instrument conveying any easements required as condition of approval to the town. 
(4)  All other procedural requirements or supporting material set forth in the subdivision and development regulations sections not mentioned in this section, which are applicable to any planned unit development. 
(5)  The following disclosure shall be required. Prior to approval by the planning commission, the developer must file and have approved by the planning commission and town solicitor the following documents: 
a.  A sample purchase and sales agreement which shall be used for the purchase of the individual lots and dwellings. Such agreement shall include in conspicuous type the following: "That the property is part of a planned unit development subject to Article XX of Chapter 21 of the Revised Ordinances of the Town of North Kingstown; that the purchaser and subsequent owners of the property are subject to the requirements therein contained; that the purchaser shall be required to be a member of an owners' association, shall be subject to rules and regulations of such association and shall be liable for any applicable assessment made by or against such association." The purchase and sales agreement shall further contain a statement by the seller that the purchaser has been provided with a copy of the rules and regulations of the owners' association, copies of any proposed management and fiscal policies, copies of restrictions or covenants running with the land in the development and a prospectus which shall be a summary in layperson's language of the information contained in the other documents. 
b.  Copies of any declaration of condominium or proposed declaration, the documents creating the owners' association, the bylaws and the rules and regulations of the owners' association, any management policies or proposed management policies, proposed fiscal management program to ensure proper maintenance of all commonly owned land and facilities, copies of any restrictions or covenants running with the land in the development and the prospectus which shall be a summary in layperson's language of the information contained in the filed documents. 
(6)  It shall be clearly and conspicuously posted at all entrances to the planned unit development that it is a planned unit development subject to the bylaws, rules and regulations of the owners' association. 
(7)  If any roads serving the planned unit development are owned in common by the owners' association and maintained as private rights-of-way, this fact, along with a statement that all the costs and expenses of repairing and maintaining the roads are the responsibility of the owners' association, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted on such roads prior to the sale of any lots. 
(8)  Such other documents or written agreements as required by the department of planning and development, planning commission or town solicitor. 
(s)  Approval required before construction of improvements. No activities such as clearing, rough grading, streets, public water supply or other improvement shall be constructed and no building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building within any planned unit development unless a plan of such development has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the town clerk and the performance guarantees are secured and approved. Notwithstanding this requirement, the planning commission may approve one or more such activities at any time upon request of the developer and subject to any required conditions and guarantees. 
(Ord. No. 94-2, § 1, 2-14-1994; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994) 
Secs. 21-488-21-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 21-500. - Legislative findings. 
    The town council finds, determines and declares that: 
(1)  The town must expand its park, school and library facilities in order to maintain current standards if new development is to be accommodated without decreasing current standards. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(2)  The state through the enactment of RIGL 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq., Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Act, and RIGL 1956, § 45-24-1 et seq., Zoning Ordinances, provides for orderly growth and provision for protecting public investment in public facilities. 
(3)  The imposition of impact fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(4)  Each of the types of land development described in section 21-511 creates demand for the acquisition or expansion of parks, the construction of park improvements, the addition of library facilities and the expansion of school facilities. The fees established by section 21-511 are derived from and based upon the costs of providing additional park, school and library facility improvements necessitated by the new land developments for which the fees are levied. 
(5)  The report entitled "Impact Fees Program for the Town of North Kingstown," dated May 28, 1997, sets forth a reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new development and the need for and costs for parks, schools and library improvements in the town. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997) 
Sec. 21-501. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  This article is intended to assist in the implementation of the town comprehensive community plan. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of land so as to ensure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide park, school and library facility improvements in the town. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997) 
Sec. 21-502. - Rules of construction. 
(a)  This article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement, unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  If there is any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." 
(5)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association or any other similar entity. 
(6)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either/or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
b.  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  The term "either/or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in any combination. 
(7)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(8)  The word "town manager" means the town manager or the municipal officials the town manager may designate to carry out the administration of this article. Any municipal official so designated shall be approved by the town council before exercising duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997) 
Sec. 21-503. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Capital improvement includes planning, land acquisition, site improvements, buildings and equipment for park, school and library facilities, but excludes maintenance and operation. 
    Feepayer means a person obtaining a building permit for an activity requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to section 21-511 and the successor in interest of such person. 
    Private facility means any facility that is not owned by or dedicated to any governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 98-12, § 1, 8-3-1998) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-504. - Imposition of impact fee. 
(a)  Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, seeks to develop land within the town by applying for a building permit for a residential building is required to pay impact fees in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any residential building which was constructed pursuant to any building permit issued after August 3, 1998, until all impact fees required by this article, calculated as of the date of the issuance of the building permit, have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 98-12, § 2, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 00-14, § 1, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 21-505. - Computation of amount. 
(a)  A baseline fee schedule for park, school and library facilities shall be established by the town council to be included in the town's annually adopted capital improvement program. Fees shall be based upon documented analysis of the projected cost of providing park, school and library facilities as indicated in the then-current capital improvement program, reflecting adjustments for the time-value of money over the period between when the fee is paid and when it is projected to be utilized. Fees shall reflect credits for the present value of any future property taxes to be paid by the developed properties for the same park, school and library capital costs, and shall reflect expected differences among dwelling types, such as single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings. 
(b)  The school facility fee for dwellings in any particular development may be adjusted relative to the baseline fee to reflect any special characteristics of the development that can be assured for at least the following ten years, such as occupancy characteristics resulting in public school enrollment expectations significantly departing from those underlying the baseline fee, or property tax payment expectations significantly departing from those assumed in calculating the baseline fee. Request for such adjustment must be made and documented in writing to the town council, which shall approve it upon determination that doing so is supported by the facts of the case. 
(c)  If a building permit is issued for mixed uses, the fee shall be determined using the schedule by apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the schedule. 
(d)  If the type of development activity that a residential building permit is issued for is not specified on the fee schedule, the town manager shall use the fee applicable to the most comparable type of land use on the fee schedule. The town manager shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type by the comprehensive community plan, supporting documents of the comprehensive community plan, and this chapter. If the town manager determines that there is no comparable type of land use on the fee schedule, the town manager shall, with the consent of the town council, determine the appropriately discounted fee by considering demographic or other documentation which is available from state, local and regional authorities. 
(e)  If there is a change of use, redevelopment or expansion or modification of an existing use which requires the issuance of a building permit, the impact fee shall be based upon the net positive increase in the impact fee for the use as compared to the previous use. The town manager shall be guided in this determination by the sources and agencies listed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  If a feepayer opts to have the impact fee determined according to subsection (b) of this section, the feepayer shall prepare and submit to the town manager an independent fee calculation study for the land development activity for which a building permit is issued. The independent fee calculation study shall follow a prescribed methodology and format for the study established by the town. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made. The town shall consider the documentation submitted by the feepayer, but is not required to accept such documentation as shall be reasonably deemed to be inaccurate or not reliable and may, in the alternative, require the feepayer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is not presented, the feepayer shall pay impact fees as adopted. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is presented, the town manager may, with the consent of town council, adjust the fee to that appropriate to the particular development. The adjustment may include a credit against the fee for private facilities constructed or deed restricted or otherwise set aside for by the feepayer which serve the same purposes and functions as set forth in the town's comprehensive community plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 98-12, § 3, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-11-2007) 
Sec. 21-506. - Payment of fees. 
(a)  The feepayer shall pay the impact fees required by this article to the town manager or the town manager's designee prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  All funds collected shall be promptly transferred for deposit in the appropriate fund to be held and used solely for the purposes specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1, 10-4-1999) 
Sec. 21-507. - Funds established. 
(a)  There is established a park impact fee fund, a school impact fee fund and a library impact fee fund. 
(b)  Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be used in accordance with section 21-508. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997) 
Sec. 21-508. - Use of funds. 
(a)  All fees collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of providing and/or making capital improvements to park, school and library facilities under the jurisdiction of the town to meet the needs of new development. 
(b)  If bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments. 
(c)  At least once each fiscal period, the town manager shall present to the town council a proposed capital improvement program for park, school and library facilities assigning funds, including any accrued interest, to specific improvement projects and related expenses. Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in an impact fee fund until the next fiscal period, except as provided by section 21-509 pertaining to refunds. 
(d)  Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in section 21-509. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997) 
Sec. 21-509. - Refund of fees paid. 
    Fees deposited or a portion thereof, other than those deemed recoupment in accordance with RIGL 1956, § 45-22.4-5(c), shall be refunded in accordance with the provisions of RIGL 1956, § 45-22.4-6(a) if such funds are not expended or encumbered within eight years of the date of collection. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 98-12, § 4, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 7-9-2001) 
Sec. 21-510. - Exemptions and credits. 
(a)  Exemptions. Any claim of exemption from payment of impact fees must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit, and any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. The following shall be exempted from payment of an impact fee: 
(1)  Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no additional residential dwelling units are created and where the use is not changed. 
(2)  The construction of accessory buildings or structures. 
(3)  The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or structure of the same use which contains no residential units in addition to those which had been contained in the building or structure which was replaced. 
(4)  The construction of any nonresidential building or structure. 
(5)  The installation of a replacement mobile home on a lot or other such site where a mobile home legally existed on such site on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(b)  Credits. Land and/or capital improvements may be offered by the feepayer as total or partial payment of the required impact fee. The offer must specifically request or provide for an impact fee credit. If the town manager, with the consent of the town council, accepts such an offer, provided the acceptance is after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, the credit shall be determined and provided in the following manner: 
(1)  Credit for the dedication of land shall be valued at 115 percent of the most recent assessed value by the town tax assessor or by fair market value established by private appraisers acceptable to the town. Credit for the dedication of land shall be provided when the property has been conveyed at no charge to, and accepted by, the town in a manner satisfactory to the town council. 
(2)  Applicants for credit for construction of improvements shall submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications and construction cost estimates to the town, and the town manager shall determine credit for construction based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if the town manager determines that such estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. The town manager, with the consent of the town council, shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating the applicant's agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate and shall return such signed document to the town manager before credit will be given. The failure of the applicant to sign, date and return such document within 60 days shall nullify the credit. 
(3)  Credit against impact fees otherwise due will not be provided until the construction is completed and accepted by the town or a suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and approved by the town finance director, when applicable. 
(4)  Any claim for credit must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit. 
(5)  All school or park/recreation fees in lieu of land dedication payments made to the town at the time of subdivision approval shall be credited against impact fees due on a pro rata basis. Land dedication made to the town at the time of subdivision approval for school or park/recreation purposes shall be credited against impact fees due as follows: 
School ..... $492.40 per building lot Recreation/park .....  172.00 per building lot  
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 01-13, § 2, 7-9-2001) 
Sec. 21-511. - Fees. 
    The following are established as the fees to be charged from the time of adoption of Ordinance No. 06-09. Said fees shall be in effect until such time as amended by the town council, but no longer than five years after the date of passage of Ordinance No. 06-09. Fees are based upon the data and analysis contained and referenced in the "North Kingstown Impact Fee Report" prepared for the town by the town department of planning and development, dated May 28, 1997, as amended: 
(1)  The fee for park and recreation land and/or facilities shall be as follows: 
Single-family residential structure, per unit ..... $1,286.00 
Two-family residential structure, per unit ..... 1,543.00 
Multi-family residential structure, per unit ..... 1,654.00 
(2)  The fee for library facilities shall be as follows: 
Single-family residential structure, per unit ..... 96.00 
Two-family residential structure, per unit ..... 128.00 
Multi-family residential structure, per unit ..... 135.00 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 98-10, § 1, 6-29-1998; Ord. No. 99-12, § 1, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 00-14, § 2, 6-12-2000; Ord. No. 01-13, § 3, 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-4, § 1, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 03-7, § 1, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 04-11, § 1, 6-7-2004; Ord. No. 05-01, § 1, 2-14-2005; Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 06-09, § 1, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 07-11, § 2, 6-11-2007) 
Sec. 21-512. - Penalty. 
    A violation of this article shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted and, upon conviction, the violator shall be punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, the town shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 8-18-1997) 
Secs. 21-513-21-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - INCLUSIONARY ZONING 

Sec. 21-600. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of inclusionary zoning is to guide new development and reuse projects so that they support the town's goal of housing diversity consistent with the town comprehensive plan, and with statewide planning and housing guidance. The intention of these provisions is to assure that all new residential developments of five or more dwelling units will contribute to the supply of housing at affordable prices in the town. 
    To achieve that intention, a share of the units resulting from such developments is to be affordably priced, subject to a price limitation to assure initial affordability, with deed rider or land lease assuring that purchaser's or tenant's incomes meet prescribed limits at the time of initial purchase or occupancy and that such affordability and income eligibility will again be observed at the time of future turnover. 
    The following is the town's preferred progression of affordable housing options: 
(1)  Affordable units developed on site. 
(2)  Off-site rehabilitation of affordable units in existing buildings. 
(3)  Off-site new construction of affordable units. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 18-23, § 1, 10-29-2018) 
Sec. 21-601. - Basic inclusionary unit requirement. 
(a)  Basic requirement. Any development which results in the net addition of five or more housing units shall assure that a number of units no fewer than ten percent of the net added housing units resulting from the development shall be affordable as specified in RIGL 1956, § 42-128-8.1(d)(1). 
(b)  Off-site location. The basic inclusionary unit requirement may be met in part or whole by locating some or all of the required inclusionary housing units on an alternative site or sites within the town if a finding is made by the planning commission that location off-site would well serve the future residents of those units. Off-site inclusionary housing units may be located in an existing structure which is to be rehabilitated, but to be credited towards meeting the inclusionary requirement of section 21-601(a) the units must not be ones which are already eligible to be counted as low and moderate income housing under RIGL § 45-53. New off-site housing units created to satisfy the requirement of this section for inclusionary housing units shall be considered part of the total number of units for the purpose of determining the total required number of inclusionary housing units. 
(1)  If the off-site development results in the net addition of five or more housing units, the development shall incorporate both the required inclusionary units for the off-site development plus the incorporated off-site units triggered by the subject property. 
(2)  The number of inclusionary units, if located off-site, shall be equivalent to 1.5 times the number of inclusionary units required on-site. The number of units shall be rounded up. 
(3)  Off-site inclusionary units shall be timed for occupancy as indicated in section 21-604 as it relates to both properties. Any necessary clarification shall be included in the planning commission's conditions related to the subdivision or land development approval. 
(4)  If off-site units are proposed in existing structures, the applicant shall provide evidence to the planning commission that the: 
a.  The housing unit(s) to be renovated have no violations of building codes. 
b.  No existing tenants will be displaced due to the acquisition of the unit to satisfy the inclusionary requirements. 
c.  The units are generally comparable to market rate units in the proposed development and compatible and complementary to the homes in the surrounding neighborhood. 
d.  The applicant must have site control of the off-site units prior to the issuance of any building permits for market rate units in the triggering development. 
(5)  If proposing the off-site units on an undeveloped site, the following must be addressed: 
a.  The applicant must have site control prior to the issuance of any building permits for market rate units in the triggering development. The applicant must include supporting documentation of site control during the permitting process for the subdivision or land development. 
b.  The applicant must provide evidence satisfactory to the planning commission that the land is developable under existing zoning for the required number of inclusionary zoning. 
(6)  All off-site units must provide supporting material in relation to the following: 
a.  The off-site units shall be within one-half mile of the triggering property unless circumstances, which are discussed and approved by the planning commission, prove the proposed off-site location to be advantageous over properties within the radius. 
b.  The applicant must demonstrate the accessibility of both properties to public transportation, infrastructure, and community assets and features. This information shall be provided in narrative and map form. 
c.  The applicant must provide data regarding the percentage of affordable units already existing in a quarter-mile radius of the off-site property. 
d.  The applicant shall provide a narrative and mapping describing the general character of the surrounding area for both the off-site location and the triggering property. 
e.  The off-site units shall be comparable or larger in size and bedroom count of the average units being associated within the triggering project unless the applicant can prove and identify that a different type of housing unit better fits the neighborhood of the off-site location. 
(c)  Accessory dwelling units. Housing units qualifying as "accessory dwelling units" as defined in section 21-22 shall not be counted as "housing units" either in determining the number of inclusionary units required under section 21-601(a) or in determining the number of proposed housing units which satisfy that requirement. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 15-09, § 1, 7-18-2015; Ord. No. 18-23, § 1, 10-29-2018) 
Sec. 21-602. - Assurance of affordability. 
(a)  Basic requirement. All inclusionary units required under this section shall be "low and moderate income housing" as defined in section 21-22. The required minimum term of affordability shall be not less than 99 years, and shall be renewable for the same term upon resale of the unit prior to expiration of the term. 
(b)  Eligible occupants. Ownership units shall be occupied by their purchasers as their primary residence and not rented for seasonal occupancy nor rented for any other occupancy except during temporary absences totaling not more than eight weeks in any 12-month period. Rental units may be sub-leased only to a household meeting the applicable income restrictions on affordability. 
(c)  Qualification and monitoring. The developer or owner shall contract with a monitoring agency approved by the RI Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation for the following purposes: 
(1)  To determine pricing for initial sale, resale, lease, transfer or sublease of the inclusionary dwelling units. 
(2)  To qualify purchasers or renters for initial occupancy based on household size and income. 
(3)  To assist in the development of a marketing and resident selection plan that meets state and federal fair housing requirements, to be approved by the planning commission. 
(4)  Rhode Island Housing and the Town of North Kingstown shall be a party to any such monitoring agreement. 
(d)  Long-term affordability. Long-term affordability shall be assured through a land lease and/or deed restriction recorded in the town land evidence records before the sale or lease of the inclusionary unit. The lease or deed restriction shall include information regarding: 
(1)  The basis for calculation of the maximum allowable sales or rental price for the housing unit both initially and for future buyers or renters. 
(2)  Restrictions concerning who may occupy the unit, and for what period. 
(3)  A marketing plan that meets local preferences and state and federal fair housing requirements. 
(4)  Provisions for monitoring and assurance of compliance over time. 
(5)  Provisions under which the town, a non-profit organization designated by the town, or Rhode Island Housing may exercise a right of first refusal to purchase an inclusionary unit being offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 18-23, § 1, 10-29-2018) 
Sec. 21-603. - Cost-mitigating provisions. 
    The following cost mitigation measures are provided as a subsidy to contribute to offsetting the net cost impact of providing housing units at affordable prices. 
(1)  Density bonus. The number of housing units allowable on the site or sites involved shall be increased above that otherwise allowable by a number equal to the number of inclusionary units required by section 21-601. The net increase in housing units shall not exceed 50 percent of the original property yield before any density bonuses were applied. At all times, the percentage of affordable units shall be no less than ten percent. 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  For land within the groundwater recharge and wellhead protection overlay districts or the Narrow River SAM Plan, such density bonus may be exercised only upon determination by the planning commission that documentation from the applicant, including deeded performance standards satisfactory to the CRMC and the planning commission, assure that the intentions of those districts and that plan will be met. 
c.  Guidance materials for determining the densities and numbers of units allowable per those rules are to be prepared and regularly updated by the town planning department in consultation with the department of water supply, the CRMC, and the planning commission, and shall be made easily available to applicants. 
d.  Density bonuses shall not be allowed on or off site for any off-site applications of inclusionary housing. 
(2)  Limitations adjusted. The planning commission shall have the authority to adjust the applicable dimensional regulations of article IV as it finds necessary to accommodate the allowed bonus and consistent with good planning practice. The adjusted dimensional regulations applicable to the development shall be shown on the final plat for the development. 
(3)  Exemption from impact fee requirements. Housing units restricted in sale price or rent per these requirements shall be exempted from the impact fee requirements of article XXI, development impact fees. 
(4)  Expedited permitting. All involved departments, boards and staff shall develop and implement procedures which will expedite the application and review procedures for residential developments subject to inclusionary requirements to the extent consistent with assuring well-considered outcomes, by measures such as giving scheduling priority to applications involving inclusionary units, arranging for staff assistance to applicants, or concurrent rather than sequential agency reviews. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 18-23, § 1, 10-29-2018) 
Sec. 21-604. - Integrating inclusionary units. 
(a)  Inclusionary unit location and appearance. Inclusionary units shall be integrated within the development to the degree feasible, and not separately segregated. The exterior appearance of the inclusionary units shall be compatible with and, except for unit size, essentially indistinguishable from the others. 
(b)  Unit size. The average number of bedrooms in the inclusionary units shall be no lower than 2.0 and shall be no lower than 1.0 less than the market unit average unless special circumstances of occupancy intended by a sponsoring public or nonprofit agency dictate otherwise and are approved by the planning commission. The average gross floor area of the inclusionary units shall be no smaller than 50 percent that of the market rate unit average. 
(c)  Timing of occupancy. The affordable units in any specific approved phase of a development shall be built and occupiable in relation to the construction and occupancy of any market rate units in that specific phase. The percentage of all the proposed market rate units which have been granted a certificate of use and occupancy shall at no time exceed the percentage of all of the proposed inclusionary units granted certificates of use and occupancy by more than 25 percent. For example, certificates of use and occupancy may not be granted for more than 50 percent of the proposed market rate units until the percentage of proposed inclusionary units granted such certificates exceeds 25 percent of the total of those units proposed. The certificate of use and occupancy for the last market-rate unit shall not be granted until all inclusionary units have such certificates. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 18-23, § 1, 10-29-2018) 
Sec. 21-605. - Marketing and resident selection. 
(a)  Plan required. The applicant shall submit an inclusionary unit marketing and resident selection plan for approval by the planning commission prior to its initiation. That plan shall meet state and federal fair housing requirements and shall describe how the inclusionary units will be marketed and potential homebuyers or tenants selected, including a description of the lottery or other process to be used for their selection. 
(b)  Local preference. Priority shall be given in resident selection to local preference households for up to half of the inclusionary units (rounded down to the nearest unit), or such lower share as may be required by other applicable authorities. "Local preference" households are to include those containing current residents of the town and persons currently employed within the town or hired to do so but not yet working within the town. It may include others, such as persons having children, parents, or siblings who are resident in the town, if shown to be consistent with state and federal fair housing requirements and approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 08-09, § 1, 6-9-2008) 
Secs. 21-606-21-619. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR) 

Sec. 21-620. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are as follows: 
(1)  To provide developers and property owners the ability to establish, certify, purchase, sell and land development rights; 
(2)  To preserve sensitive resource areas such as groundwater reserves, wildlife habitat, agricultural lands, and public access to surface waters; 
(3)  To direct development away from sensitive resource areas to places better suited to increased levels of development such as established or proposed mixed use, commercial or residential centers; and 
(4)  To direct development to areas served by existing infrastructure such as established roadways, public water supply system, centralized sewer collection system, public transit and other utilities. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 3, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 11-02, § 2, 1-10-2011) 
Sec. 21-621. - Authority. 
    A person or party proposing only to determine the development rights and vest those rights in a certificate of development rights shall apply for TDR sending area land development project approval with the planning commission in accordance with section 21-623. 
(1)  A person or party purchasing development rights already vested in a certificate of development rights without landing said rights in a receiving area shall record the purchase with the director of planning and receive an updated certificate of development rights reflecting the change in ownership. Parties may purchase all or a portion of the development rights vested in a certificate of development rights. 
(2)  At the time of an application qualifying as a major land development project or a major subdivision, an applicant proposing to land development rights shall appear before the planning commission. 
(3)  Any sale, conveyance or transfer of development rights shall apply to whole development rights and not fractions thereof. Fractions of development rights remaining after the landing of development rights has occurred shall be extinguished. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 3, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 21-622. - Applicability. 
(1)  Areas that qualify as sending areas are delineated by the sending area overlay district pursuant to section 21-190 of the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Districts that qualify as potential receiving districts for development rights include: 
(a)  Post Road district. 
(b)  Compact Village Development District as provided for in section 21-95. 
(c)  Wickford Junction District. 
(3)  Where a lot is partially contained within either the sending area overlay district or the receiving area district, only the portion of the lot contained in such area may be used for the purposes of establishing or landing development rights respectively. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 3, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 11-02, § 3, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 12-03, § 6, 2-27-2012; Ord. No. 13-19, § 6, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 21-623. - Determining and certifying development rights. 
(1)  General. Development rights may be approved by the planning commission as part of a TDR sending area land development project. Master plan approval is required to officially determine the number of development rights associated with a parcel(s) of land and authorize certification from the director of planning. 
(2)  Identifying the TDR-parcel. TDR-parcel(s) shall be included in the sending area overlay district pursuant to section 21-190. An applicant may choose to establish development rights for a portion of any tract of land in the sending area overlay district in accordance with the limitations established in the subdivisions and land development regulations. 
(3)  Establishing yield. The development rights that may be created on a given parcel of land are determined by either the maximum number of detached single family dwelling units in residential districts or the gross floor area of office space in non-residential districts that could reasonably be expected to be developed on the site as determined by the planning commission. The applicant shall have the burden of proof with regard to the reasonableness and feasibility of the design and engineering specifications for the development plan; provided, however, that the planning commission's determination of the number of development rights, which is based on the review of submitted plans and materials, shall be conclusive. The site yield shall not include the use of any density bonuses or development increases that may be offered elsewhere in the zoning ordinance including, but not limited to, inclusionary zoning or conservation developments. Site plans developed as part of a comprehensive permit application shall not be considered viable yield plans for the purposes of a TDR sending area land development application. 
(4)  Submittal requirements. Applicants for a TDR sending area land development project shall be required to submit plans to the planning commission in accordance with the TDR sending area pre-application checklist and TDR sending area master plan checklist in the subdivisions and land development regulations. 
(5)  Wetland limitations. Neither the pre-application nor the master plan require field-verified wetlands but, in the absence of field verified wetlands, the applicant shall use digital wetland data layers available from the town to depict the location and extent of on-site wetlands. Where an applicant believes (s)he can provide more accurate data relative to the location and extent of wetland areas, said data shall be developed through field reconnaissance by a qualified wetland biologist and verified through a site visit by the planning commission or its designee. 
(6)  On-site wastewater treatment systems (OWTS). For sites that would be served by OWTS, density shall be further determined by evaluating the amount of development that could be supported by these systems. No development shall be shown that would require a variance from the state department of environmental management. The planning commission shall determine the suitability of the parcel for wastewater disposal based on the soils information provided by the applicant, upon observations made during any site visit to the property, and/or other evidence available to the commission at any time during the review process. 
(7)  Transferable and retained development rights. Within the initial application for a sending area land development project, applicants may petition for all development rights associated with a TDR-parcel(s) to be transferable or, instead, may petition to retain a portion of their development rights as buildable on that site. 
(8)  Area for future landing of retained development rights. Where an applicant proposes to retain development rights, the application for a TDR sending area land development project shall include the delineation of a conceptual building envelope showing the general location where the retained development rights may be constructed. 
(a)  The applicant shall bear the burden of proof as to whether the retained development rights can be developed within the designated area. The planning commission shall have the discretion to request further information as is reasonable and necessary to demonstrate the feasibility of future development of retained rights. Information requested by the planning commission shall not exceed those requirements set forth in the sending area land development plan, master plan review checklist. 
(b)  Approval by the planning commission of an area for future development of retained development rights by the planning commission in no way guarantees approval of future plan submittals for this site. Additional information and unforeseen circumstances related to the site may further limit the amount of development that can actually occur. 
(9)  Criteria for retained development rights for non-agricultural restrictions. In the case of proposed non-agricultural lands, the preserved area shall be contiguous and shall be connected with open space on the subject parcel and adjacent parcels to the greatest extent practicable. 
(10)  Criteria for retained development rights for agricultural restrictions. In the case of proposed agricultural lands, the RAV score for the entire site shall not exceed the weighted average RAV score for the proposed retained tract by more than ten percent based on a review of existing soils maps. 
(11)  Certificates of development rights. Upon the approval of a master plan, the planning commission shall authorize the issuance of a certificate of development rights from the director of planning barring any appeals during the appropriate appeal period. The director of planning shall not issue any certificates of development rights until the applicant demonstrates that the appropriate deed restrictions have been placed on the subject property. Where an applicant has received approval for both transferable and retained development rights, the planning director shall issue a certificate for each separate set of development rights. Issuance and maintenance of the certificate(s) shall follow the rules and procedures in the subdivisions and land development regulations. 
(12)  Vesting of development rights. The original number of development rights vested in a certificate of development rights shall be based on the plans approved by the planning commission as described in this section of the zoning ordinance. Changes to the zoning ordinance or any other federal, state or local regulation that occur after the vesting of those rights shall not increase or decrease the number of rights originally approved by the planning commission, unless state or federal law specifically preempts the town's authority in this matter. Development rights shall be considered viable as long as the easement that was established as part of their approval remains intact. However, development rights are the property of the bearer of the certificate and the town bears no responsibility as to the market value of these rights, the feasibility of landing those rights in a receiving area, or the feasibility of developing any retained development rights. 
(13)  In the case of properties in the sending area, as defined in section 21-190, that are located in the Town of Exeter per the memorandum of agreement between the Town of North Kingstown and the Town of Exeter for the "retained ten acre parcel" adopted on December 6, 2010 and December 13, 2010 by the Towns of Exeter and North Kingstown respectively, said property shall receive master plan approval or the equivalent level of approval from the adjacent municipality. A master plan or the equivalent level of approval shall be certified in writing to the town planning commission determining the established yield of buildable lots or commercial square footage in a commercial zone per the zoning designation. The town planning commission will review said approval letter and apply the criteria in this ordinance, specifically article XXIII to determine and certify development rights, to determine the criteria for retaining and landing development rights, and preserving the sending area parcels. A certificate of development rights will be issued by the administrative officer after review by the planning commission and all other rights and requirements of this ordinance and of the subdivisions and land development regulations shall be applicable to said certificates. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 3, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 10-06, § 8, 4-26-2010; Ord. No. 11-02, § 4, 1-10-2011) 
Sec. 21-624. - Criteria for retaining and landing development rights. 
(1)  Future building of retained development rights in the sending area. Once an applicant has received a certificate of retained development rights for a parcel, the rights may only be developed on that parcel, and before construction may commence, the applicant shall submit a new application to the planning commission. The planning commission may combine the master plan and preliminary plan phases of the application process where an applicant proposes to develop fewer than ten (10) development rights. In addition to all applicable zoning ordinance standards and standards within the subdivisions and land development regulations, the planning commission or director of planning and development shall use the following criteria for approving the building of retained development rights: 
(a)  The preserved area that was identified as part of the TDR sending area land development application is not encroached upon by the proposed development. 
(b)  The location of new structures and impervious surfaces shall preserve on site resources to the maximum extent practicable. These resources may include wetland areas, buffers, habitat, mature forest, soils suitable for agricultural use, historic resources, and scenic vistas. 
(c)  Final plan approval shall not be granted until all deed restrictions are in place for designated preservation areas. 
(2)  Approved subdivision or land development plans. Any party that has received master, preliminary or final plan approval for a parcel in the sending area overlay district and has not commenced construction may apply to the director of planning and development for a certificate of development rights to convert the approved property yield into transferable and/or retained development rights under the following conditions. 
(a)  The approved development plan shall only include single family detached homes in a residential district or office space in a commercial district. 
(b)  Where the applicant proposes to retain a portion of the development rights, he or she shall provide a development plan showing the delineation of a conceptual building envelope including the general location of where the retained development rights will be constructed. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof as to whether the retained development rights can be developed within the designated area. The director of planning and development shall have the discretion to request further information as is reasonable and necessary to demonstrate the feasibility of future development of retained rights. Information requested by the director of planning and development shall not exceed those requirements set forth in the sending area land development plan, master plan review checklist. 
(c)  Approval of an area for future development of retained development rights by the director of planning and development in no way guarantees approval of future plan submittals for this site. Additional information and unforeseen circumstances related to the site may further limit the amount of development that can actually occur. 
(d)  Preserved non-agricultural lands shall be contiguous and shall be connected with open space on the subject parcel and adjacent parcels to the greatest extent practicable. 
(e)  In the case of proposed agricultural lands, the RAV score for the entire site shall not exceed the weighted average RAV score for the proposed retained tract by more than ten percent based on a review of existing soils maps. 
(f)  Development of any retained development rights shall follow the procedures outlined in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Criteria for amending the restrictions associated with retained development rights. The planning commission may allow for amendments to the originally approved plans associated with retained development rights including, but not limited to, the proposed location for future development of those retained development rights only if the proposed amendment: 
(a)  Is in the interest of the residents of the town; 
(b)  Will not result in any degradation to significant viewsheds; 
(c)  Will not result in the degradation of sensitive wildlife habitat; 
(d)  Will not result in the degradation of areas in the groundwater recharge and wellhead protection overlay district; 
(e)  Will not result in the loss of prime agricultural lands that have historically been used for agricultural activities; 
(f)  Will not fragment existing tracts of forested lands; and 
(g)  Is consistent with applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
(4)  Receiving area bonuses. Once the number of development rights has been approved by the planning commission and certified by the director of planning and development, the development rights may be transferred to a receiving area. The planning commission shall determine the relationship between the number of certified development rights and the receiving area yield according to the transfer of development rights schedule provided in the subdivisions and land development regulations. Applicants may propose to use density bonuses exclusively for additional residential or commercial development or for a combination of the two uses. The maximum density bonuses allowable for receiving areas are listed in the provisions for each receiving area zoning district as applicable (e.g., Post Road district, etc.). 
(5)  Units in the receiving area that require TDR. The number of units that require a development right transfer shall not include the number of units that may already be allowed by-right, that may already exist on site in a manner that conforms with current building regulations, or any units that may be required to be affordable as defined in section 21-22 and specified in section 21-94.C.(1)(c). 
Sample calculation for one acre of land: 
Allowable number of units in PR district (receiving area) with TDR = 30 units 
Requirements for affordability in PR district utilizing TDRs = 4.5 (rounded to 5) units (15%) 
By-right allowance in PR district = 4 units 
Number of pre-existing units on site = 2 units 
Number of units requiring TDR: 30 - 5 - 4 - 2 = 19 units 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 9, 4-26-2010; Ord. No. 11-02, § 5, 1-10-2011) 
Sec. 21-625. - Preserving sending area parcels. 
(1)  Existing agricultural lands. Lands identified for preservation in the sending area that are in agricultural production or are otherwise identified for agricultural activities by the applicant when development rights are purchased may be preserved as conservation lands or for agricultural activities; 
(2)  Existing natural lands. Lands identified for preservation in the sending area that are not in agricultural production or otherwise identified for agricultural activities by the applicant when development rights are purchased shall be preserved as conservation areas; 
(3)  Restrictions on sending area parcels. Restrictions on sending area parcels shall be recorded as deed restrictions upon approval of a TDR sending area land development application. Conservation or agricultural lands preserved through TDR shall either: 
(a)  Remain in private (non-common) ownership if the use is limited to those approved by the planning commission through a binding deed restriction that runs with the land. With agreement of the property owner through the land development or subdivision process, the planning commission may limit the amount of space that remains in private ownership to ensure the protection of natural resources or the maintenance of an established greenway; 
(b)  Be conveyed to and accepted by the town for park, open space, agricultural or other permitted use or uses; 
(c)  Be conveyed to a nonprofit organization the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space or resource protection; or 
(d)  Be conveyed to a corporation or trust whose principal purpose is the stewardship of said land for uses approved by the planning commission. 
(4)  Deed restrictions for non-agricultural lands. All non-agricultural land preserved through the TDR permit process shall be protected in perpetuity against further development and unauthorized alteration by appropriate deed restrictions, and by the grant of a conservation or preservation restriction to the town, pursuant to RIGL 34-39, as amended. In addition, the perpetual maintenance of open space and any authorized uses shall be guaranteed by appropriate deed restrictions and by grant of a conservation or preservation restriction to the town, pursuant to RIGL 34-39, as amended. Every deed restriction shall require approval by the director of planning before any development rights are sold, landed or otherwise extinguished. Every deed restriction shall contain the following provision: 
"If the owners, or their successors or assigns fail to maintain conservation lands in accordance with those restrictions placed upon the property, the town may perform any necessary maintenance and enforce the payment for such costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, by an action at law or in equity against the owners or their successors or assigns." 
(5)  Deed restrictions for agricultural lands. All land designated for conservation as agricultural land shall be protected in perpetuity against non-agricultural development and shall allow agricultural use in accordance with this ordinance by appropriate deed restrictions. Said restrictions shall be imposed via conservation restrictions for farming and agricultural uses (pursuant to RIGL Title 34, Chapter 39 as amended) to the state agricultural land preservation commission with the division of agriculture chief acting as advisor (pursuant to the Farmland Preservation Act, RIGL Title 42, Chapter 82 as amended) which shall serve as the principal steward and enforcer for any period of time; and to the town which shall serve as the secondary steward and enforcer. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the agricultural land preservation commission does not agree or fails to serve as principal steward and enforcer, the planning commission may allow, for such period of time, other non-profit entities to hold various stewardship and enforcement rights to supplement those rights held by the town. Said entities shall have missions dedicated to agricultural preservation and a commitment to continuing allowable agriculture use. Any rules or enforcement enacted by said entity shall be consistent with any applicable rules of the department of environmental management, division of agriculture. No restrictions shall be placed upon the property that would preclude agricultural lands that have been left fallow to be cleared, re-cultivated and returned to an active agricultural operation subject to applicable state laws. 
(6)  Allowable uses on conservation lands. Consistent with any applicable local, state or federal regulations, the planning commission shall regulate allowable uses for conservation lands in accordance with the land use table (article III) for the open space and public lands districts, unless specific deed restrictions preclude the allowance of any of those uses. Where a use is allowed by special use permit, the planning commission may approve such use through the TDR sending area land development process. 
(7)  Allowable uses on agricultural lands. Consistent with any applicable local, state or federal regulations, the planning commission shall regulate allowable uses for agricultural lands in accordance with the land use table (article III) for the appropriate underlying district on lands preserved for agricultural use. Where a use is allowed by special use permit, the planning commission may approve such use through the TDR sending area land development process. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 3, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 10-06, § 10, 4-26-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-06, § 10, adopted April 26, 2010, amended the Code by renumbering and amending former § 21-624 as a new § 21-625. 
Sec. 21-626. - Procedures for landing development rights in a receiving area. 
(1)  General. All applications for landing development rights in a receiving area shall come before the planning commission as a major land development or major subdivision as applicable. At the master plan stage of review, applicants must demonstrate to the planning commission that the bearer of the certificate of development rights is in agreement with the terms of the proposed application and understands the number of development rights that will be extinguished after the landing process is complete. Documentation of this assurance shall be provided in a letter signed by the bearer of the certificate of development rights or his/her representative at the time of the application to land the development rights. In the event that the applicant does not own a certificate of development rights, a letter of understanding between the applicant and a bearer of a certificate of development rights or a property owner eligible to send development rights from their property, shall be presented to the planning commission at the master plan stage of review. 
(2)  Materials. In addition to the materials customarily required as part of an application for a major land development or major subdivision, an applicant proposing to land development rights shall submit the appropriate number of copies of his/her certificate of development rights to the planning commission. The validity of these development rights shall be verified by the director of planning or his/her designee during the preliminary or final plan review, as determined by the planning commission. 
(3)  Final approval. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for development that utilizes the landing of development rights until all necessary deed restrictions are recorded in the land evidence records and said development rights are formally extinguished by the director of planning through the issuance of a revised certificate of development rights. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 3, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 10-06, § 11, 4-26-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-06, § 11, adopted April 26, 2010, amended the Code by renumbering and amending former § 21-625 as a new § 21-626. 
Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) Map

APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A contains the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations as adopted by the planning commission on May 16, 2006. Amendments to these regulations are indicated by a history note enclosed in parentheses following the section amended. The absence of such a history note indicates that the section derives unamended from the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations of May 16, 2006. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbering text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity have been made in brackets. 
Charter reference- Planning commission, § 802. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town saved from repeal, § 1-9(8); any ordinance establishing the official plat of the town saved from repeal, § 1-9(9); buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; mobile and manufactured home parks, ch. 10; subdivisions, ch. 18; zoning development plan, § 21-268 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1.0. - AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 1.1. - Authority. 
    In accordance with the authority vested in the North Kingstown Planning Commission by G.L. 1956, § 45-23-1 et seq., as amended, and by article VIII, section 805 of the Charter of the Town of North Kingstown, the planning commission hereby declares its intention to exercise the power granted to it and hereby adopts the following regulations. They are declared effective as of December 28, 1995, and supersede all previous subdivision regulations. 
Sec. 1.2. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of these regulations to establish the procedural and substantive provisions for the subdivision and development of land in order to ensure the orderly growth of the Town of North Kingstown and to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(2)  Provide for the orderly, thorough and expeditious review and approval of land developments and subdivisions; 
(3)  Promote high quality and appropriate design and construction of land developments and subdivisions; 
(4)  Protect the existing natural and built environment and to mitigate all significant negative impacts of any proposed development on the existing environment; 
(5)  Promote design of land developments and subdivisions which are well-integrated with the surrounding neighborhoods with regard to natural and built features, and which concentrate development in areas which can best support intensive use by reason of natural characteristics and existing infrastructure; 
(6)  Provide thorough technical review of all proposed land developments and subdivisions; 
(7)  Provide local design and improvement standards to reflect the intent of the comprehensive plan with regard to the physical character of the various neighborhoods and districts of the Town of North Kingstown; 
(8)  Encourage, fairly apply and administer dedications of public land, impact mitigation and payment in lieu thereof based on clear documentation and of needs; 
(9)  Establish consistent application of procedures for local recordkeeping on all matters of land development and subdivision review, approval, and construction. 
(10)  Enhance the nature of the natural environment through the development process wherever possible; 
(11)  Encourage development consistent with the policies, goals and objectives of the town's comprehensive plan, particularly with regard to the protection of interconnected networks of open space and greenway systems; 
(12)  Encourage the ecological enhancement and restoration of existing site conditions on land proposed for development. 
    It is also the purpose of these regulations to provide for the harmonious development of the town; to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience and prosperity; to make adequate provisions for traffic; to lessen traffic accidents; to promote safety from fire and natural hazards; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to prevent the development of unsanitary conditions; to secure a well-articulated street and highway system; to coordinate streets within subdivisions with other planned streets; to provide for the width of streets, limitations of street grades and street intersection angles; to provide for the relation of streets to topography; to prevent duplication of street names; to promote coordinated development of unbuilt areas; to secure an appropriate allotment of land area in new developments for all the requirements of community life; to conserve natural beauty and other natural resources; to furnish guidance for the wise and efficient expenditure of funds for public works; to facilitate the adequate, efficient and economic provision of transportation, water supply, sewerage, recreation and other public utilities and requisites and to ensure conformance with the purposes of conservation development in conserving open land, protecting site features and providing flexibility in the siting of structures, services and infrastructure. 
Sec. 1.3. - Consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    In the instance of uncertainty in the construction or application of any section of these regulations, these regulations shall be construed in a manner that will further the implementation of, and not be contrary to, the goals, policies and applicable elements of the comprehensive plan of the town, as may be amended from time to time. These regulations shall be construed in a manner consistent with the Rhode Island Land Development and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992, as amended. 
Sec. 1.4. - Relationship to zoning ordinance. 
    The requirements of the zoning ordinance of the Town of North Kingstown, as amended from time to time, shall be considered to be the applicable standards for all subdivisions and developments governed by these subdivision and land development regulations. 
Sec. 1.5. - Relationship to other federal, state and local land use regulations. 
    These regulations are intended to be consistent with and not supersede any federal, state or other local land use regulations. 
Sec. 1.6. - Applicability. 
(a)  These subdivision and development regulations shall be applicable in all of the following instances: 
(1)  In all cases of subdivision of land, including resubdivision, as defined in article 2.0 of these subdivision and land development regulations, all provisions of these regulations shall apply. 
(2)  In all cases of land development projects as provided for in G.L. 1956, § 45-24-47 of the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991. 
(3)  In all cases of development plan review as provided for in G.L. 1956, § 45-24-49 of the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991. 
(b)  Plats required: 
(1)  All activity defined as subdivision shall require a new plat, drawn to the specifications of these subdivision and land development regulations, and shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission or its agents as provided herein; and 
(2)  Prior to recording, the approved plat shall be submitted for signature and recording as specified in article 6.0 of these subdivision and land development regulations. 
Sec. 1.7. - Legislative findings. 
(a)  The Rhode Island General Assembly recognizes and affirms that the findings and goals stated in the Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation Act and the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991, respectively, present findings and goals with which these subdivision and land development regulations shall be consistent. 
(b)  The Rhode Island General Assembly further finds that: 
(1)  The subdivision enabling statutes contained in G.L. 1956, §§ 45-23-1-45-23-24 repealed December 31, 1995, have been enacted in a series of separate actions over many years and do not provide for all the elements presently necessary for proper municipal review and approval of land development and subdivision projects; 
(2)  The character of land development and subdivision, and the related public and private services, have changed substantially in recent years; 
(3)  The responsibilities of the local government in regulating land development and subdivision have changed, increased in complexity, and expanded to include additional areas of concern; 
(4)  State and federal laws increasingly require the interaction of local land development regulatory authorities with those of the federal and state agencies and adjacent municipalities; 
(5)  Not all instances of land development or subdivision are sufficiently reviewed prior to recording or construction, resulting in unwarranted environmental impacts, financial impact on private individuals and communities, and inappropriate design; 
(6)  At present, the cities and towns throughout the state each establish their own procedures for review, approval, recording, and enforcement of land development and subdivision projects; 
(7)  It is necessary to provide for review and approval of land development projects within the subdivision review and approval procedures as specified in the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991; 
(8)  It is necessary to require that the regulations and standards for all land development projects and subdivisions be sufficiently definite to provide clear direction for development design and construction and to satisfy the requirements for due process for all applicants for development approval. 
(c)  It is the intent of the general assembly: 
(1)  That the land development and subdivision enabling authority contained herein provide all cities and towns with the ability to adequately address the present and future needs of the communities; 
(2)  That the land development and subdivision enabling authority contained herein requires each city and town to develop land development and subdivision regulations in accordance with the community comprehensive plan, capital improvement plan, and zoning ordinance and to ensure the consistency of all local development regulations; 
(3)  That certain local procedures for review and approval of land development and subdivision shall be the same in every city and town; 
(4)  That the local procedure for integrating the approvals of state regulatory agencies into the local review and approval process for land development and subdivision shall be the same in every city and town; and 
(5)  That all proposed land developments and subdivisions will be reviewed by local officials, following a standard process, prior to recording in local land evidence records. 
Sec. 1.8. - Vested rights-continuation of prior regulations. 
    Subdivisions and land development projects which have been submitted to the planning commission for approval, and have been certified as complete under the provisions of the regulations in effect prior to May 16, 2006 may be continued to be reviewed by the planning commission and approved under those regulations in accordance with the following: 
1.  Final approvals. Any subdivision which, at the time of adoption of these amendments, has received final approval, or final approval with conditions, from the planning commission, may initiate or construct any part of the development, or record said plans in accordance with the subdivision regulations in effect at the time final approval was granted. The planning commission, may, in its discretion, grant extensions to any such final approval in accordance with the procedure for such extensions as set forth in the regulations in effect at the time of final approval. 
2.  Preliminary approvals. Any subdivision or land development project which, at the time of adoption of these amendments, has received preliminary approval, or preliminary approval with conditions, from the planning commission, may continue to be reviewed by the planning commission in accordance with the subdivision regulations in effect at the time preliminary approval was granted provided that the final plat, including all the material required in the final plat checklist, is filed with, and has been certified as complete by the administrative officer within one year from the date of preliminary approval or within one year from the date of any such other time period granted as an extension by the planning commission; or 
3.  Master plan approvals. Any subdivision or land development project which, at the time of adoption of these amendments, has received master plan approval, or master plan approval with conditions, from the planning commission, may continue to be reviewed by the planning commission in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time master plan approval was granted provided that the preliminary plat, including all the material required in the Preliminary Plat Checklist, is filed with, and has been certified as complete by the Administrative Officer within one (1) year from the date of master plan approval or within one year from any such other time period granted as an extension by the planning commission. 
4.  Other status. Any subdivision which, at the time of adoption of these Regulations, has not received final, preliminary or master plan approval; or has been reviewed by the planning commission for preliminary or master plan review but no approval therefor has been granted; or has received preliminary or master plan approval more than one year prior to the date of adoption of these regulations; or for which any extension of approval has expired; or for which only pre-application conference(s) has (have) been conducted shall be required to be reviewed under the revisions to the land development and land development and subdivision regulations adopted on May 16, 2006 pursuant to the Rhode Island Land Development and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992. 
    The planning commission shall determine vested rights for subdivisions submitted for approval prior to January 11, 1982. Appeals from a decision regarding the application status and vested rights of any subdivision shall be made to the board of appeals as herein provided. 
ARTICLE 2.0. - DEFINITIONS 
    Administrative officer. The director of planning and development. 
    Administrative subdivision. Resubdivision of existing lots which yields no additional lots for development and involves no creation or extension of streets. Such resubdivision shall only involve divisions, mergers, mergers and division, or adjustments of boundaries of existing lots. 
    Agricultural land. Land suitable for agriculture by reason of suitability of soil or other natural characteristics or past use for agricultural purposes. Agricultural land includes that defined as prime farm land or additional farm land of statewide importance for the state by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
    Agricultural lands (TDR): Those lands preserved for agricultural use as part of a sending area land development project. The development rights associated with those lands shall be vested in certificates of development rights and are potentially transferable to receiving area zoning districts. 
    Applicant. Person who applies for subdivision or development plan approval either as an owner or authorized agent of the owner. 
    Arcade. A passage or walkway covered over by a succession of arches or vaults supported by columns. 
    Articulation. The degree or manner in which a building wall or roofline is made up of distinct parts or elements. A highly articulated wall will appear to be composed of a number of different vertical and horizontal planes, usually made distinct by their change in direction (projections and recesses) and/or changes in materials, colors or textures. 
    Awning. A roof cover of canvas or other material extending over building openings to provide protection from the sun and rain. 
    Board of appeals. The local review authority for appeals of actions of the administrative officer and the planning commission on matters of land development or subdivision shall be the local zoning board of review constituted as the board of appeals. 
    Bond. See "Improvement guarantee." 
    Buildable lot. A lot where construction for the use(s) permitted on the site under the zoning ordinance is considered practicable by the planning commission, considering the physical constraints to development of the site as well as the requirements of the pertinent federal, state and local regulations. 
    Building setback line. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a street line or a lot line and a principal or accessory building or structure; generally parallel with and measured from the street line or lot line at a minimum distance therefrom equal to the required yard depth. 
    Certificate of completeness. A notice issued by the administrative officer informing an applicant that the application is complete and meets the requirements of the town's regulations, and that the applicant may proceed with the approval process. 
    Certificate of development rights: Document issued and maintained by the director of planning that serves as the official record for quantification, ownership, sale or extinguishing of transferable development rights associated with land in the sending area overlay district. 
    Certificate of retained development rights: Document issued and maintained by the director of planning that serves as the official record for quantification, ownership, sale or extinguishing of non-transferable development rights associated with land in the sending area overlay district. 
    Colonnade. A series of regularly shaped columns supporting a roof structure. 
    Column. A vertical support, usually cylindrical, consisting of a base, shaft and capital, either monolithic or built up of drum sections. 
    Commission. The North Kingstown Planning Commission. 
    Concept plan. A drawing with accompanying information showing the basic elements of a proposed land development plan or subdivision as used for pre-application meetings and early discussions, and classification of the project within the approval process. 
    Connectivity. The degree to which buildings can relate or connect to each other through walkways and other pedestrian infrastructure. 
    Conservation development. A type of land development project which utilizes certain site planning techniques as set forth in the subdivision and land development regulations in order to conserve open land, protect site features and provide flexibility in the siting of structures, services and infrastructure. See article 13.0. 
    Conservation lands (TDR): Those lands preserved in a natural state and/or for those uses allowable by the planning commission as part of a sending area land development project. The development rights associated with those lands shall be vested in certificates of development rights and are potentially transferable to receiving area zoning districts. 
    Consistency with the comprehensive plan. A requirement of all local land use regulations which means that all such regulations and subsequent actions shall be in accordance with the public policies arrived at through detailed study and analysis and adopted by the municipality as the comprehensive community plan. 
    Conventional subdivision. A subdivision in which all lots meet the minimum requirements of the appropriate zoning district and all land being subdivided is dedicated to either development lots or street right of way, with no common open space. Not a conservation development. 
    Cornice. A continuous molded projection that crowns a wall or other construction or divides it horizontally for compositional purposes; usually consists of bed molding, soffit, fascia, and crown molding. 
    Courtyard. A space enclosed by a building or multiple buildings that is open to the sky and may be landscaped to create an aesthetically pleasing environment. 
    Cul-de-sac. See "street, cul-de-sac." 
    Dedication, fee-in-lieu-of. Payments of cash which are authorized when requirements for mandatory dedication of land are not met because of physical conditions of the site or other reasons. 
    Development regulation. Zoning, subdivision, land development plan, development plan review, historic district, official map, floodplain regulation, soil erosion control or any other governmental regulation of the use and development of land. 
    Development rights: In the context of transfer of development rights, the right to develop the maximum number of detached single family dwelling units or the maximum amount of office space that can reasonably be permitted on a designated sending area parcel under the applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
    Division of land. A subdivision. 
    Dormer. A window set upright in a sloping roof. The term is also used to refer to the roofed projection in which this window is set. 
    Endorsement. The signature of the planning commission chairperson or administrative officer on an approved plat or plan, permitting recording of the plat or plan. 
    Environmental constraints. Natural features, resources, or land characteristics that are sensitive to change and may require conservation measures or the application of special development techniques to prevent degradation of the site, or may require limited development, or in certain instances, may preclude development. See also "physical constraints to development." 
    Facade. The front of a building or any of its sides facing public spaces, frequently distinguished by distinctive architectural treatment. 
    Final plan. The final stage of land development and subdivision review. 
    Final plat. The final drawing(s) of all or a portion of a subdivision to be recorded after approval by the planning commission and any accompanying material in accordance with the provisions herein and/or required by the planning commission. 
    Frontage. The portion of a lot abutting a street as measured along the street line between lot lines. 
    Governing body. The North Kingstown Town Council. 
    Improvement. Any natural or built item which becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate. 
    Improvement guarantee. A security instrument accepted by the governing body upon the recommendation of the town engineer and the planning commission to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by the land development and subdivision regulations, or required by the town as a condition of approval, will be completed in compliance with the approved plans and specifications of a development. 
    Land development project. A project in which one or more lots, tracts or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex of uses, units or structures, including, but not limited to planned development, cluster and/or conservation development for residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open space, and/or mixed uses as may be permitted in the zoning ordinance. 
    Land suitable for development. The total land area, less land unsuitable for development. 
    Land unsuitable for development. Land having natural or man-made limitations which make it unsuitable for development. See section 21-22 of the zoning ordinance. 
    Landing development rights: The process by which a developer or property owner may apply development rights previously established in the sending area overlay district to parcel(s) in the receiving area for the purposes of increasing density as may be allowed in the zoning ordinance or Subdivisions and Land Development Rules and Regulations. This process involves an application to the planning commission for a major subdivision or land development project as applicable. 
    Local regulations. The land development and subdivision review regulations adopted under the provisions of the Rhode Island Land Development and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992, as amended. 
    Maintenance guarantee. Any security instrument which may be required and accepted by the town to ensure that necessary improvements will function as required for a specific period of time. See "improvement guarantee." 
    Major land development plan. Any land development plan not classified as a minor land development plan. All nonresidential land development projects shall be considered as major land development plans. 
    Major land development project. A land development project in which the total floor area for a commercial or industrial use is at least 100,000 square feet, mixed use development is at least 200,000 square feet or project proposing density bonuses through the transfer of development rights or inclusionary zoning. 
    Major subdivision. Any subdivision not classified as either an administrative subdivision or a minor subdivision. 
    Massing. The three dimensional bulk of a structure consisting of its height, width, and depth. 
    Master plan. An overall plan for a proposed project site outlining general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic parameters of a major development proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. Required in major land development or major subdivision review. 
    Minor land development plan. A development plan for a residential project as defined in local regulations, provided that such development does not require waivers or modifications as specified in these regulations. 
    Minor land development project. A land development project in which the total floor area for a commercial or industrial use is at least 50,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet or a mixed use development at least 100,000 square feet but less than 200,000 square feet. 
    Minor subdivision. A plan for a subdivision of land consisting of five or fewer lots, provided that such subdivision does not require waivers or modifications as specified in this chapter [appendix]. 
    Modification of requirements. See article 8.0, waivers and modifications. 
    Mullion. A structural element which serves to frame a multi-pane window unit. 
    Open space. Any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; and used for outdoor recreation, agriculture and/or conservation of natural resources and site features as provided in Section 21-217 of the Zoning Ordinance. Provided, however that the area may be improved with only those buildings, structures, utilities, streets, and off-street parking, and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land; and as may be permitted by these Regulations. 
    Parapet. A portion of a wall that projects above a roof and can effectively screen rooftop infrastructure from pedestrians at the street level; sometimes serves as a guard at the edge of a balcony or roof. 
    Parcel. A lot, or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under single control, and usually considered a unit for purposes of development. Also referred to as a tract. 
    Phased development. Development, usually for large-scale projects, where construction of public and/or private improvements proceeds by section(s) subsequent to approval of a master plan for the entire site. 
    Physical constraints to development. Characteristics of a site or area, either natural or manmade, which present significant difficulties to construction of the uses permitted on that site, or would require extraordinary construction methods. See also "environmental constraints." 
    Pilasters. A slightly-projecting column built into a wall or pier. Architecturally treated as a column, with a base, shaft and capital that is attached to a wall surface. 
    Planning board. The North Kingstown Planning Commission. 
    Plat. A drawing or drawings of a land development or subdivision plan showing the location, boundaries, and lot lines of individual properties, as well as other necessary information as specified in the local regulations. 
    Porch. A platform, usually having a separate roof, at an entrance to a building that is attached to the outside of the structure. 
    Portico. A porch that is leading to the entrance of a building, or extended as a colonnade, with a roof structure over a walkway, supported by columns or enclosed by walls. 
    Pre-application conference. An initial meeting between developers and the planning commission or the department of planning and development which affords developers the opportunity to present their proposals informally and to receive comments and directions from town officials and others. 
    Preliminary plan. The required stage of land development and subdivision review which shall require detailed engineered drawings and all required state and federal permits. 
    Public improvement. Any street or other roadway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, drainage feature, or other facility for which the town or other governmental entity either is presently responsible, or will ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation upon municipal acceptance. 
    Public informational meeting. A meeting of the planning commission or governing body preceded by a notice, open to the public and at which the public shall be heard. 
    Receiving area zoning district (receiving area): A zoning district identified by the town as eligible to receive development rights through a major land development project review. 
    Relative agricultural value (RAV): This value is used as part of the agricultural lands preservation commission (ALPC) scoring for applications to its program in accordance with Rule 9 of the "Rules and Regulations Governing the Procedures for the Operation of the Agricultural Lands Preservation Commission and the Purchase of Farmland Development Rights" as may be amended. During the scoring process, ALPC assigns a RAV number to each soil type on the property in accordance with the soil's capacity to produce the intended crops along with other criteria. RAV numbers provided by ALPC during the scoring process shall be the only RAV values acceptable to the town. 
    Residential development. Development consisting entirely of single-family or multiple-family dwelling units. A dwelling unit is a structure or portion thereof providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation and containing a separate means of ingress and egress. 
    Resubdivision. Any change of an approved or recorded subdivision plat or in a lot recorded in the town land evidence records, or that affects the lot lines of any areas reserved for public use, or that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of the local land development and subdivision regulations. For the purposes of this act [appendix], any such action shall constitute a subdivision. 
    Retained development rights: In the sending area overlay district, those development rights for a parcel(s) of land that may still be applied to said parcel(s) in the form of future residential or commercial development subject to planning commission approval. 
    Roofline. The top covering of a building which may consist of a variety of styles including, but not limited to: gable roof, hip roof, shed roof, and gambrel roof. 
    Scale. The general feeling of mass and size of a building as it relates to that of other buildings along a street or block front. 
    Sending area overlay district (sending area): A zoning overlay district that identifies areas eligible for establishing development rights that may eventually be transferred to a receiving area. 
    Sketch plan overlay sheet. A scaled drawing that illustrates conceptual layouts of house lots, buildings, streets and conservation areas. 
    Soil Survey of Rhode Island. The maps and accompanying text of the soil survey conducted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, for the state, including any amendments thereto. 
    Stepback. A condition in which the upper story or stories of a building are set back inward from the lower story. 
    Stormwater detention. A provision for storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
    Stormwater retention. A provision for storage of stormwater runoff. 
    Street. A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified by the functions they perform. See "street classification." 
    Street, access to. An adequate and permanent way of entering a lot. All lots of record shall have access to a public street for all vehicles normally associated with the uses permitted for that lot. 
    Street, alley. A public or private thoroughfare primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street. 
    Street classification. A method of roadway organization which identifies a street hierarchy according to function within a road system, that is, types of vehicles served and anticipated volumes, for the purposes of promoting safety, efficient land use and the design character of neighborhoods and districts. Local classifications shall use the following as major categories: 
(a)  Arterial. A major street that serves as an avenue for the circulation of traffic into, out of, or around the municipality and carries high volumes of traffic. 
(b)  Collector. A street whose principal function is to carry traffic between local streets and arterial streets but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties. 
(c)  Local. A street whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties. 
    Street, cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate vehicular turnaround, either temporary or permanent, at the closed end. 
    Street, limited access highway. A freeway or expressway providing for through traffic. Owners or occupants of abutting property on lands and other persons have no legal right to access, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the highway. 
    Street, private. A thoroughfare established as a separate tract for the benefit of multiple, adjacent properties and meeting specific, municipal improvement standards. This definition shall not apply to driveways. 
    Street, public. All public property reserved or dedicated for street traffic. 
    Street, stub. A portion of a street reserved to provide access to future development, which may provide for utility connections. 
    Subdivider. Any person who: 
(1)  Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or 
(2)  Directly or indirectly sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises to sell, lease, or develop, any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a subdivision; or 
(3)  Engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a subdivision. 
    Subdivision. The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels. Any adjustment to existing lot lines of a recorded lot by any means shall be considered a subdivision. All resubdivision activity shall be considered a subdivision. The division of property for purposes of financing constitutes a subdivision. 
    TDR-parcel: The portion of any tract of land in a sending area overlay district for which a certificate of development has been applied for or obtained or for which a certificate of retained development rights has been applied for or obtained. 
    TDR sending area land development project: The permitting process by which development rights are established for land in the sending area. A TDR sending area land development project shall be considered a major land development project. 
    Technical review committee. A committee appointed by the planning commission with the concurrence of the town council for the purpose of reviewing, commenting, and making recommendations to the commission with respect to approval of land development and subdivision applications. 
    Temporary improvement. Improvements built and maintained by a developer during construction of a development project and prior to release of the improvement guarantee, but not intended to be permanent. 
    Transferable development rights: Development rights for a parcel(s) of land in the sending area overlay district that have been recorded on a certificate of development rights and may only be developed once they are successfully landed in a receiving area. 
    Transparency. A street level design standard that defines a requirement for clear or lightly tinted glass in terms of a percentage of the facade area. 
    Vested rights. The right to initiate or continue the development of an approved project for a specified period of time, under the regulations that were in effect at the time of approval, even if, after the approval, the regulations change prior to the completion of the project. 
    Viewshed. The primary area which can be viewed from a defined observation point. To determine the extent of the viewshed, important vantage points and significant features should be identified. The area that can be seen from those points should be designated as the viewshed. 
    Waiver of requirements. See article 8.0, waivers and modifications. 
    Walkway. A path for walking that is generally not enclosed. It can be at ground level, or it can be elevated. 
    Yield plan. A plan of a conventional subdivision or land development project (as opposed to a conservation development) that depicts the maximum number of building lots or dwelling units that could reasonably be built on a parcel of land under current zoning, taking into account physical constraints to development, such as wetlands, steep slopes, etc. and not including land unsuitable for development towards the minimum lot area required in the appropriate zoning district. 
(Amd. of 7-15-2008; Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
ARTICLE 3.0. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 3.1. - General requirements. 
(a)  All subdivisions submitted to the town for approval shall be subject to the requirements contained herein unless otherwise specifically provided. In the instances where approval of any subdivision or land development by the planning commission is required, the commission, prior to granting approval, shall make positive findings on all of the applicable standards listed below, as part of the record. If a negative finding for any of these standards is made, the planning commission shall have grounds for denial of the project design. These standards are: 
(1)  Each subdivision shall be consistent with the requirements of the town comprehensive plan and/or shall satisfactorily address the issues where there may be inconsistencies. 
(2)  Each lot in the subdivision shall conform to the standards and provisions of the town zoning ordinance. Lots not being created for the purpose of present or future development need not meet the area and other dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance provided that: 
a.  A notation is shown on the recorded plat that the lot being created is not a buildable lot; and 
b.  A conservation or preservation restriction pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 34-39-1 et seq., as amended, is granted to the Town of North Kingstown prohibiting any such present or future development. 
(3)  There will be no significant negative environmental impacts from the proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all required conditions for approval. 
(4)  The subdivision, as proposed, will not result in the creation of individual lots with such physical constraints to development that building on those lots according to pertinent regulations and building standards would be impractical. Lots with such physical constraints to development may be created only if identified as permanent open space or permanently reserved for a public purpose on the approved, recorded plans. 
(5)  All proposed land developments and all subdivision lots shall have adequate and permanent physical access to a public street. Lot frontage on a public street without physical access shall not be considered in compliance with this requirement. 
(6)  Each subdivision shall provide for safe circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; for adequate surface water runoff; for suitable building sites; and for the preservation of natural, historical, or cultural features that contribute to the attractiveness of the community. 
(b)  Except for administrative subdivisions, findings of fact must be supported by legally competent evidence on the record which discloses the nature and character of the observations upon which the fact finders acted. 
ARTICLE 4.0. - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4.1. - Phasing of projects. 
(a)  When phasing of a project is required in accordance with the provisions of article 14, section 14.1.2.15, entitled "Rate of development," the following provisions are applicable: 
(1)  Approval of the entire site design first as a master plan. Thereafter, the development plans may be submitted for preliminary and/or final review and/or approval by phases. 
(2)  In such review and approval of phased development, the planning commission may, in its discretion, impose conditions for determining the physical limits of phases, completion schedules, and guarantees for allowing progression to additional phases, for allowing two or more phases to proceed in review or construction simultaneously, for interim public improvements or construction conditions, for changes to master or preliminary plans, and may include other provisions as necessitated by local conditions. 
(3)  The master plan documents shall contain information on the physical limits of the phases, the schedule and sequence of public improvement installation, improvement guarantees, and the work and completion schedules for approvals and construction of the phases. 
(b)  The master plan for a phased development shall remain vested as long as it can be proved, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, that work is proceeding on either the approval stages or on the construction of the development as shown in the approved master plan documents. Vesting shall extend to all information shown on the approved master plan documents. 
Sec. 4.2. - Pojac Point Road approvals. 
(a)  For any proposed road in the Pojac Point residential district, the applicant must submit the required materials to the department of planning and development at least 20 days prior to the commission meeting at which the proposal is to be considered. 
(b)  The commission may approve such application, with or without modifications or conditions, after a public hearing thereon due notice of which shall be given by the applicant at least ten days in advance of the hearing to the director of public safety, the town engineer, the secretary of the Pojac Point fire district and the owners of property within 200 feet of any lot for which the frontage required by section 21-37(b) of the zoning ordinance could be measured along said road if the application were approved. 
(c)  Notice of such public hearing shall include a complete copy of the application and be by certified mail, return receipt requested. Approval of an application shall be granted only when the commission is satisfied that said road conforms, or after improvement or construction will conform, to reasonable standards as established, from time to time, by the town engineer. 
(d)  A decision of the commission approving a private road under this article shall include a plan of that part of said road as is approved by said decision together with any conditions of such approval and shall be recorded in the office of the town clerk. 
Sec. 4.3. - Compliance-Pojac Point. 
    No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building on any lot in the Pojac Point fire district for which the frontage required by section 21-37(b) of the zoning ordinance is measured along a private road approved in accordance with these regulations until (a) the decision of the commission has been recorded in the office of the town clerk; (b) the town engineer has certified that the improvement and/or construction of said private road has been performed in accordance with said decision; and (c) all conditions of such approval, including the recording of required legal documents, have been fulfilled. 
ARTICLE 5.0. - REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PLATS AND PLANS 

Sec. 5.1. - General requirements. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consider each application for subdivision approval according to the procedures set forth in this section unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(b)  The administrative officer shall advise the applicant as to which approvals are required and the appropriate board or commission for hearing an application for land development or subdivision project. 
(c)  An applicant for subdivision approval who wishes the planning commission to take some official action on his or her application shall submit all of the materials required by the applicable checklist in article 18.0 of these regulations to the administrative officer. If the requested action is not applicable under article 18.0, the applicant shall submit a written request to the administrative officer describing the requested action. The matter will be placed on the next available agenda of the planning commission only if the administrative officer determines that all of the required material has been submitted and only after a certificate of completeness has been issued in accordance with these regulations. 
(d)  Any submission of materials to the administrative officer shall be accompanied by a cover letter or letter of transmittal indicating the date, the materials being submitted and the requested action. No materials shall be accepted by the administrative officer without said cover letter. Upon receipt of any materials, the administrative officer shall record the date of receipt upon them. 
(e)  If an application for subdivision approval is made by someone other than the owner of the land being subdivided, the application shall be signed by both the applicant and the landowner. 
(f)  To make application for subdivision and land development, the applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the following materials: 
(1)  A completed and signed application form; 
(2)  The application checklist indicating that all required information is shown on the plans, or indicating where said information is either not applicable or has been waived by the planning commission or the administrative officer; 
(3)  The required number of completed plans; 
(4)  Administrative and project review fees (if required). See article 11, section 11.4. 
(g)  The submission of significantly revised plans at the sole initiative of the applicant, such that the plans require review by the technical review committee, shall require a new application, completed checklist, the required number of plans, and the full application fee. 
(Amd. of 2-17-2009; Amd. of 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 5.2. - Certification of a complete application. 
(a)  An application shall be complete for purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action when so certified by the administrative officer. Certification of a complete application shall be made in writing by the administrative officer upon a form entitled "certificate of completeness." a copy of said certificate shall be provided to the applicant. In the event such certification of the application is not made within the time specified in these regulations for the type of plan being proposed, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of commencing the review period unless the application lacks information required for such applications as specified in article 18.0, and the administrative officer has notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application. 
(b)  The planning commission may subsequently require the applicant to correct any information found to be in error and/or submit additional information specified in the regulations but not required by the administrative officer prior to certification, as is necessary to make an informed decision. 
(c)  Where review is postponed with the consent of the applicant, pending further information or revision of information, the time period for review shall be stayed and shall resume when the administrative officer or planning commission determines that the required application information is complete. 
(d)  For the purposes of calculating mandatory review periods as provided in these regulations, all days shall be considered to be calendar days. 
(Amd. of 2-17-09; Amd. of 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 5.3. - Procedure for approval. 
    Applications for subdivision approval shall be considered in accordance with the following procedures. 
5.3.1. Staff conference. 
a.  The applicant shall meet with the staff of the department of planning and development to discuss the proposed project. At the staff conference, the applicant and the planning staff shall determine if a pre-application meeting with the planning commission is required by these regulations or is desired by either the applicant or the town. 
b.  The applicant shall then submit all the information required by the pre-application checklist in article 18.0. The administrative officer shall review and comment on the checklist information, and if determined to be complete, shall issue a certificate of completeness and schedule the applicant to appear before the planning commission. 
c.  If no pre-application conference is required or requested, the administrative officer will advise the applicant as to the requirements of these regulations and the procedure to be followed for subdivision approval. 
5.3.2. Pre-application conference and concept review. 
a.  Pre-application conferences are intended for the guidance of the applicant and shall not be considered approval of a project or of any of its elements. The pre-application conference shall aim to encourage information sharing and discussion of project concepts among the participants, including what form of land development may be appropriate to meet the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan with regard to preserving the character of the land, natural resources, and the provision of community services. 
b.  At the pre-application stage, the applicant shall submit a sketch plan as described in article 13, section 13.5, and the planning commission or the technical review committee shall provide an informal concept plan review for the proposed development. The purpose of the sketch plan is to provide the applicant with the opportunity to submit a diagrammatic plan for informal discussion with the commission regarding the design of the proposed development. It will also provide the applicant with planning commission input in the formative stages of subdivision and land development concept design. Applicants seeking a pre-application meeting or an informal concept review shall submit general, conceptual materials as required by the pre-application checklist in article 18.0. 
c.  The commission shall, as the result of this conference, provide a preliminary opinion as to the acceptability of the land for development and as to the proposed lot sizes, street layout, surface drainage, water supply, sanitary facilities, circulation pattern, and design. The applicant shall use the information obtained from this conference in preparing the plat for master plan or preliminary submission. The commission shall also determine whether a project review fee is required, due to the size, scale or complexity of a proposed project, the project's potential impacts, or because the town lacks the necessary expertise to perform the review work related to the permit or approval, as further provided in article 11, section 11.4.5. 
d.  One or more pre-application conferences shall be held before the planning commission for all major and minor land development projects or subdivision applications, and for all conservation developments. Pre-application conference may be held for administrative subdivisions upon the request of either the administrative officer or the applicant. 
e.  Pre-application meetings shall allow the applicant to meet with appropriate town officials, boards and/or commissions, planning staff, and state agencies for advice as to the required steps in the approval process, the pertinent local plans, ordinances, regulations, rules and procedures and standards which may bear upon the proposed development project. 
f.  At the pre-application meeting, the planning commission shall discuss the initial basic maximum number of lots/dwelling units permitted in the development, as provided in article 13, section 13.8. Upon review of the sketch plan(s) submitted by the applicant, the commission shall provide the applicant with its informal opinion regarding the number of lots/dwelling units that could reasonably be built upon the parcel under current zoning, taking into account the physical constraints to development. This number shall not be binding upon the commission or applicant. The final basic maximum number shall be determined in later stages of review, as provided in article 13, section 13.8. At this meeting, the applicant working with the commission, shall also make the determination to allow a development to be submitted for review as a conventional subdivision, as a residential compound, or as a conservation development. 
g.  Provided that at least one pre-application meeting has been held for major land development or subdivision application or 60 days has elapsed from the filing of the pre-application submission and no pre-application meeting has been scheduled to occur within those 60 days, nothing shall be deemed to preclude an applicant from thereafter filing and proceeding with an application for a land development or subdivision project in accordance with section 5.2 of this article. 
5.3.3. Administrative subdivision. 
a.  Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed administrative subdivision, as defined herein, shall submit to the administrative officer the items required by the checklist for administrative subdivisions in article 18.0. 
b.  The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 15 days from the date of submission according to the provision of section 5.2 of this article. 
c.  Within 15 days of certification of completeness, the administrative officer shall review the application and approve, deny or refer it to the planning commission with recommendations. The administrative officer may refer the application to the technical review committee for their [its] recommendation. The officer shall report the action to the planning commission at its next regular meeting, to be made part of the record. 
d.  If no action is taken by the administrative officer within the 15 days, the application shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular planning commission meeting. 
e.  If referred to the planning commission, the commission shall consider the application and the recommendations of the administrative officer and/or the technical review committee and shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within 65 days of certification of completeness. Failure of the planning commission to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the administrative subdivision plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning commission or committee to act within the required time, and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
f.  Denial of an application by the administrative officer and/or the technical review committee shall not be appealable and shall require the plan to be submitted as a minor subdivision application. 
g.  Any approval of an administrative subdivision shall be evidenced by a written decision, which shall be filed and posted in the office of the town clerk. 
h.  Approval of an administrative subdivision shall expire 90 days from the date of approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such approval is submitted for signature and recording as specified in article 6.0. 
5.3.4. Minor land development and minor subdivision. 
a.  Review stages. Minor plan review shall consist of three stages, (1) pre-application; (2) preliminary, including a site visit; and (3) final, provided, that if a street creation or extension is involved, a public hearing is required at the preliminary stage of review. The planning commission may combine the approval stages, providing requirements for both stages have been met by the applicant to the satisfaction of the planning commission. 
b.  Submission requirements. Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed minor subdivision or minor land development, as defined in this article, shall submit to the administrative officer the items required by the pre-application checklist as provided in article 18.0. Pre-application review shall follow the procedure specified in section 5.3.2. Following the pre-application meeting(s) the applicant shall submit the information required in the preliminary plat checklist for minor land developments and minor subdivisions. 
c.  Certification of preliminary plat. The application shall be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 25 days or within 15 days if no street creation or extension is required, according to the provisions of section 5.2 of this article. The running of the time period set forth in this article will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and will recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event will the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its resubmission. 
d.  Site visit. After preparing the existing resources and site analysis map, and before the preliminary plan is approved, the planning commission shall schedule a site visit of the property. In order to facilitate the inspection, the planning commission may request that proposed roads, site features and improvements are staked in the field to indicate their general location. The existing resources and site analysis map shall be distributed at the site visit to those town officials in attendance, if it has not been distributed earlier. It is strongly encouraged that the site visit be attended by members of the planning commission, town officials, the applicant and/or the applicant's representatives. Owners of property within the notice radius specified in section 5.3.5.t. shall also be notified and invited to attend. The site visit shall be considered a public meeting and shall be conducted in accordance with the town's normal procedures for compliance with the state open meetings law. Members of the public shall be permitted to attend the site visit. 
The purpose of the visit is to familiarize local officials with the property's existing conditions and special features, to identify potential site design issues, and to provide an informal opportunity to discuss site design concepts, including the general layout of designed open space lands, buildings and street alignments. Comments made by town officials or their staff and consultants shall be interpreted as being only suggestive. It shall be understood by all parties that no formal recommendation can be offered, and no official decisions can be made at the site visit. Minutes of the site visit shall be kept in accordance with G.L. tit. 42, ch. 46, entitled "Open Meetings." 
Lack of a quorum of the planning commission in attendance at this visit shall not constitute a failure on the part of the applicant to satisfy the requirements of a site visit. In the event that the planning commission does not schedule a site visit, or that a scheduled site visit is not conducted within the prescribed time period through no fault of the applicant, the applicant shall not be found to be deficient in the application process, and shall be allowed to proceed with the application. 
e.  Technical review committee. The technical review committee shall review the preliminary plan application and shall comment and make recommendations to the planning commission. When reviewed by the technical review committee, the following shall apply: 
1.  If the land development or subdivision plan is approved by a majority vote of the committee members, the application shall be forwarded to the planning commission with a recommendation for preliminary plan approval without further review; or 
2.  If the plan is not approved by a majority vote of the committee members, the application shall be referred to the planning commission for their [its] decision on the application; 
3.  In either situation when the technical review committee has approved or not approved a development application, the committee may forward the application to the Planning Commission with recommended conditions for Planning Commission consideration. 
f.  Reassignment to major review. The planning commission may reassign a proposed minor project to major review only when the commission is unable to make the positive findings required in article 3.0, section 3.1. 
g.  Decision. 
1.  No street extension or creation. If no street extension or creation is required, the planning commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the preliminary plan within 65 days of the issuance of the certificate of completeness by the administrative officer as provided in section 5.2.c. of this article, above. Provided, however, that if an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and the commission as provided in section 5.2 of this article, this time period shall be stayed. 
2.  Street extension or creation. If a street extension or creation is required, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing prior to approval according to the requirements in section 5.3.5.s. of this article. The planning commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the preliminary plan within 95 days of the issuance of the certificate of completeness by the administrative officer as provided in subsection 5.2.c. of this article. Provided, however, that if an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and the commission as provided in section 5.2 of this article, this time period shall be stayed. 
h.  Failure to act. Failure of the planning commission to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning commission to act within the required time, and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
i.  Final plan. The planning commission shall delegate final plan review and approval to the administrative officer unless it elects to review the final plan itself. When the review and approval of the final plan is delegated to the administrative officer, the administrative officer shall report its actions to the planning commission at its next regular meeting to be made part of the record. 
j.  Expiration of approval. Approval of a minor land development or subdivision plan shall expire 90 days from the date of approval unless with [within] such period a plat or plan, in conformity with such approval, and as defined in article 2.0, is submitted for signature and recording as specified in article 6.0. Validity may be extended for a longer period for cause shown, if requested by the applicant in writing, and approved by the planning commission. 
5.3.5. Major land development and major subdivision. 
a.  Review stages. 
1.  Major plan review shall be required of all applications for land development and subdivision approval unless classified as an administrative subdivision or as a minor land development or a minor subdivision. Major plan review shall consist of four stages of review: 
(a)  Pre-application meeting(s); 
(b)  Conceptual master plan; including a site visit; 
(c)  Preliminary plan; 
(d)  Final plan. 
2.  Also required are a public informational meeting and a public hearing. The planning commission may vote to combine review stages to modify and/or waive requirements as specified in article 8.0. Review stages may be combined only after the planning commission determines that all necessary requirements have been met by the applicant. 
b.  Pre-application submission requirements. 
1.  Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed major subdivision or major land development, as defined in these regulations, shall first submit to the administrative officer the plans and supporting materials provided in the pre-application checklist for major land development and major subdivision as provided in article 18.0. The procedure and criteria for pre-application meetings and concept review as provided in section 5.3.2 of this article shall apply. At the conclusion of the pre-application meeting(s), the applicant may proceed to the conceptual master plan stage of review. 
c.  Conceptual master plan submission requirements. 
1.  Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed major subdivision or major land development, as defined in these regulations, shall first submit to the administrative officer the plans and supporting materials provided in the conceptual master plan checklist for major land development and major subdivision as provided in article 18.0, including but not limited to the information required on the existing resources and site analysis map. 
2.  The purpose of the conceptual master plan stage of review is to provide the applicant with the opportunity to present an overall plan for a proposed project site outlining general, rather than detailed, development intentions. The conceptual master plan describes the basic parameters of a major development proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. 
3.  Initial comments on the conceptual master plan shall be solicited from local agencies, adjacent communities, state agencies, and federal agencies as required in the checklist for conceptual master plan, including but not limited to the planning department, the department of public works, fire and police departments, the conservation and recreation commissions, adjacent communities, the state departments of environmental management and transportation, and the coastal resources management council, as appropriate, and federal agencies, as appropriate. The administrative officer shall coordinate review and comments by participating agencies. If an agency fails to provide written comments prior to the date of a scheduled meeting at which an application is being discussed or heard, the applicant shall not be found to be deficient in the application process, and the application shall not be found to be incomplete due to the failure of an agency to provide comment. 
d.  Certification of the conceptual master plan application. 
1.  The application shall be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 60 days of its receipt, according to the provisions of section 5.2 of this article. The running of the time period set forth in this subsection will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and will recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event will the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its resubmission. 
e.  Site visit. 
1.  The planning commission shall schedule a site visit in accordance with the procedure and requirements of section 5.3.4.d. of this article, entitled site visit, provided, however that the site visit shall be scheduled before the master plan is approved. 
f.  Technical review committee. 
1.  The technical review committee shall review the application for conceptual master plan approval and shall comment and make recommendations to the planning commission within the time limits for planning commission action as established by section 5.3.5.h. of this article. 
g.  Informational meeting. 
1.  A public informational meeting shall be held prior to the planning commission decision of the conceptual master plan, unless the conceptual master plan and preliminary plan approvals are being combined, in which case the public informational meeting shall be optional, based on planning commission determination. The public informational meeting shall be held in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Public notice for the informational meeting is required and shall be given at least seven days prior to the date of the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality. Postcard notice shall be mailed by the applicant to all property owners within the notice area as stated in section 5.3.5.t. of this article. 
(b)  The applicant shall also provide an on-site sign or signs notifying the public of the application pending before the planning commission as specified in section 5.3.5.(s)5. of this article, below. 
(c)  At the public informational meeting, the applicant or the applicant's representative(s) shall present the proposed development project. The planning commission shall allow oral and written comments from the general public. All public comments shall be made part of the public record of the project application. 
h.  Decision. 
1.  The planning commission shall, within 120 days of certification of completeness of the conceptual master plan application, or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, approve of the conceptual master plan as submitted, approve with changes and/or conditions, or deny the application according to the requirements of article 11.0, section 11.6. 
i.  Failure to act. 
1.  Failure of the planning commission to act within the period prescribed in section 5.3.5.h. of this article shall constitute approval of the master plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning commission to act within the required time, and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
j.  Vesting. 
1.  The approved master plan shall be vested for a period of one year, with a one-year extension upon written request by the applicant, who must appear before the planning commission for the annual review. Vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good cause shown, if requested by the applicant in writing, and approved by the planning commission. Master plan vesting shall include the zoning requirements, conceptual layout and all conditions shown on the approved master plan drawings and supporting materials. 
2.  The initial two-year vesting for the approved conceptual master plan shall constitute the vested rights for the development as required in G.L. 1956, § 45-24-44 of the Rhode Island Zoning Enabling Act of 1991, as amended. 
k.  Preliminary plan submission requirements. 
1.  Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed major subdivision or major land development, as defined in these regulations, shall first submit to the administrative officer the plans and supporting materials provided in the preliminary plat checklist for major land developments and major subdivisions as provided in article 18.0, including but not limited to: engineering plans depicting the existing site conditions, engineering plans depicting the proposed development project, a perimeter survey, all permits required by state or federal agencies prior to commencement of construction, including permits related to freshwater wetlands, the coastal zone, floodplains, preliminary suitability for individual septic disposal systems, public water systems, and connections to state roads. 
2.  The administrative officer shall solicit final written comments and/or approvals of the departments and agencies specified in the checklist. 
3.  Prior to approval of the preliminary plan, copies of all legal documents describing the property, proposed easements and rights-of-way shall be submitted to the administrative officer. 
l.  Certification of preliminary plan application. 
1.  The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 60 days, according to the provisions of section 5.2 of this article. The running of the time period set forth in this subsection will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and will recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event shall the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its submission. 
m.  Technical review committee. 
1.  The technical review committee shall review the application for preliminary plan approval and shall comment and make recommendations to the planning commission within the time limits for planning commission action as established by section 5.3.5.p. of this article. 
n.  Public hearing. 
1.  Prior to a planning commission decision on the preliminary plan, a public hearing shall be held in accordance with the requirements of section 5.3.5.s. of this article. 
o.  Public improvement guarantees. 
1.  Proposed arrangements for completion of the required public improvements, including construction schedule and/or financial guarantees, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission at preliminary plan approval. 
p.  Decision. 
1.  The planning commission shall, within 120 days of certification of completeness of the preliminary plan application as provided in section 5.2. of this article, or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant as provided in section 5.2.c. of this article, approve of the preliminary plan as submitted, approve with changes and/or conditions, or deny the application according to the requirements of article 11.0, section 11.6. 
q.  Failure to act. 
1.  Failure of the planning commission to act within the period prescribed in section 5.3.5.p. of this article shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning commission to act within the required time, and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
r.  Vesting. 
1.  The approved preliminary plan shall be vested for a period of one year, and vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good cause shown, if requested in writing by the applicant, and approved by the planning commission. The vesting for the preliminary plan approval shall include all general and specific conditions as shown on the approved preliminary plan drawings and supporting material. 
s.  Public hearing and notice requirements. 
1.  A public hearing shall be required for a major land development project or a major subdivision or where a street extension or creation requires a public hearing for a minor land development project or minor subdivision. 
2.  Public notice of the hearing shall be given at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. Newspaper ads shall be printed in the legal section of the classifieds using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by the newspaper in its news articles. 
3.  Written notice shall be sent by the applicant, upon forms to be provided to the applicant by the town, to each owner of property within the notice areas as specified in section 5.3.5.t. of this article. The applicant shall receive a copy of the notice from the department of planning and development. Notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. As proof of such mailing, a copy of all return receipts shall be provided to the department of planning and development by the applicant prior to or at the time of the public hearing. 
4.  All mail and newspaper notices required by this subsection shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The date, time, and place of the public hearing; 
(b)  The assessor's plat and lot number(s) of the subject property; 
(c)  The street address of the subject property, or if no street address is available, the name of the street(s) on which or near which the subject property is located and the distance and direction from the nearest existing street intersection in tenths of a mile; 
(d)  Advise interested parties where and when a copy of the plans of the proposed major subdivision or major land development project may be examined; and 
(e)  Contain a statement that the proposed major subdivision or major land development project may be revised by the planning commission as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing. 
5.  On-site sign. The applicant shall also provide an on-site sign or signs notifying the public of the scheduled public hearing or informational meeting pending before the planning commission. This sign(s) shall be considered to be supplemental notice and shall be of a weather-resistant design, measuring a minimum 20 inches by 30 inches, erected in a location upon the site proposed for development which is visible from the nearest public or private street and fixed upon a support that is of sufficient height to make the sign visible from the nearest public or private street. The sign shall be placed on the site at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. Such sign shall contain a basic project description and notice of the public hearing or informational meeting, and shall be maintained on the site by the applicant until the public hearing or informational meeting is closed. The administrative officer shall determine if additional notification signs are required in order to provide sufficient public notice, up to a maximum of two signs. The administrative officer shall provide signage specifications and content to the applicant. 
t.  Notice area. 
1.  The distance for notice of the public hearing shall be 200 feet from the perimeter of the parcel being subdivided in all zoning districts. All abutting property owners to the proposed development's property boundary shall receive notice. The applicant is responsible for determining the correct names and addresses of all property owners required to be notified, and shall, at a minimum, be as accurate as the most current names and addresses listed by the tax assessor. 
2.  Additional mail notice for areas which fall within watersheds shall also be sent as required in G.L. § 45-23-53(B) and (C). 
3.  Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by the administrative officer to the administrative officer of an adjacent municipality if: 
(a)  The notice area extends into the adjacent municipality; or 
(b)  The development site extends into the adjacent municipality; or 
(c)  There is a potential for significant negative impact on the adjacent municipality. 
4.  The cost of all such notice shall be borne by the applicant. 
u.  Final plan submission requirements. 
1.  Any applicant requesting final approval of a proposed major subdivision or major land development, as defined herein, shall first submit to the administrative officer the plans and supporting materials required by the final plat checklist for major land development and major subdivision as provided in article 18.0, in addition to any material required by the planning commission when the application was given preliminary approval. 
2.  Arrangements for completion of the required public improvements, including construction schedule and/or financial guarantees. 
3.  Certification by the tax collector that all property taxes are current. 
4.  For phased projects, the final plan for phases following the first phase shall be accompanied by a copy of as-built drawings not previously submitted of all existing public improvements for prior phases. 
v.  Certification. 
1.  The application for final plan approval shall be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 25 days, according to the provisions of section 5.2 of this article. This time period may be extended to 45 days by written notice from the administrative officer to the applicant where the final plans contain changes to or elements not included in the preliminary plan approval. The running of the time period set forth in this section 5.3.5.v.1. shall be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and shall recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event shall the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its resubmission. 
2.  If the administrative officer certifies the application as complete and does not require section 5.3.5.v.1. below, the final plan shall be considered approved. 
w.  Referral to the planning commission. 
1.  If the administrative officer determines that an application for final approval does not meet the requirements set by these regulations or by the planning commission at preliminary approval, the administrative officer shall refer the final plans to the planning commission for review. 
2.  The planning commission shall, within 45 days, after the certification of completeness, or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, approve or deny the final plan as submitted. 
x.  Failure to act. 
1.  Failure of the planning commission to act within the period prescribed in section 5.3.5.w. of this article shall constitute approval of the final plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning commission to act within the required time, and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
y.  Recording. 
1.  The final approval of a major subdivision or land development project shall expire one year from the date of approval unless, within that period, the plat or plan shall have been submitted for signature and recording as specified in article 6.0. The planning commission may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period, if requested by the applicant in writing. 
z.  Acceptance of public improvements. 
1.  Signature and recording as specified in article 6.0 of these regulations shall constitute the acceptance by the town of any street or other public improvement or other land intended for dedication. Final plan approval shall not impose any duty upon the town to maintain or improve those dedicated areas until the town council accepts the completed public improvements as constructed in compliance with the final plans. 
aa.  Validity of recorded plans. 
1.  The approved final plan, once recorded, shall remain valid as the approved plan for the site unless and until an amendment to the plan is approved under the procedure set forth in article 6.0 of these regulations, or a new plan is approved by the planning commission. 
5.3.6. Development plan review. 
1.  Any applicant requesting approval of a development plan, as defined in the zoning ordinance, shall submit to the administrative officer the items required by the checklist for development plans in article 18.0. 
2.  The technical review committee shall review all development plans and make a recommendation to either the administrative officer or planning commission as applicable. 
3.  The administrative officer or planning commission shall render a decision, which shall be evidenced by a written decision and shall be filed and posted in the office of the town clerk. Four copies of the final plan set shall be submitted by the applicant for signature by the administrative officer. 
(Amd. of 7-15-2008; Amd. of 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 10-13-10) 
ARTICLE 6.0. - RECORDING PLATS AND PLANS 

Sec. 6.1. - Endorsement of plats and plans. 
a.  All approved final plans and plats for land development and subdivision projects shall be endorsed (signed) by the appropriate planning commission official, with the date of final approval. Plans and plats for major land developments and subdivisions and minor land developments and subdivisions shall be endorsed by the planning commission chairperson or, in the absence of the chairperson, the secretary of the planning commission attesting to the approval by the planning commission. All administrative subdivision plats and plans shall be endorsed and dated with the date of approval by the administrative officer. 
b.  Upon endorsement, all plans and plats shall be submitted to the administrative officer prior to recording and filing in the land evidence records of the town. The material to be recorded for all plans and plats shall include all pertinent plans with notes thereon concerning all the essential aspects of the approved project design, the implementation schedule, special conditions, placed on the development by the town, permits and agreements with state and federal reviewing agencies, and other information as required by the planning commission. A formal written final plan decision letter, signed by the planning commission chair or secretary for major land development projects and major subdivisions, or by the administrative officer for minor land development projects and minor subdivisions, to include all conditions of final approval, and referencing all approved plans and supporting material, shall also be recorded. 
c.  Other parts of the applications record for subdivisions and land development projects, including all meeting records, approved master plan and preliminary plans, site analyses, all legal agreements, records of the public hearing and the entire final approval set of drawings shall be kept permanently by the town departments responsible for implementation and enforcement. One copy shall be kept on file by the department of planning and development. 
d.  No endorsement of plans and plats shall be made until: 
(1)  The administrative officer has certified in writing that all of the required improvements have been made; or 
(2)  The finance director has certified in writing that acceptable improvement guarantees have been received in accordance with the provisions of article 7.0 of these regulations. 
e.  The administrative officer shall notify the statewide "911" emergency authority and the local police and fire authorities servicing the new plat with the information required by each of the authorities. 
f.  Digital parcel data. The final record plans of minor subdivisions that are computer generated with computer aided drafting (CAD), automated mapping, or GIS software, shall be submitted with copies of digital files on magnetic or optical media. The final record plans and as-built drawings of major subdivisions that are computer generated shall be submitted with copies of digital .dwg files on magnetic or optical media. Registration points for each .dwg layer shall be in the RISPCS NAD'1983. A minimum of four such points spaced near the extremities of the drawing or map defining the spatial extent of the plan or drawing is required. The name and version number of the computer software used to generate the digital files shall be submitted. 
Sec. 6.2. - Changes to recorded plats and plans. 
a.  For all changes to the approved plans of land development projects or subdivisions subject to this appendix, an amendment of the final development plans shall be required prior to the issuance of any building permits for construction upon the subject property. Any changes approved in the final plan shall be recorded as amendments to the final plan in accordance with the procedure established for recording of plats and plans as provided in section 6.1 of this article. 
b.  Minor changes to a land development or subdivision plan shall be approved administratively by the administrative officer, whereupon a permit may be issued. The administrative officer may, at his/her discretion, authorize such changes without review and approval of the planning commission and without a public hearing thereon. All such changes shall be made a part of the permanent record of the project application. This provision shall not prohibit the administrative officer from requesting a recommendation from either the technical review committee or the planning commission. 
c.  Denial of the proposed change(s) by the administrative officer shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review as a major change according to the procedures provided in section 6.2.(f), below. 
d.  Upon written authorization of the approval of a minor change by the administrative officer, the building official may issue a building permit for any proposed construction upon the subject property. 
e.  For the purposes of these regulations, the term "minor changes" shall mean any change which, in the opinion of the administrative officer, is consistent with the intent of the original approval. Such minor changes shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
(1)  Amendments to the utility plans which are acceptable to the town engineer and the director of public works; 
(2)  Lot line revisions which can be reviewed and approved as an administrative subdivision according to the provisions of article 5.0; 
(3)  Amendments to grading plans or drainage plans which are acceptable to the town engineer and the director of public works and which do not require the approval of any state or federal reviewing authorities; 
(4)  Amendments to construction plans which are required because of unforeseen physical conditions on the parcel being subdivided; 
(5)  Modifications to any construction plans for off-site improvements which are acceptable to the town engineer and the director of pubic works; or 
(6)  Modifications which are required by outside permitting agencies such as, but not limited to, the department of environmental management, the coastal resources management council, and the department of transportation. 
f.  Major changes to a land development or subdivision plan may be approved only by the planning commission and shall follow the same review and public hearing process as required for preliminary approval to a major land development and major subdivision as provided in article 5.0. 
g.  For the purpose of these regulations, the term "major changes" shall mean changes which, in the opinion of the administrative officer, are clearly contrary to the intent of the original approval. Such major changes shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
(1)  Changes which would have the effect of creating additional lots or dwelling units for development; 
(2)  Changes which would be contrary to any applicable provision of the zoning ordinance or which require a variance or special use permit from the zoning board of review; or 
(3)  Changes which may have significant adverse impacts on abutting property or property in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision or land development project. 
Sec. 6.3. - Rescission procedure. 
a.  The planning commission, only upon application by all landowners of the plat to be affected, may determine that the application for plat recession is not consistent with the comprehensive community plan and is not in compliance with the standards and provisions of the town's zoning ordinance and/or land development and subdivision review regulations and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of article 5.0, section 5.3.5s. 
b.  The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny the application for rescission of the plat in accordance with the requirements of article 11.0, section 11.6. 
c.  If it is necessary to abandon any street covered under G.L. § 24-6-1 et seq., the planning commission shall submit to the town council the documents necessary for the abandonment process. 
d.  Once the required process for rescission or for rescission and abandonment has been completed, the revised plat shall be signed and recorded as specified by article 6.0, section 6.1 of these regulations. 
ARTICLE 7.0. - GUARANTEES OF IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 7.1. - Purpose. 
a.  Improvement guarantees shall be provided to ensure the timely and proper installation and completion of the required street, utility and other physical improvements, including any approved improvements to any resulting open space, and to ensure compliance with other nonstructural conditions of final plat approval. 
Sec. 7.2. - Procedures. 
a.  Planning commission approval of agreements for the completion of all required improvements shall be required prior to final plan approval. Such agreements may, at the option of the planning commission, be in the form of: 
(1)  Completion of actual construction of all improvements; 
(2)  Improvement guarantees, or 
(3)  A combination thereof. 
b.  Where improvements are constructed without a financial guarantee, the work is to be completed prior to final approval and recording. All construction shall be inspected and approved under the direction of the administrative officer in accordance with these regulations. Inspections shall be made by the department of public works engineering division at all required stages during construction, and written inspection reports shall be prepared by the inspector(s) and maintained by public works. All inspection reports shall be submitted to the administrative officer. In addition, "as built" drawings of the site which have been certified by a state licensed surveyor or engineer and which show that all the improvements, including any grading of the site, are in accordance with the approved construction plans shall be submitted to the engineering division for review and approval. The site design engineer must certify that, in his opinion, based on a reasonable degree of engineering certainty, all of the improvements, including grading, have been constructed in substantial compliance with approved construction plans. 
Where improvements are proposed to be constructed without a financial guarantee, and the planning commission has approved that proposal, the appropriate town official shall certify in writing that all information required by the appropriate checklist in article 16 has been submitted, and that the applicant may proceed with construction of the proposed development as shown on the final plans. This certification shall include the statement that the final plat shall not be recorded until all required improvements have been completed, and that the provisions of article 9, section 9.1 entitled violations will apply. This letter shall constitute conditional final approval and shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the town. The date of recording shall constitute the commencement of the appeal period provided in article 12, section 12.1. 
c.  Upon completion of all required improvements constructed without a financial guarantee, the administrative officer shall certify in writing of such completion, and a copy of the certification shall be provided to the subdivider upon request. The final plat shall be endorsed by the planning commission or the administrative officer and the plat shall be recorded as provided by these regulations, at which time the lots within the subdivision may be transferred or sold. The applicant shall be required to post a bond in the amount of ten percent of the construction estimate prior to the acceptance of all required improvements by the town. Such bond shall be held by the town for a period of one year, to be released upon the written request of the applicant, and following final inspection and acceptance of the required improvements by the town. 
d.  If improvements are to be guaranteed, guarantees shall be in an amount and with all necessary conditions to secure for the town the actual construction and complete installation of all the required improvements, within the period specified by the planning commission. The amount shall be based on actual cost estimates for all required public improvements. 
e.  The recommended amount of the improvement guarantee shall be submitted in writing by the town engineer to the planning commission for approval. 
f.  Acceptable funds may include a cashier's check, cash, letter of credit, or other funds which the director of finance determines will be readily available to the town if the improvements are not completed within two years of approval of the final plat. Negotiable funds will be kept in a savings account under the supervision of the director of finance. 
g.  The amount of the improvement guarantee approved by the planning commission shall be submitted by the town clerk to the town council for approval. 
h.  The applicant may apply to the department of planning and development requesting from the commission a partial release of the improvement guarantee upon completion of a portion of the required improvements. The town engineer will notify the commission in writing as to the amount of reduction recommended, if any, based upon the completion of improvements according to required specifications. Such as application shall include "as built" drawings of the site which have been certified by a state licensed surveyor or engineer and which show that all improvements, including any grading of the site, are in accordance with the approved plans. The site design engineer must certify that, in his opinion, based upon a reasonable degree of engineering certainty, all of the improvements, including grading, have been constructed in substantial compliance with approved plans. The application will not be acted on until the submitted "as built" drawings have been approved by the engineering division. 
i.  Upon completion of all required improvements, the applicant may apply to the department of planning and development requesting from the commission the release of 90 percent of the improvement guarantee originally posted. 
j.  One year following the date of completion of all of the required improvements as provisionally certified by the town engineer, the applicant may, by writing the department of planning and development, request the commission to release the remaining improvement guarantee. The town engineer will notify the commission in writing as to whether defects in the design or construction of the required improvements have become evident since the release of 90 percent of the original improvement guarantee. 
k.  Where no improvement guarantee is required, a certified copy of the vote of the commission stating that no improvement guarantee is required shall be filed with the recorded plat. 
l.  Required improvements shall be completed within two years of the final approval of the subdivision by the commission. If additional time is required, the subdivider shall, by writing to the department of planning and development, request from the commission such additional time as necessary. Any such extension request shall be accompanied by an improvement guarantee review, update, and posting of additional improvement guarantee, if so determined by the commission. If the improvements are not completed within two years or the time extension arranged with the commission, the improvement guarantee will be forfeited to the town. Upon forfeiture, the commission shall authorize the director of public works to use the forfeited performance guarantee to complete or cause to be completed as many of the required improvements as the improvement guarantee will cover. 
m.  Where a development or subdivision is approved and constructed in phases, the planning commission shall specify improvement guarantee requirements related to each particular phase. 
n.  All public improvements, open space, streets, land, easements or other facilities, once inspected by the town engineer, approved by the director of public works, certified by the administrative officer and approved by the commission, shall be conveyed by the subdivider with a written request to the administrative officer. The request by the subdivider shall contain a description of all facilities to be accepted and shall be accompanied by an accurate description of all streets, easements, land or other facilities by metes and bounds and by reference to the final plat drawing(s) and by a warranty deed transferring ownership to the town and describing any special conditions or other requirements. Said improvements as conveyed to the town shall be accepted by the appropriate municipal agency for maintenance and/or as part of the municipal system. 
o.  Private facilities, such as private roads, open space and privately maintained drainage systems, wastewater, and water systems and/or facilities shall not be conveyed to the town. 
p.  The town has the authority to enforce the guarantees by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies, including but not limited to those as granted by G.L. § 45-23-46(I). 
ARTICLE 8.0. - WAIVERS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 8.1. - Modification or waiver of requirements. 
    The planning commission shall have the power to grant such modifications or waivers from the requirements for land development and subdivision approval as may be reasonable and within the general purposes and intents of these regulations. The only grounds for such waivers or modifications shall be where the literal enforcement of one or more of the provisions of the regulations is impractical and will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question or where such waiver or modification is in the best interest of good planning practice or design as evidenced by consistency with the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 8.2. - Waiver of development plan approval. 
a.  The planning commission may waive requirements for development plan approval where there is a change in use or occupancy and no extensive construction of improvements is sought. The waiver shall be granted only by a decision of the commission that finds that the use will not affect existing drainage, circulation, relationship of buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting and other considerations of development plan approval, and that the existing facilities do not require upgraded or additional site improvements. 
b.  The application for a waiver of development plan approval review shall include such documentation as required by the commission on prior use of the site, the proposed use, and its impact. 
c.  The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for a waiver or modification. 
Sec. 8.3. - Reinstatement of development applications. 
    8.3.1. Conditions. Where the deadlines for particular actions are exceeded and the development application or approval is therefore rendered invalid, an application may be reinstated by the planning commission under the following conditions: 
a.  Within a period of one year after the expiration of the application, reinstatement may be granted to that point in the review which the application had reached prior to expiration. 
b.  Where the expiration period is greater than one year but not more than two years, the application reinstatement may be granted to recommence at the previous highest level of review. 
c.  Where the expiration period is greater than two years, the application process is required to restart. 
    8.3.2. Criteria. Application for reinstatement of a previously approved subdivision shall be made to the planning commission in writing by the subdivider. The planning commission, in approving or denying the request for a reinstatement, shall make findings of fact which shall be made part of the record. Such findings shall be based on the following criteria: 
a.  The subdivision is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
b.  The subdivision regulations affecting the application are substantially the same as they were at the time of original approval; 
c.  The zoning of the subdivision parcel affecting the application is substantially the same as it was at the time of original approval; 
d.  Physical conditions on the subdivision parcel affecting the application are substantially the same as they where at the time of original approval; and 
e.  Any applicable state or federal regulations affecting the application are substantially the same as they were at the time of original approval. 
Sec. 8.4. - Decisions on waivers and modifications. 
    The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for a waiver or modification by the following procedure: 
a.  The planning commission's decision shall be made within 45 days of the date the request for the waiver or modification was first considered by the planning commission, unless the applicant waives that deadline. 
b.  The planning commission's decision shall be in writing, and shall contain findings of fact addressing the conditions contained in article 8, section 8.1. 
ARTICLE 9.0. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 9.1. - Violations. 
a.  Any person who fails or refuses to adhere to all of the terms and conditions of any subdivision of land or development plan that has been approved by the planning commission or the administrative officer shall be in violation of these regulations. 
b.  Any owner, or agent of the owner, who transfers, sells, or negotiates to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of, or by other use, a plat of the subdivision before the plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the land evidence records shall be in violation of these regulations. 
c.  Any person who, having submitted an application for subdivision or development approval, begins construction of the subdivision or development, or constructs any structure or improvement on the parcel, without having first received final approval from the planning commission or the administrative officer, and without having first posted the required improvement guarantee, shall be in violation of these regulations. 
Sec. 9.2. - Penalties. 
a.  Any person adjudged in violation of these regulations shall be liable for penalties not to exceed $500.00 per day, and each day of existence of a violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec. 9.3. - Injunctive relief. 
a.  The town shall have the authority to bring suit in the county superior court to restrain the violation of, or compel compliance with, the provisions of these regulations. 
b.  An action for injunctive relief brought by the town in the superior court may be consolidated with an action seeking penalties for violations of these regulations. 
ARTICLE 10.0. - ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10.1. - Adoption and amendment procedures. 
    The planning commission shall adopt and amend these subdivision and land development regulations according to the procedures set forth in this article. 
10.1.1. Public hearing notice requirements. 
a.  No local regulations shall be adopted, repealed, or amended until after a public hearing has been held upon the question before the planning commission, at which opportunity shall be given to all persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed regulations. 
b.  Notice of a public hearing on any proposed adoption or amendment shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least once each week for three successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing, which may include the week in which the hearing is to be held. 
c.  The newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by the newspaper articles, and shall: 
1.  Specify the place of said hearing and the date and time of its commencement; 
2.  Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of local regulations is under consideration; 
3.  Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the regulations that may be printed once in its entirety, or may summarize or describe the matter under consideration; 
4.  Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under consideration may be obtained or examined and copied; and 
5.  State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or amended prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising, as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing, provided that any such alteration or amendment must be presented for comment in the course of said hearing. 
d.  Notice of the public hearing shall be sent to the following: 
1.  The associate director of the division of planning of the state department of administration. Said notice, which may be a copy of the newspaper advertisement, shall be sent at least two weeks prior to the public hearing. 
2.  The city or town planning board of any municipality where there is a public or quasipublic water source, or private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, located within 2,000 feet of the boundaries of the town. Said notice shall be sent first class mail. 
3.  The governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district, or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source located within the town or within 2,000 feet of the town's boundaries, provided that the governing body of the state or municipal water department or agency, special water district, or private water company has filed with the town building official a map survey showing the areas of surface water resources and/or watersheds and parcels of land within 2,000 feet of the areas of surface water resources and/or watersheds, pursuant to G.L. § 45-24-53(E). 
e.  The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing at the date, time and place specified in the newspaper advertisement and notices. 
Sec. 10.2. - Publication and availability. 
    10.2.1. Printed copies of these regulations, any exhibits, and all amendments shall be available to the general public. A reasonable charge may be made for copies. 
    10.2.2. Upon publication of local regulations and any amendments thereto, the administrative officer shall send a copy to the state department of administration, division of planning and to the state law library. 
Sec. 10.3. - Severability. 
    10.3.1. If any article, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in these regulations shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decree or decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decree or decision shall not affect or impair the validity of any other section or remaining portion of these regulations. 
ARTICLE 11.0. - ADMINISTRATION OF REGULATIONS AND AMENDMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 11.1. - Administrative officer. 
    11.1.1. Administration. These subdivision and land development regulations shall be administered by the administrative officer, who shall report to the planning commission. For the purposes of these regulations, the administrative officer shall be the director of planning and development. 
    11.1.2. Appointment. The appointment of the director of planning and development shall be the responsibility of the town manager. 
    11.1.3. Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the administrative officer shall include but not be limited to: 
a.  Oversee and coordinate the review, approval, recording, and enforcement of the provisions of these regulations; 
b.  Serve as the chair of the technical review committee; 
c.  Coordinate the reviews of proposed land development projects and subdivision with adjacent municipalities; 
d.  Direct the enforcement of local regulations and coordinate the enforcement efforts of the zoning enforcement officer, the building inspector, planning department staff, the town engineer, the department of public works, and other local officials responsible for the enforcement or carrying out of discrete elements of the regulations. 
    11.1.4. Qualifications. The qualifications of the administrative officer shall be determined by the town manager as provided in the official job description for the director of planning and development. 
Cross reference- Officers, § 2-46 et seq. 
Sec. 11.2. - Technical review committee. 
    11.2.1. Establishment. There is hereby established a subcommittee of the planning commission, to be known as the technical review committee, to conduct technical reviews of applications subject to planning commission jurisdiction. These technical reviews shall be for the purposes of making recommendations to the commission, with such recommendations being advisory in nature, and not binding upon the commission. 
    11.2.2. Membership. Membership of the technical review committee shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The director of planning and development; 
(2)  The director of public works; 
(3)  The director of water supply; 
(4)  The fire chief; 
(5)  The chief of police; 
(6)  The town engineer; and 
(7)  The environmental coordinator. 
    11.2.3. Records. A written record of the technical review committee shall be maintained and made a permanent part of the documentation on the development application. Reports of the technical review committee to the planning commission shall be in writing and be kept as part of the permanent record. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-216 et seq. 
Sec. 11.3. - The planning commission board of appeals. 
    The zoning board of review is the board of appeals to hear appeals of decisions of the planning commission or the administrative officer on matters of review and approval of land development and subdivision projects. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-216 et seq. 
Sec. 11.4. - Fee schedules. 
    11.4.1 Procedural history. On May 16, 2006 the planning commission held a public hearing, pursuant to article 10.0 of these subdivision and land development regulations, to consider proposed regulations governing fees. At the close of the public hearing, the planning commission voted to adopt regulations governing fees and a new schedule of fees for review conducted by the planning commission and its consultants on the various types of applications which come before it. This document, subject to revision from time to time in a manner spelled out herein, constitutes the planning commission's rules governing the imposition of fees and its current fee schedules. 
    11.4.2 Purpose. These regulations and fee schedules have been adopted to produce a more equitable schedule of fees which more accurately reflects the costs of technical, design and legal review of applications to the planning commission; to establish a review procedure in the selection of consultants; to encourage better design of residential development; and to promote more informed decision-making by the Planning Commission. 
    11.4.3 Fee Structures and Regulations. 
a.  General. The planning commission shall impose reasonable fees for the review of applications which come before it. The planning commission may impose administrative fees and project review fees as may be applicable to the types of applications set forth below. 
b.  Approval by town council required. No fee imposed by the planning commission shall become effective until the town council shall have approved such fee by ordinance or resolution. 
c.  Method of payment. The payment of administrative fees and project review fees shall be by check only or by such other method as approved by the finance director. 
    11.4.4 Administrative fees. 
a.  Applicability. An administrative fee shall be assessed to offset the expense of review by the planning commission and town departments with regard to all applications set forth in section 11.4.4.c., below. 
b.  Submittal. Administrative fees shall be submitted at the time of the submittal of the application. Any application filed without this fee shall be deemed incomplete and no review work by the town shall commence until the fee has been paid in full. 
c.  Schedule of administrative fees. The following schedule applies to the types of applications to the planning commission set forth below. This schedule supersedes all previous schedules as they may have appeared in the zoning ordinance, the subdivision and land development regulations, and any checklists which may have been compiled from time to time for the benefit of applicants. 
Type of Development Preapplication Conference Conceptual Master Plan Preliminary Hearing Final Hearing* Administrative subdivision NA NA NA $100.00 Conventional/Standard subdivision $450.00 + $50.00/acre $450.00 +$50.00/acre $450.00 + $50.00/acre $700.00 Conservation development $450.00 + $50.00/acre $450.00 + $25.00/acre $450.00 + $25.00/acre + $300.00 legal review 700.00 Residential compound $450.00 + $25.00/acre $450.00 + $15.00/acre $450.00 + $25.00/acre + $300.00 legal review $450.00 Planned unit development $450.00 + $25.00/acre $450.00 +$25.00/acre $450.00 + $50.00/acre + $500 legal review $1,000.00 Minor subdivision $300.00 + $25.00/acre - $300.00 + $25.00/acre $250.00 Minor subdivision w/street $300.00 + $25.00/acre - $300.00 + $25.00/acre $450.00 Commercial/industrial development plan As provided in chapter 9 of the Town of North Kingstown Code of Ordinances - - Recording of subdivision plan As provided in G.L. tit. 34, ch. 13 Mailing and advertising The cost of all mailing and advertising expenses shall be borne by the applicant.  
*In accordance with article 5.0, section 5.3.5 (w) 1, if the administrative officer determines that an application for final approval does not meet the requirements set forth by these regulations or by the planning commission at preliminary approval, the administrative officer shall refer the final plans to the planning commission for review and the fee for preliminary hearing shall apply, or in the instance of a commercial/industrial development plan, the final plan fee shall be assessed, except as may be waived or modified by the planning commission. 
d.  Fees for revised applications. Where an administrative fee has been calculated by the number of lots or units proposed, and the application is revised after payment of said fee, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  If the number of proposed lots or units increases after the initial submittal, the applicant shall pay a fee equivalent to the difference between the fee originally paid and the fee that would have been paid had the original submission included these additional lots or units. No review of these additional lots or units shall take place until this additional fee is paid to the town, and failure to make this payment after requesting additional lots shall be grounds for denial of the application. 
2.  If the number of proposed lots or units decreases, a refund of that portion of the application fee predicated on those lots or units shall be granted only if, in the judgment of the planning commission, no cost associated with the review of those lots or units has been yet incurred. 
e.  Fee waivers. The planning commission may, upon approval of the town council, waive or reduce any administrative fee, if, in the opinion of the commission, unusual circumstances exist regarding the subject property or the applicant. 
f.  Refund. Once the review process has been commenced, the planning commission shall not refund administrative fees, including the case of withdrawal of the application by the applicant, except as provided in section 11.4.4.d.2, above. 
    11.4.5. Project review fees. 
a.  Applicability. In addition to an administrative fee, for all subdivisions and land development projects, including conservation developments, but specifically excluding those types of subdivisions specified in article 13, section 13.2., the planning commission shall impose a project review fee on those applications which require, in the judgment of the planning commission, review by outside consultants due to the size, scale or complexity of a proposed project, the project's potential impacts, or because the town lacks the necessary expertise to perform the review work related to the permit or approval. The fee shall ultimately equal the actual cost to the town for such consultant. In hiring outside consultants, the town may engage engineers, planners, lawyers, landscape architects, architects, or other appropriate professionals able to assist the commission and to ensure compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances, and regulations. Such assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, analyzing an application, design review of applications to determine consistency with the comprehensive plan; determining consistency with the purposes and design standards for conservation developments; assessing the economic, archaeological, traffic or environmental impact of a development proposal, review of unique site features including trees; or for monitoring a project or site for compliance with the commission's decisions or regulations. Project review fees are separate from, and in addition to, fees imposed by the town for inspecting a project during construction or implementation as provided in article 11, section 11.5. 
b.  Submittal. Initial project review fees shall be submitted at the time of the submittal of the master plan application (for major subdivisions or land development projects) and at the time of the submittal of the preliminary application (for minor subdivisions or land development projects). These fees shall be held in custody by the finance director (escrow account). Any application filed without this fee shall be deemed incomplete and no review work shall commence until the fee has been paid in full. 
c.  Schedule of initial project review fees. The following schedule applies to the types of applications to the planning commission set forth below. This schedule supersedes all previous schedules as they may have appeared in the subdivision and land development regulations, and any checklists which may have been compiled from time to time for the benefit of applicants. Where more than one type of application has been submitted for planning commission action, only the largest of the applicable initial project review fees shall be collected to be held in the escrow account, and not the sum of those fees. 
$500.00 for each lot or dwelling unit for the first five lots or dwelling units, (whichever is greater) including existing dwellings, if present; 
Plus $250.00 for each lot or dwelling unit thereafter. 
d.  Replenishment. When the balance in an applicant's escrow account falls below 25 percent of the initial project review fee, as imposed above, the planning commission may consider whether to require a supplemental project review fee to cover the cost of the remaining project review. 
e.  Inspection phase. As a condition of final plan approval, the planning commission shall require inspection fees in accordance with article 11, section 11.5 for the purpose of ensuring the availability of funds during the inspection phase of the review process. 
f.  Handling of project review fees. The project review fee is to be held in an escrow account as established by the finance director. No interest shall accrue on any funds held in this escrow account. 
1.  Outside consultants retained by the town to assist in the review of an application shall be paid from this account. 
2.  Project review fees may be used by the town for the purposes stated in article 11, section 11.4.5.a at any time during the review process. 
3.  Project review fees shall be turned over to the finance director by the administrative officer to be held in an escrow account. 
4.  The finance director shall prepare a report for the administrative officer on activity in the escrow account upon request. 
5.  An accounting of an applicant's funds held in the escrow account may be requested by the applicant at any time. The finance director shall respond to the request in a timely fashion. 
6.  An applicant may request the administrative officer to provide an estimate of bills pending from consultants for work completed, or in progress, but not yet invoiced. 
7.  Excess fees in the escrow account shall be returned to the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest. For the purpose of this section, any person or entity claiming to be an applicant's successor in interest shall provide the commission with documentation establishing such succession in interest. Excess fees shall be returned at the conclusion of the review process which is defined as either: 
(a)  With the disapproval of a subdivision or land development plan; or 
(b)  With the release of the performance bond or other financial guarantees at the end of construction of an approved final plan; or 
(c)  With the final inspection after approval on all other types of applications under the zoning ordinance or subdivision and land development regulations. 
g.  Disqualification. The choice of a consultant hired by the town for the review of an application may be appealed as provided in article 12.0. 
1.  Three circumstances may disqualify the selected consultant. These conditions constitute the only grounds for an appeal. 
(a)  Conflict of interest: A consultant shall not have a financial interest in the project under review, or be in a position to financially benefit in some way from the outcome of the pending review process. 
(b)  Lack of appropriate qualifications: A consultant shall possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist of either an educational degree in, or related to, the field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. 
(c)  Business relationship: The consultant has conducted business with an applicant within the past 18 months. 
2.  The required time limits for action upon an application by the planning commission shall be extended by duration of the appeal. 
h.  Reinstatement/extensions. Applications for extension of approvals or deadlines established by these regulations shall pay a reinstatement/ extension fee equal to the administrative filing fee for the review stage of approval that expired. See article 8, section 8.3. 
Sec. 11.5. - Inspection fees. 
(a)  Inspection fees shall be in the amount of two percent of the total amount of the original guarantee of all required improvements. In the absence of a guarantee, inspection fees in the amount of two percent of the total estimated cost of all required improvements as estimated in accordance with procedure established by article 7.0 of these regulations. Inspection fees shall be paid in full before construction begins of any improvements requiring inspection, or before recording, whichever is sooner. 
Sec. 11.6. - Meetings, votes, decisions, and records. 
(a)  All records of the planning commission proceedings and decisions shall be written and kept permanently available for public review. Completed applications for proposed land development and subdivision projects under review by the planning commission shall also be available for public review. 
(b)  Participation in a planning commission meeting or other proceedings by any party shall not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not in good faith, intentional misconduct, knowing violation of law, transactions where there is an improper personal benefit, or malicious, wanton or willful misconduct. 
(c)  All final written comments to the planning commission from the administrative officer, municipal departments, the technical review committee, state and federal agencies, and local boards or commissions shall be part of the permanent record of the development application. 
(d)  All votes of the planning commission shall be made part of the permanent record and shall show the members present and their votes. A decision by the planning commission to approve any land development or subdivision application shall require a vote for approval by a majority of the current planning commission membership. 
Sec. 11.7. - Precedence of approvals between the planning commission and other local permitting authorities. 
(a)  Where an applicant requires both a variance from the local zoning ordinance and planning commission approval, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation from the planning commission, as well as conditional planning commission approval for the first approval stage for the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain conditional zoning board of review relief, and then return to the planning commission for subsequent required approval(s). 
(b)  Where an applicant requires both a special use permit under the local zoning ordinance and planning commission approval, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation from the planning commission, as well as conditional planning commission approval for the first approval stage for the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain a conditional special use permit from the zoning board of review, and then return to the planning commission for subsequent required approval(s). 
(c)  Where an applicant requires both planning commission approval and town council approval for a zoning ordinance or zoning map change, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation on the zoning change from the planning commission, as well as conditional planning commission approval for the first approval stage for the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain a conditional zoning change from the town council, and then return to the planning commission for subsequent required approval(s). 
ARTICLE 12.0. - APPEALS 

Sec. 12.1. - Procedure for appeals to the board of appeals. 
    12.1.1. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission or the administrative officer shall have the right to appeal that decision, to the extent provided in G.L. § 45-23-66, to the board of appeals. Appeals from a decision granting or denying approval of a final plan shall be limited to elements of such approval or disapproval not contained in the decision reached by the planning commission at the preliminary review stage, providing that a public hearing was held at that stage pursuant to G.L. § 45-23-42. Appeals shall be governed by the following procedure: 
a.  The appeal must be taken within 20 days of the day the decision is recorded and posted in the office of town clerk. 
b.  The appeal shall be in writing, on a form provided by the department of planning and development, and shall state clearly and unambiguously the factual and legal issue(s) or decision that is being appealed, the reason for the appeal, and the relief sought. 
c.  The appeal shall either be sent by certified mail, with a return receipt requested, or shall be handdelivered to the clerk of the board of appeals. 
d.  Upon receipt of an appeal, the board of appeals shall require the planning commission or administrative officer to transmit forthwith to the board of appeals all papers, documents and plans, or a certified copy thereof, constituting the record of the action which is being appealed. 
    12.1.2. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed. 
Sec. 12.2. - Public hearings on appeals to the board of appeals. 
    Appeals of the decision of the administrative officer and the planning commission shall be given a public hearing set forth as follows: 
    12.2.1. The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on each appeal within 45 days of receipt of the appeal by the clerk of the board of appeals. 
    12.2.2. The public hearing shall be conducted at a meeting called and advertised especially for that purpose, and shall be conducted separately from any zoning board of review meeting that may be advertised for that same date and place. The public hearing may be held on the same date and at the same place as a meeting of the zoning board of review. 
    12.2.3. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least 14 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Notice shall be sent by first class mail to the parties to the appeal and to those persons required to be notified by article 5.0 of these regulations. The cost of any notice required for the public hearing shall be borne by the appellant. 
    12.2.4. At the public hearing, any party may appear in person, or may be represented by an agent or attorney. 
    12.2.5. The board of appeals shall maintain a complete record of all its proceedings, including minutes of meetings and records of votes taken, which shall be separate from the minutes and records of the zoning board of review. 
    12.2.6. The board of appeals shall render a decision within ten days of the close of the public hearing. The decision shall be in writing and shall include reasons for the decision. 
Sec. 12.3. - Board of appeals standards of review. 
    12.3.1. The board of appeals shall render a decision on the appeal in the following manner: 
a.  The board of appeals shall not substitute its own judgment for that of the planning commission or the administrative officer, but shall consider the issue upon the findings and record of the planning commission or administrative officer. The board of appeals shall not reverse a decision of the planning commission or administrative officer except on a finding of prejudicial procedural error, clear error, or lack of support by the weight of the evidence in the record. 
b.  The concurring vote of three of the five members of the board of appeals sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any decision of the planning commission or administrative officer. 
c.  In the instance where the board of appeals overturns a decision of the planning commission or administrative officer, the proposed project application shall be remanded to the planning commission or administrative officer, at the stage of processing from which the appeal was taken, for further proceedings before the planning commission or administrative officer and/or for the final disposition, which shall be consistent with the board of appeal's decision. 
Sec. 12.4. - Appeals to the superior court. 
    12.4.1. Appeals of decisions of the board of appeals. 
a.  An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the board of appeals to the county superior court by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of appeal within 20 days after the decision has been recorded and posted in the town clerk's office. 
b.  When the complaint is filed by someone other than the original applicant or appellant, the original applicant or appellant and the members of the planning commission shall be made parties to the proceedings. 
c.  The appeal to the superior court shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other appropriate orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
d.  Within 30 days after being served with a copy of the complaint, the board of appeals shall file the original documents acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed from, or certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the clerk of the court. 
e.  The court shall review the appeal pursuant to G.L. § 45-23-71. 
    12.4.2. Appeals of enactment or amendment of regulations. 
a.  Any legal resident or landowner or any association of residents or landowners of the town may appeal an enactment or amendment of these regulations by the planning commission. 
b.  Said appeal shall be made by filing a complaint in the county superior court within 30 days after such enactment or amendment has become effective. 
c.  The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of the local regulations, as enacted or amended, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
d.  The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area or areas in which the enactment or amendment is not consistent with the following: 
1.  G.L. § 45-22.2-1 et seq., known as the Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation Act; 
2.  G.L. § 45-24-27 et seq., known as the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991; 
3.  The town comprehensive plan; or 
4.  The town zoning ordinance. 
e.  The court shall review the complaint without a jury. The court shall consider whether the enactment or amendment of the local regulation is consistent with the referenced article or sections of 12.4.2.d.1 through 4 and if the court finds that the enactment or amendment is not consistent, the court shall invalidate the enactment or the amendment, or those parts of such enactment or amendment which are not consistent. The court shall not revise the local regulations to be consistent, but may suggest appropriate language as part of the court decision. 
f.  The court may in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its own motion, award reasonable attorney's fees to any party to an appeal, as set forth herein, including the municipality. 
ARTICLE 13.0. - CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 13.1. - Definition and purpose. 
    A conservation development is a type of land development project which utilizes prescribed site planning techniques to conserve open land, protect site features and provide flexibility in the siting of structures, services and infrastructure. In a conservation development, a percentage of the buildable land is set aside as open space in conformance with the comprehensive plan; buildings and developed areas are concentrated in specific areas on the site; and development plans are reviewed in accordance with procedures set forth within the subdivision and land development regulations. Under conservation development, there is no increase in the number of lots or dwelling units that would be permitted under conventional subdivision or development except where ordinance provisions include incentive bonuses for certain types or conditions of development. 
    Pursuant to and consistent with article IX of the zoning ordinance, the purposes of this article, conservation development, are: 
a.  To conserve open land, including those areas containing unique and sensitive natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes, streams, floodplains, wetlands, aquifers and their recharge areas, and agricultural lands, by setting them aside from development; 
b.  To preserve historical and archaeological resources; 
c.  To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of services and infrastructure, including sewage disposal systems and wells, and to reduce length of roads, utility runs, and the amount of paving required for residential development; 
d.  To provide for a diversity of lot sizes, building densities, and housing choices to accommodate a variety of age and income groups, and residential preferences, so that the population diversity of the community may be maintained; 
e.  To implement adopted municipal policies to conserve a variety of irreplaceable and environmentally important resources as set forth in the comprehensive plan; 
f.  To provide reasonable incentives for the creation of a greenway system within the town; 
g.  To implement adopted land use, transportation and community service policies, as set forth in the comprehensive plan; 
h.  To protect areas of the town with productive agricultural soils to encourage continued or future agricultural use by conserving blocks of land large enough to allow for efficient farm operations; 
i.  To create neighborhoods with direct visual and/or physical access to open land, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space, and with a strong neighborhood identity; 
j.  To provide for the maintenance of open land set aside for active or passive recreational use, stormwater drainage or conservation lands; 
k.  To conserve and create scenic views and preserve the rural character of the Town; 
l.  To provide a buffer between new development and existing streets, neighborhoods, active farmland and adjacent park or conservation land. 
Sec. 13.2. - Applicability. 
    The planning commission may allow conservation developments only in the zoning districts specified in article IX of the zoning ordinance, and in accordance with all requirements and standards specified in said article. 
Sec. 13.3. - Procedures. 
    Applications for conservation development approval shall be made in accordance with the procedures for approval of a major or minor subdivision or land development project based on the number of lots or dwellings in the development as provided in article 5.0 of these regulations. 
Sec. 13.4. - Design process. 
    The design of a conservation development shall follow the design process specified in the following steps. When the master plan is submitted for major land development projects or subdivisions, or preliminary plans for minor land development projects or subdivisions, applicants shall demonstrate to the planning commission that this design process was considered in determining the layout of proposed streets, building locations, and open space. 
a.  Understanding the site. The first step is to inventory existing site features, taking care to identify sensitive and noteworthy natural, scenic and cultural resources on the site, and to determine the connection of these important features to each other and strategies for protection. This information shall be submitted in the form of an existing resources and site analysis map, as specified in section 13.17 of this article. 
b.  Evaluating site context. The second step is to evaluate the site in its larger context by identifying physical (e.g., stream corridors, wetlands), transportation (e.g., street and bicycle networks), and cultural (e.g., open spaces, recreational opportunities) connections to surrounding land uses and activities. This information shall be submitted in the form of a site context map, as specified in section 13.6 of this article. 
c.  Designating the open space. The third step is to identify the open space to be preserved on the site. The open space shall include the most sensitive and noteworthy resources of the site, and, where appropriate, areas that serve to extend neighborhood open space networks to/from surrounding property. The designation of open space shall reflect consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
d.  Location of building sites. The fourth step is to locate building sites, using the proposed open space as a base map as well as other relevant data on the existing resources and site analysis map. The design shall take into account the potential negative impacts of residential development on nearby conservation areas as well as the potential positive benefits of such locations to provide attractive views and visual settings for residences, with emphasis on consistency with the town's rural character. 
e.  Alignment of streets and trails. Upon designation of the building sites, a street plan shall be designed to provide vehicular access to each building, complying with the standards of article 14 herein and bearing a logical relationship to topographic conditions. 
f.  Lot lines. Upon completion of the preceding 5 steps, the final step is simply to draw in the lot lines to delineate the boundaries of individual residential lots (if applicable). 
Sec. 13.5. - Sketch plan overlay sheet. 
    The design process described above shall be documented by the applicant and presented to the planning commission. To expedite this process, a conceptual sketch plan(s) for development shall be presented as overlay sheets to be superimposed on top of more detailed site surveys and environmental data (at the same scale). 
    At the pre-application stage of review, the initial sketch plan may be presented as an overlay to survey plans, topographic maps or aerial photographs of the parcel(s) proposed for development. As an alternative, if detailed site information and surveys are not available, a separate diagrammatic sketch plan may be presented. 
    At the preliminary stage of review for minor land development projects and subdivisions, and at the master plan stage of review for major land development projects and subdivisions, the sketch plan of development shall be presented as an overlay to the existing resources and site analysis map. 
Sec. 13.6. - Site context map. 
    A map showing the location of the proposed development within its neighborhood context shall be submitted. The site context map, which shall be superimposed on an aerial photograph, shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 400 feet or as necessary to show the area within one-half mile of the subdivision parcel. It shall show the locations of all streets, existing lot lines, and zoning district boundaries. Existing developed areas, open spaces, conservation areas, parks, wetlands, rivers and streams, agricultural areas, state natural heritage areas, flood plains or flood hazard areas, and significant public facilities shall be indicated on this map. If applicable, this map shall indicate coastal features and/or SAM plan guidelines as required by CRMC. Topography at 10-foot contour intervals (from USGS maps) shall be shown. 
Sec. 13.7. - Lot dimensional requirements. 
    A conservation development may be developed with dwelling units on separate lots, a single lot, or a combination thereof. Where dwellings are proposed to be located on individual lots, the minimum dimensional regulations as provided in section 21-216 of the zoning ordinance shall be applicable to dwellings within a conservation development. Where dwellings are located on a single lot, the lot frontage and width, front yard depth, rear yard depth and side yard depth shall be as provided in section 21-216 of the zoning ordinance. 
    The density and dimensional requirements for conservation developments in the planned village district shall be as provided in section 21-64 of the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 13.8. - Basic maximum number of dwelling units. 
    The basic maximum number of dwelling units allowed on a parcel of land proposed for development as a conservation development is defined as the maximum number of dwellings that could reasonably be expected to be developed as a conventional subdivision upon that parcel under a yield plan as defined herein. The applicant shall have the burden of proof with regard to the reasonableness and feasibility of the design and of the engineering specifications for such yield plan; provided, however, that the planning commission's determination of the basic maximum number shall be conclusive. 
    Yield plans shall be prepared by the applicant as conceptual layout plans in accordance with the pre-application checklist (checklist B). Yield plans shall show proposed streets, lots, rights-of-way, land unsuitable for development and other pertinent features. Although the yield plan must be drawn to scale, it need not be based on a field survey. However, it must be a realistic layout reflecting a development pattern that could reasonably be expected to be implemented, taking into account the presence of constraints to development as defined in article 2, existing easements or encumbrances and the suitability of soils for subsurface sewage disposal. 
    The yield plan shall also reflect the dimensional standards for uses being proposed, as contained in article IV, dimensional regulations, and table 2A-2C, or other applicable dimensional requirement of the zoning ordinance. The yield plan must identify how conventional lots or uses could be developed having the required area, frontage and other dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
    On sites served by individual sewage disposal systems (ISDS), density shall be further determined by evaluating the number of dwellings or other uses that could be supported by ISDS on lots in a conventional subdivision. Lots or dwelling units shown on a yield plan shall not include dwellings proposed to be serviced by an ISDS that requires the granting of a variance by the state department of environmental management. The planning commission shall determine the suitability of the parcel to be developed as a conventional subdivision, based on the soils information provided by the applicant, upon observations made during the site visit to the property, and/or upon other evidence available to the Commission at any time during the development review process. 
    At the pre-application stage of review, the planning commission shall discuss the basic maximum number of lots/dwelling units permitted in a development. This initial determination shall not be binding upon the Commission or applicant, but shall provide guidance and direction to the applicant regarding the maximum number of lots or dwelling units that appear to be feasible, taking into account the physical constraints to development present on the site. The applicant shall use this initial determination as the basis for submission of more detailed information during subsequent stages of review. Upon further investigation and upon receipt of more detailed soils and environmental information as may be provided in subsequent stages of review, the planning commission may increase or reduce the number of lots/dwelling units contained in the initial basic maximum number. For all developments, the final basic maximum number shall be made at the final stage of review. 
    In developments that require alterations to be made to freshwater wetlands, the commission may establish an initial basic maximum number contingent upon confirmation by the state department of environmental management that such alterations are permitted under the provisions of the Freshwater Wetlands Act. 
Sec. 13.9. - Types and location of buildings. 
    A conservation development may consist of any combination of uses as permitted in section 21-213 of the zoning ordinance. The planning commission may require the development plan to show the location of building footprints, and their relation to driveways and streets, and may approve, approve with modification, or deny such locations. For all two-, three- and four-unit dwellings, the applicant shall be required by the planning commission to submit exterior building elevations and schematic architectural plans for its review and approval. The commission shall review these drawings for conformity with the design guidelines set forth herein and in the comprehensive plan. The commission may permit specific written or graphic architectural standards or codes for building appearance to be submitted by the applicant for review and approval. 
    For the purposes of determining the basic maximum number, a single-family dwelling shall be counted as one dwelling, a two-family dwelling shall be counted as two dwellings, a three-family dwelling shall be counted as three dwellings and a four-family dwelling shall be counted as four dwellings. Accessory family dwelling units shall not be permitted within a conservation development. 
    Lots having reduced area or frontage shall not have frontage on a street other than on a street created by the conservation development; provided, however, that the planning commission may waive this requirement where it is determined that such reduced lot(s) are consistent with existing development patterns in the neighborhood. 
Sec. 13.10. - Stormwater management. 
    The stormwater management system for a conservation development shall conform to the town's subdivision and land development regulations, with particular regard for the need to encourage infiltration and groundwater recharge as opposed to detention or retention basins. See article 14, section 14.1.2.3. 
Sec. 13.11. - Parking. 
    Each dwelling unit shall be served by off-street parking as provided in section 21-272 of the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 13.12. - Open space. 
    Every conservation development shall provide protected open space in accordance with the standards set forth below, and in section 21-218 of the zoning ordinance. 
a.  The planning commission shall specifically authorize plans for the use, management and maintenance of all open space areas within any conservation development. Areas proposed to fulfill the minimum open space requirement within a conservation development shall not be excavated or regraded, except as permitted by the planning commission. Disturbance to the natural contours of the land shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible. Existing natural vegetation and any significant natural or man-made features shall be preserved except as permitted by the planning commission to create or enhance areas of landscaping, parks, recreation, conservation, forestry or wildlife habitat. These disturbances shall be specifically shown on the open space use plan. 
At the time of master plan review by the planning commission for major subdivisions or land development projects, or preliminary review for minor subdivisions or land development projects, the applicant shall submit a separate open space use plan containing: 
1)  The general location and area of all proposed open space; 
2)  The general proposed use(s) of the open space; 
3)  Existing topography and existing ground cover of open space areas; 
4)  The location and nature of any existing buildings, structures, stone walls or other unique natural and/or historic features; 
5)  Areas of open space from which existing vegetation will be removed or altered and areas which are proposed to be disturbed or otherwise graded, excavated or altered from their existing natural state; 
6)  Generalized proposals for the regrading, revegetating and/or landscaping of proposed disturbed areas; 
7)  The location and nature of any proposed buildings, structures, parking areas or roadways, impervious areas, recreation areas; and 
8)  Areas proposed to be left in their existing natural states without any disturbance. 
At the time of preliminary review by the planning commission, a more detailed management plan that specifies the use and management of the open space shall be submitted for review and approval, which may be combined with any required grading plans, landscaping plans, soil erosion plans or drainage plans required for preliminary approval. 
The planning commission shall require final construction plans to show proposed open space use(s) and alterations required as a condition of final approval. 
b.  Clearing and excavation of open space areas may be permitted only for the installation of stormwater retention or detention facilities, other drainage facilities, water supply wells, or for permitted park, open space, recreational or agricultural uses in accordance with a plan approved by the planning commission. 
In addition, no commercial earth removal, even if permitted by the zoning ordinance in the zoning district in which the development is proposed, shall be permitted within any open space areas. In approving an open space use plan, the commission may permit grading that includes removal of earth materials. The commission shall, however, clearly indicate, as a condition of preliminary approval, the approximate quantities of material and the general areas from which earth removal is authorized, and shall only authorize the minimal amount of earth removal required to grade the land for the intended purpose. 
c.  Where ISDS and/or wells are proposed to be located within the open space area of a conservation development, the planning commission may, as a condition of approval, require that a capital fund to be established to cover future maintenance of these utilities. The commission shall set the requirements for this capital fund to be administered by a home owners' association, by individual lot or dwelling unit owners, or other organization approved by the commission. 
Sec. 13.13. - Open space design review standards. 
a.  List of resources to be conserved. The design of open space lands in any conservation development shall reflect the standards set forth in this section and, to the fullest extent possible, incorporate any of the following resources if they occur on the parcel (not listed in order of significance): 
1.  Stream channels, floodplains, wet soils, swales, springs, and other freshwater wetland areas, including adjacent buffer areas that may be required to ensure their protection; 
2.  Special aquatic sites, vernal pools and significant natural areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern, such as those listed in the statewide natural heritage inventory; 
3.  Moderate to steep slopes, particularly those adjoining watercourses and ponds, where disturbance and resulting soil erosion and sedimentation could be detrimental to water quality; 
4.  Healthy woodlands, particularly those performing important ecological functions such as soil stabilization and protection of streams, wetlands, and wildlife habitats; 
5.  Areas where precipitation is most likely to recharge local groundwater resources because of topographic and soil conditions affording high rates of infiltration and percolation; 
6.  Hedgerows, groups of trees, location and species of large individual trees of botanic significance, and other vegetation features representing the site's rural past; 
7.  Active agricultural uses, pastures, croplands; 
8.  Prime farmland soils and farmland soils of statewide importance; 
9.  Historic structures and sites; 
10.  Visually prominent topographic features such as knolls, hilltops and ridges; 
11.  Geologic features such as eskers or kettle holes; 
12.  Scenic viewsheds as seen from public roads (particularly those with historic features); 
13.  Existing trails connecting the parcel to other locations in the town; 
b.  Other design considerations. The configuration of proposed open space lands set aside for common use in a conservation development shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  They shall be free of all structures except historic buildings or structures, stone walls, and structures related to open space uses. The planning commission may grant approval of structures and improvements required for storm drainage and privately owned and maintained water supply within the open space provided that such facilities would not be detrimental to the purpose for which the open space is proposed. Placement of individual sewage disposal systems (ISDS) within the open space shall be permitted only by the granting of a waiver by the commission, as provided in section 21-217 of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  They shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots or dwellings within the development. Nonadjoining lots shall be provided with safe and convenient pedestrian access to open space land; 
3.  They shall be suitable for active or passive recreational uses to the extent deemed necessary by the planning commission, without interfering with adjacent dwelling units, parking, driveways, and roads; 
4.  They shall be interconnected wherever possible to provide a continuous network of greenway lands within and adjoining the subdivision; 
5.  They shall provide buffers to adjoining parks, preserves or other protected lands; 
6.  They shall provide for pedestrian pathways for use by the residents of the development. Consideration shall be given to providing for public access on such trails if they are linked to other publicly accessible pathway systems within the town or region. Provisions should be made for access to the open space lands, as required for land management and emergency purposes; 
7.  Whenever possible, they shall be undivided by public or private streets, except where necessary for proper traffic circulation; 
8.  They shall be suitably landscaped either by retaining existing natural cover and wooded areas and/or according to a landscaping plan to protect open space resources; 
9.  They shall be consistent with the comprehensive community plan. 
c.  Uses permitted within open space areas. The open space in a conservation development shall be devoted only to conservation purposes or for park, recreation and agricultural purposes. Stormwater drainage areas and well placement may also be allowed if permitted by the planning commission in accordance with sections 13.12-13.13. Placement of individual sewage disposal systems (ISDS) within the open space shall be permitted only by the granting of a waiver by the commission, in accordance with the provisions of article 8.0. 
Specific uses permitted within open space areas shall be as provided in section 21-217 of the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 13.14. - Buffer areas. 
    The planning commission may require a vegetated buffer between new development and existing streets, neighborhoods, active farmland, adjacent park or conservation land, or other surrounding uses or areas as provided in section 21-219 of the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 13.15. - Streets. 
    Streets within a conservation development may be publicly or privately owned and maintained and shall conform to the standards of section 14.1.2, required improvements of these regulations. Streets shall be designed to conform to the standards of the town where the street is or may be ultimately intended for dedication and acceptance by the town. Private streets shall be adequate for the intended use and vehicular traffic and shall be maintained by an association of unit owners or such other means or entity as may be approved by the planning commission. 
Sec. 13.16. - Decision. 
    The planning commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a subdivision. 
Sec. 13.17. - Existing resources and site analysis map. 
    All subdivisions and land development projects, whether or not proposed to be developed as a conservation development, shall be required to prepare an existing resources and site analysis map. Provided, however that administrative subdivisions and subdivisions that create lots which are not for the purpose of present or future development shall not be required to provide such map. The purpose of this map is to provide the planning commission with a comprehensive analysis of existing conditions, both on the proposed development site and within 500 feet of the site. Conditions beyond the parcel boundaries may be described on the basis of existing published data available from governmental agencies, and from aerial photographs. 
    The planning commission shall review the map to assess its accuracy, conformance with municipal ordinances, and likely impact upon the natural and cultural resources on the property. Unless otherwise specified by the planning commission, such plans shall generally be prepared at the scale of one inch equals 100 feet or one inch equals 200 feet, whichever would fit best on a single standard size sheet (24 inches by 36 inches). Where necessary for clarity, and subject to the approval of the administrative officer, the map may be submitted as a series of more than one map. The following information shall be included in this map: 
a.  Topography, the contour lines of which shall be at two-foot intervals, determined by photogrammetry (although ten-foot intervals are permissible beyond the parcel boundaries, interpolated from U.S.G.S. published maps). The determination of appropriate contour intervals shall be made by the administrative officer, who may require greater or lesser intervals on exceptionally steep or flat sites. Slopes between 15 and 25 percent and exceeding 25 percent shall be clearly indicated. Topography for major subdivisions shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor or professional engineer from an actual field survey of the site or from stereoscopic aerial photography and shall be coordinated with official U.S.G.S. benchmarks. 
b.  The location and delineation of ponds, streams, ditches, drains, special aquatic sites, vernal pools, natural drainage swales, 100-year floodplains and freshwater wetlands, as defined in the zoning ordinance. Additional areas of wetlands on the proposed development parcel shall also be indicated, as evident from testing, visual inspection, or from the presence of wetland vegetation. All wetland locations shall be verified by RIDEM. 
c.  Vegetative cover conditions on the property according to general cover type including cultivated land, agricultural land, permanent grass land, meadow, pasture, old field, hedgerow, woodland and wetland. Trees with a caliper in excess of 18 inches DBH, if located within an area proposed for disturbance or alteration shall also be indicated. Vegetative types shall be described by plant community, relative age and condition. Specimen vegetation as defined in article 2 shall be identified. 
d.  Soil series, types and map units, as mapped by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in the latest published soil survey for the state, and accompanying data published for each soil relating to its suitability for construction and for septic suitability. Soils shall be mapped so as to highlight soils having development limitations as described in article 14, section 14.1.1. The area of each soil series, in acres or square feet, shall also be provided. 
e.  Ridge lines of existing hills and watershed boundaries shall be identified. 
f.  A viewshed analysis showing the location and extent of views both from and within the proposed development parcel as well as views into the property from adjacent public or private streets and properties. See definition, article 2.0. 
g.  Geologic formations on the proposed development parcel, including rock outcroppings, cliffs, kettle holes, eskers, etc. based on available published information or more detailed data obtained by the applicant. 
h.  All existing man-made features including but not limited to streets, driveways, farm roads, woods roads, buildings, foundations, walls, wells, drainage fields, dumps, excavated areas, utilities, and storm and sanitary sewers. 
i.  Location of all historically significant sites or structures on the tract, including but not limited to cemeteries, stone walls, cellar holes and foundations, and known archaeological resources. 
j.  Location of trails that have been in public use (pedestrian, equestrian, bicycle, etc.). 
k.  Location of all easements and other encumbrances of property which are or have been filed of record with the land evidence records of the town. 
Sec. 13.18. - Incentives. 
    The planning commission may award a zoning incentive so as to increase the number of dwelling units beyond the basic maximum number; as provided, in section 21-215 of the zoning ordinance. 
ARTICLE 14.0. - DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 14.1. - Required improvements and design standards. 
    All developments approved by the commission must meet the required minimum standards for design, improvements, and construction as specified in these regulations. 
14.1.1. General requirements. 
1.  All developments shall be designed and constructed with consideration given to the topography of the land and other natural characteristics of the site. 
2.  All developments shall be designed to promote harmonious relationships with surrounding land uses. 
3.  In all developments, the effects of prevailing winds, seasonal temperatures, and hours of sunlight on the physical layout, proposed land use, and proposed building sites shall be taken into account. 
4.  Land to be subdivided must be suitable for such purposes. The commission will not approve the subdivisions on unsuitable land. Suitability of land will be dependent on the following: 
a.  Water supply (public or private) must be adequate to service the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Topography of the site and its natural and manmade drainage must be suitable for the proposed subdivision. 
c.  Development limitations districts, (DLD), as described below shall contain lots of no less than 80,000 square feet of land, or in the case of a conservation development or residential compound, the overall density shall not exceed one dwelling unit for every two acres of land. 
Land with development limitations is subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  High water table limitations districts. 
(a)  Designations: These apply to all lands designated with the following symbols on the maps in the soil survey of R.I.: Aa, Co, Sb, Ma, Mc (9, 19, 31, 34X, 34). 
(b)  Characteristics: Soils designated by these symbols have a high water table within one foot of the surface during most of the year. 
(c)  Permitted uses: Any use permitted in the zoning district which does not require a basement or a subsurface sewage disposal system. 
(2)  Flood hazard limitations districts. 
(a)  Designation: These apply to all lands designated with the following symbols on the maps in the soil survey of R.I.: Pp, Ru (23, 39). 
(b)  Characteristics: Soils designated by these symbols are subject to periodic flooding due to streams overtopping their banks. 
(c)  Permitted uses: Any use permitted in the zoning district which does not require a basement or a subsurface sewage disposal system. 
(d)  Minimum restrictions: Streets shall be located, elevated and constructed in such a manner as to minimize or eliminate damage by flooding. Proposed lots shall not be approved without a suitable building site of sufficient elevation to permit construction having a first floor elevation above the level of the 100-year flood. All house lots shall have continuous access to roads above the level of the 100-year flood. 
(3)  Coastal flood hazard limitations districts. 
(a)  Designation: These apply to all lands designated with the following symbols on the maps in the soil survey of R.I.: Ba, Mk (21, 20). 
(b)  Characteristics: Soils designated by these symbols consist of tidal marsh or coastal beaches. They are subject to tidal flooding during severe storms. 
(c)  Permitted uses: Any use permitted in the zoning district which does not require a basement or a subsurface sewage disposal system. 
(d)  Minimum restrictions: Streets shall be located, elevated and constructed in such a manner as to minimize or eliminate damage by flooding. Proposed lots shall not be approved without a suitable building site of sufficient elevation to permit construction having a first floor elevation above the level of the 100-year flood. All house lots shall have continuous access to roads above the level of the 100-year flood. 
(4)  Seasonal water table limitations districts. 
(a)  Designation: These apply to all lands designated with the following symbols on the maps in the soil survey of R.I.: PmA, PmB, PnB, Rf, Bc, Wa, SdB, Ss, StA, StB, SuB, SvB, Dc, WbA, WbB, WcB, WdB, Se, Sf, Rc, ScA, Tb, WhA, WhB, WrB, RaA, RaB (5A, 5B, 5XB, 7M, 12, 30, 32, 42A, 42B, 42XB, 42MB, 45, 47A, 47B, 47XB, 47MB, 48, 48X, 53, 54, 61, 64A, 64B, 64MB, 69A, 69B). 
(b)  Characteristics: Soils designated by these symbols have a seasonal water table within 3.5 feet of the ground surface for significant periods of time. 
(c)  Permitted uses: Any use permitted by the zoning district. 
(d)  Minimum restrictions: No lot shall be recorded as a building lot in the land evidence records with [within] any portion in the seasonal water table district unless: 1) public sewers are available or 2) approval for an on-site sewage disposal system has been granted by the R.I. Department of Environmental Management. In addition, the applicant must present a satisfactory plan showing how the effects of the seasonal water table are to be mitigated for construction of structures with basements, driveways [and] parking lots. 
(5)  Slowly permeable soils limitations districts. 
(a)  Designation: These apply to all lands designated with the following symbols on the maps in the soil survey of R.I.: PmA, PmB, PnB, NeA, NeB, NeC, NfB, NoC, PbB, PsA, PsB, Se, Sf, WhA, WrB, BrA, BrB, RaA, RaB (5A, 5B, 5XB, 10A, 10B, 10C, 10XB, 10MC, 67XB, 29A, 29B, 48, 48X, 64A, 64MB, 68A, 68B, 69A, 69B). 
(b)  Characteristics: Soils designated by these symbols have firmly compacted substrata, with resulting slow permeability. 
(c)  Permitted uses: Any use which is permitted by the zoning district. 
(d)  Minimum restrictions: No lot in this district shall be recorded as a building lot in the land evidence records unless: 1) public sewers are available, or 2) approval for an on-site sewage disposal system has been received from the R.I. Department of Environmental Management. 
(6)  Extremely stony soils limitations districts. 
(a)  Designation: These apply to all lands designated with the following symbols on the maps in the soil survey of R.I.: BoC, CkC, NcC, Rf, SvB, WrB (49MC, 40MC, 24MC, 7M, 42MB, 64MB). 
(b)  Characteristics: These soils have numerous stones and boulders exposed at the ground's surface. These stones pose problems in construction and site preparation. These soils have little natural topsoil due to the high volume of stones. 
(c)  Permitted uses: Any use permitted by the primary district provided: 
1)  Areas to be eventually landscaped have a minimum of three inches of topsoil before planting, and 
2)  On-site sewage disposal systems are to be carefully designed and installed where stones and boulders hinder the installation and operation of such systems. 
(7)  Frost heave limitations districts. 
(a)  Designation: These apply to all lands designated by the following symbols in the soil survey of R.I.: BhA, BhB, BmA, BmB, BnB, BnC, BoC, Ma, Mc, RaA, RaB, Rc, PmA, PmB, PnB, Rf, Ru, ScA, SdB, Se, Sf, Tb, Wa, WbA, WbB (16A, 16B, 49A, 49B, 49XB, 49XC, 49MC, 34, 34X, 69A, 53, 5A, 5B, 5XB, 7M, 39, 54, 54XB, 48, 48X, 61, 30, 47A, 47B, 69B). 
(b)  Characteristics: The soils designated by these symbols have a high frost heave potential in the soil survey of R.I. These soils contain sufficient moisture during the winter months to promote the formation of ice lenses. 
(c)  Permitted uses: Any use which is permitted by the zoning district. Unless included in other development limitation districts (DLD's) of the subdivision and development regulations, soils designated as being within a frost heave limitation district are not subject to the minimum lot size requirement of the DLD provision. (Note: the following soils: BhA, BhB, BmA, BmB, BnB, and BnC, are not included in any other DLD). 
(d)  Minimum restrictions: Proposed roads, streets, sidewalks, paved driveways, patios and similar structures susceptible to frost heave damage must have footings or subgrade materials installed in such a manner as will significantly minimize the potential for frost damage. Subgrade materials for roads and streets must meet, or exceed, the standards in section VI(A) of "State of Rhode Island-Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." Test borings at 50-foot intervals shall be taken along the approximate centerline of all roads in this district to determine whether additional roadway design requirements are necessary. 
(8)  Steep slope limitations districts. 
(a)  Designation: These apply to all lands designated by the following symbols on the soil survey of R.I.: CaD, ChD, HkD (37MD, 40MD, 27D). 
(b)  Characteristics: These soils have slopes in excess of 15 percent and pose building construction and soil erosion problems. On-site sewage disposal systems must be carefully designed and installed if located on such steep slopes. 
(c)  Permitted uses: Any use permitted by the zoning district. 
(d)  Minimum restrictions: 
i.  Proposed structures shall be of sound engineering design with such footings, retaining walls, benches, etc., as needed to stabilize the soil. 
ii.  On-site septic filter beds or trenches must be laid with careful consideration of the slope and contours. 
iii.  Site plan: All applications must include a site plan which shows in detail how the applicant intends to minimize soil erosion on these soils. 
(9)  Utilities limitations districts. 
(a)  Areas served by neither public water nor public sewers shall have a minimum lot size of 80,000 square feet, or in the case of conservation developments or residential compounds, the average density shall not exceed one dwelling unit for every two acres of land. 
(b)  Areas served by public water but which do not have public sewers shall have a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet, or in the case of conservation developments or residential compounds, the average density shall not exceed one dwelling unit for every 20,000 square feet. 
(c)  No land shall be developed without certification from the department of public works that there is an adequate supply of public water or adequate groundwater to serve the proposed development. 
d.  Exceptions: Recognizing that the standards employed in making the soil survey of R.I. allow for inclusion of small areas of contrasting soils, the soil survey map may be superseded provided the applicant supplies adequate soil descriptive information to the commission. Such detailed soils information should be prepared by a qualified soil scientist and be presented using the descriptive terminology defined in the National Cooperative Soil Survey. Under a memorandum of understanding, the commission may ask the Southern R.I. Conservation District to review and comment on the supplemental soils data provided by the applicant. To obtain exceptions to the permitted uses and minimum restrictions, the applicant must show to the satisfaction of the commission that the soil in the subject area has characteristics warranting the requested change. 
e.  Other conditions which the planning commission determines affect health and/or safety may be considered limitations under this section. 
f.  In the event that the percolation rate for any proposed building lot is slower than 20 minutes per inch and/or the water table level is four feet or less, the commission may require verification of said perc and/or water table tests by the town in addition to any state approvals, prior to the granting of final subdivision approval. 
5.  Lots. 
a.  Lot fragments are not permitted. 
b.  No lot, regardless of size, which is rendered useless for building due to utility easements, rights-of-way, watercourses or topography shall be shown as a building lot on any subdivision. Such property shall be included in adjoining lots. 
c.  Side lines of lots shall, insofar as practicable, be either at right angles or radial to street lines. Departures from this rule will be allowed only where it is impractical to do otherwise. 
d.  The commission shall require a larger lot size where soil conditions warrant such an increase in the lot size and if percolation tests indicate the need for additional area for the safe and efficient installation of individual sewage disposal systems. 
    14.1.2. Required improvements. The following minimum required improvements shall be constructed or provided in all subdivisions: 
1.  Streets; 
2.  Pedestrian and bicycle ways and access; 
3.  Stormwater drainage systems; 
4.  Water supply; 
5.  Sewage disposal; 
6.  Street lights; 
7.  Street signs; 
8.  Boundary markers; 
9.  Street trees, plantings and screenings; 
10.  Erosion and sediment controls; 
11.  Regrading; 
12.  Reserved; 
13.  Communication lines; 
14.  Repair of damages; 
15.  Rate of development; 
16.  Off-street parking; 
17.  Open space (if applicable); 
18.  Stump dumps; 
19.  Stone walls; 
20.  Off-site improvements. 
These improvements shall be constructed or provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Streets. Streets must be designed with regard to topography, natural features, function, clarity of movement and economy of street length. The arrangement of streets shall be considered in relation to the existing street system, and to conform to existing topographic and natural terrain as much as possible. The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient and orderly movement of traffic; to meet, but not exceed the needs of the present and future population served; to have a simple and logical circulation pattern; to respect natural features and topography by minimizing cuts and fills; and to create an attractive streetscape. In the design of any street system, the following criteria must be taken into consideration: 
a.  The street system must be integrated with the existing network of streets so that there are at least two points of access, whenever possible. 
b.  Lots fronting on more than one street must be avoided except at street intersections or in cases where proximity to expressways or major highways warrant it. Where necessary, the lot should front on the minor road and be screened from the major road by suitable planting. In designing street layout, consideration shall be given to creation of a new parallel street separated from the existing public street by a foreground meadow (see figure 11 at the end of this appendix). 
c.  The pattern of circulation must be obvious to the motorist, with local streets clearly subordinate to collector streets. Pavement width, street alignment, design and location of intersections, frequency and degree of horizontal and vertical curves, width of abutting lots, frontage and setback of homes, or other means should heighten the distinction between local and collector roads. 
d.  Streets shall be interconnected as far as practicable, employing cul-de-sacs only where essential. An interconnected system of through streets is encouraged, both within the parcel being developed as well as to surrounding streets or adjacent property which may be developed in the future. Where cul-de-sacs are deemed by the planning commission to be desirable, continuous pedestrian circulation shall be provided for by connecting footpaths, sidewalks and/or bicycle paths that link the end of the cul-de-sac with the next street or adjoining open space. 
Street design shall consider opportunities to achieve design objectives, such as creating or preserving vistas, parks or village greens. The design and layout of streets shall encourage reduced traffic speed, traffic calming and pedestrian-friendly residential neighborhoods. As part of the design process provided in article 13, section 13.4, street layout shall be considered in relation to the location of open space, building sites and pedestrian circulation. 
e.  Cut and fill operations shall be minimized. Steep slopes, sheer drops or other conditions which cause erosion shall be avoided. Roads shall be designed and located to fit the natural topography. 
f.  Collector and local streets shall be designed in a manner to reflect the topography, to slow traffic speeds, and provide good sites for development. 
g.  Street layout in long straight segments shall be avoided. Where large trees or interesting natural features are found to be in a proposed right-of-way, the right-of-way and the street pavement shall be designed to avoid said feature wherever possible and practical. Rights-of-way shall not be stripped of trees or vegetation except where grading is necessary or safety requirements dictate. All slopes shall be adequately stabilized. 
h.  Street systems and parking areas shall be designed and located to avoid channeling excessive runoff water onto lower streets, lots, or directly into bodies of water. 
i.  Cul-de-sacs, P-loops and other forms of street layout may be utilized, where suitable, in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  All dead end streets shall be provided with a cul-de-sac or turnaround of an acceptable design sufficient to provide for safe movement and turning of vehicles. Acceptable designs are illustrated in Figures 7-8. 
The use of central planted islands which collect stormwater and provide for groundwater infiltration is encouraged. Center islands shall have at least 25-foot radius unless waived by the planning commission for topographic reasons, steep slopes, or environmental constraints. Larger center islands are encouraged where necessary to create additional open space, landscaped drainage areas or part of a design feature developed as required in article 13, section 13.4. Figures 11A & 11B also show alternative designs for cul-de-sacs, including the "loop lane." 
Dead end streets shall serve no more than 25 lots or dwelling units. Streets serving more than 25 lots or dwelling units shall be provided with a secondary access, which may be an "emergency" access of a design and location approved by the planning commission. The commission may also permit more than 25 lots or dwelling units to be located on a dead end street if, in the opinion of the commission, there is a likelihood of a future street connection to adjoining streets or properties that would provide secondary access. 
Dead end streets less than 800 feet in length shall be encouraged to be designed similar to boulevards, as one-way loop roads separated by a landscaped area at least 50 feet in width (see figure 11A). 
The use of "hammerhead turnarounds" as illustrated in figure 9 shall be limited to short dead end streets serving no more than three dwelling units. Streets having this type of turnaround shall be privately owned and maintained. 
(2)  P-loops are here defined as loop streets from a single access point. The entrance leg may not exceed 600 feet and the loop of a P-loop may not exceed 2,200 feet. The commission may require that utility easements essential to the town be provided by the developer. 
j.  Dedication of reserved strips for future street connections to adjoining undeveloped property may be required by the commission. These strips shall have the necessary radial intersections. The developer of the adjoining property will be required by the commission to connect to and build the street over the reserved strip, if the reserved strip is selected as a future access. Reserved strips that are not to be used shall be deeded to abutting landowners in a predetermined manner at such time as the adjoining property is developed. 
k.  The following major categories of street classification are established: 
(1)  Arterial. A major public street that serves as an avenue for the circulation of traffic into, out of, or around the town and carries high volumes of traffic and provides for high levels of mobility. Parking is not allowed on arterial streets. Access should be strictly limited to intersecting streets or major driveways. Access should not be provided to residential lots. 
(2)  Collector. A public street whose principal function is to carry traffic between local streets and arterial streets but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties. These streets provide a balance between land access and mobility, and may provide frontage to residential lots. Parking may be allowed on collector streets. 
(3)  Local. Streets whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties. There are three types of local streets: 
  Local access (Double-Loaded). Public streets whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties on both sides of the street. Parking may be allowed on these streets. 
  Local access (single-loaded). Public streets whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties on one side of the street only. Parking should be discouraged on these streets. 
  Local private. Private streets whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties. Streets within residential compounds serving up to seven residential dwellings on a private street fall within this classification. 
l.  Street dimensions shall conform to table 1 below and as illustrated in figures 1-8, which can be found in exhibit B. 
  Figure 1 illustrates the cross-section for an arterial street, designed as a boulevard with a planted center median. 
  Figures 2 and 3 illustrate collector streets, which may provide access to residential lots, and will vary in pavement width depending if parking is permitted or not. Parking may be permitted on one side of the street as shown in Figure 2. Figure 3 illustrates a collector street on which parking is not allowed. 
  Figure 4 illustrates a local access street where lot frontage is permitted on both sides of the street (double loaded). Parking may be allowed on one or both sides of the street. 
  Figure 5 illustrates a local access street where lot frontage is permitted on only one side of the street (single loaded). Two optional cross-sections are shown for configurations with a sidewalk and without a sidewalk. 
  Figure 6 illustrates a local private street used in a residential compound and a private common driveway. A gravel roadway surface is allowed except on steep slopes. 
  Figure 7 illustrates typical turnaround details for a teardrop-shaped cul-de-sac. This configuration should be used on local access streets (single loaded and double loaded), and where required on collector streets. 
  Figure 8 illustrates hammerhead turnaround details. 
  Figure 9 illustrates various configurations for private common driveways. 
  Figure 10 illustrates methods of buffering new dwellings in a subdivision or land development project from existing public streets. 
  Figures 11A and 11B provide alternative designs for cul-de-sacs, including the "loop lane." 
  Figure 12 typical roadway section. 
  Figures 13A and 13B provide typical street light details. 
TABLE 1 
MINIMUM STREET DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 
Type of Road R.O.W. Width Pavement Width Cul-de-Sac Dimensions Hammerhead R.O.W. Radius Hammerhead Pavement Radius Road Intersection Fillet Radius at R.O.W. Road Intersection Fillet Radius at Pavement Arterial 70 2-20 lanes N/A N/A N/A 25 35 Collector 50 22 - No parking 
26 - Parking See figures7 and 8 N/A N/A 25 35 Local access (double loaded) 50 22 See figures7 and 8 35 49 25 35 Local access (single loaded) 45-50 20 See figures7 and 8 30 42.5 15 25 Local private (residential compound) 30 18-22 See figures7 and 8 30 34-36 15 25  
Notes: 
1.  All dimensions in feet. 
2.  Center islands in culs-de-sac are encouraged. See article 14, section 14.1.2.1.i(1) 
m.  Curves and sight distance. 
(1)  Horizontal curve: Where there is a change in the alignment of a street along the centerline, a curve with a radius to ensure safe sight distance shall be made. The minimum centerline radii of curves shall be as follows: Arterial and collector street - 250 feet; local street - 150 feet. 
(2)  Sight distance: A minimum sight distance of 200 feet shall be provided between reverse curves for local streets, and 275 feet for collector streets. 
(3)  Reverse curves: Normally a tangent of at least 100 feet shall be provided between reverse curves for local streets and 200 feet for collector streets. 
n.  Street intersections. 
(1)  Intersections of more than two streets shall be avoided where possible. 
(2)  Streets forming an intersection shall meet one another at an angle of 90 degrees plus or minus a tolerance of 10 degrees. 
(3)  Within 100 feet of an intersection, horizontal and vertical street alignment shall be maintained. 
(4)  Intersections where a driver's vision is likely to be obstructed shall be avoided. 
(5)  Steep gradients must be reduced to a minimum and avoided at road intersections. The grade within 100 feet of an intersection shall not exceed three percent. 
(6)  Intersections of local and collector streets shall be spaced a minimum of 250 feet apart (centerline to centerline). 
(7)  Where two streets intersect a third, their intersections shall coincide precisely or their centerlines shall be separated by a minimum of 250 feet. 
(8)  Where a proposed street in the proposed subdivision intersects a state highway, the subdivision plan shall be submitted to the department of transportation by the subdivider. A physical alteration permit issued by the department of transportation shall be given in writing to the commission before preliminary subdivision approval will be granted for major subdivisions and land development projects, and before final approval will be granted for minor subdivisions and land development projects. 
o.  Street grades shall be no less than one percent and no greater than eight percent. 
p.  Street names. 
(1)  The name of a new street shall not duplicate existing or platted street names in the town or approximate such names in spelling, sound, pronunciation, or by the use of alternate suffixes such as "lane," "way," "drive," "court," "avenue," or "street." 
(2)  New streets shall bear the same name of any continuance of, or when in alignment with, an existing or platted street. 
(3)  All street names shall be approved by the fire department before approval of the final plat. 
q.  Frontage. The area to be subdivided shall have frontage on or access to an existing improved public street. If such an existing street has not been improved to the standards and specifications as required in these regulations, the commission may require the subdivider to make certain improvements on his [or her] frontage where necessary for drainage, safety, traffic, or other reasons as deemed proper by the commission. See article 14, section 14.1.2.20. entitled "Off-site improvements." 
r.  Frontage on a state or federal highway. When a tract fronting on a state or federal highway for a distance of 500 feet or more with an average depth of more than 350 feet is to be subdivided into more than five residential lots, the commission will require that residential lots adjoining the highway be provided with frontage on a secondary or interior street, and that access to the highway be restricted to a single access road or driveway. See figure 9, private common driveway. 
s.  Alleyways. Alleyways shall be provided in commercial or residential developments where required by the planning commission or department of planning and development. Alleys shall be used to provide service access and they shall be treated as private streets. Where alleyways are permitted by the planning commission to provide rear access to lots or dwellings that have frontage on an improved street, but physical access is not provided to the street, the planning commission shall make the required finding provided in article 3, section 3.1(a)(5). 
t.  If an existing public or private street(s) which is proposed to be incorporated into a new subdivision or land development project has not been improved to the standards and specifications as required by these regulations, the commission shall require the subdivider to make those improvements as a condition of approval. 
2.  Pedestrian and bicycle ways and access. Provision for pedestrian and bicycle ways and access (sidewalks, pathways, bikepaths, etc.) shall be made in all subdivisions to public areas and neighboring commercial facilities. Pedestrian and bicycle ways and access must meet town specifications. Unless expressly relieved from this requirement by a resolution of the planning commission, the rights-of-way shall be deeded to the town. The commission may require a public crosswalk in blocks longer than 600 feet. All rights-of-way or easements shall be 15 feet wide, and shall be clearly marked and landscaped to protect abutting landowners. On any road which the commission deems necessary for the safety of future inhabitants of the subdivision or abutting lands, the commission may require a paved sidewalk designed to the standards of the town engineer. Curbs, berms, sidewalks and curb ramps for the handicapped may also be required. 
a.  Sidewalk requirements. 
(1)  All subdivisions and land development projects shall be required to provide sidewalks, in addition to trails or footpaths to provide pedestrian access within the proposed development as well as to adjoining or nearby neighborhoods, open spaces or major public or private facilities. At the time of submission of the sketch plan overlay sheet and site context map, the applicant shall provide an analysis of the pedestrian circulation anticipated within and adjacent to the proposed development. The planning commission shall determine the location and type of pedestrian facilities to be incorporated into the proposed development as early as possible in the review process, but no later than at master plan review for major subdivisions or land development projects and at preliminary review for minor subdivisions or land development projects. 
Trails and walking paths will not be required if an active farm. 
Sidewalks shall be required to be installed on one side of all proposed new public streets in all subdivisions and land development projects where dwellings are proposed to be located, except for short cul-de-sac streets serving five or fewer lots or dwellings or less than 400 feet in length. 
(2)  Sidewalks may be required to be installed in other areas if the Planning Commission finds any of the following: 
(a)  The subdivision is located within an area one mile from a public or private school; 
(b)  The subdivision is located in reasonable proximity to major public or private facilities such as churches, playgrounds or shopping areas or where there is a reasonable likelihood that pedestrian traffic to/from/within the proposed subdivision would result; or 
(c)  The subdivision is located within an area with high vehicular traffic volumes and where there would be a likelihood of danger to pedestrians. 
(3)  Commercial development. In all commercial developments, there must be at least one clearly designated route for pedestrians between the street, the parking area and the main entrance of each building. A raised sidewalk is preferred with crosswalks designated by pavers or scored concrete across vehicular lanes. Trees and other plantings shall be provided along the walkway in accordance with landscaping requirements of these regulations. 
(4)  Construction requirements. The type of sidewalk construction shall be "Portland cement" concrete and designed and installed in accordance with RIDOT standards. Curb ramps in compliance with the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) may also be required. 
(5)  The planning commission shall have the option of establishing responsibility for care, maintenance and repair of sidewalks to the homeowners' association in conservation developments. 
b.  Bicycle access. 
(1)  Bicycle paths, lanes or routes shall be incorporated in a subdivision or development plan as appropriate to extend an existing bicycle facility; to intersect with proposed state or town bicycle facilities; to connect adjacent subdivisions where vehicular connections would be impractical; or where adjacent to a nearby public or private school, recreation areas or other similar facilities which would be likely to generate significant bicycle traffic. 
c.  Reservations of land. 
(1)  Dedication of reserved strips for future bicycle path and sidewalk connections to adjoining undeveloped property may be required by the planning commission. Where required, land reservations for bicycle and pedestrian access shall be provided on a separate strip of land dedicated to the town or on an easement having a minimum width of 15 feet. 
3.  Stormwater drainage systems. Stormwater management within a proposed development shall be designed to minimize the volume and rate of runoff and to encourage infiltration into the ground. Wherever possible, grass swales and sheet flow of stormwater over unpaved areas shall be employed instead of curbs and gutters and closed or piped drainage systems. Where practical, in lieu of a single large detention or retention area, a series of smaller basins shall be employed. Drainage systems may be located within designated open space areas with the permission of the planning commission. Drainage detention or retention basins shall be suitably landscaped and integrated into the overall site design as provided in article 13, section 13.4. 
a.  Site preparation: Natural drainage patterns shall be maintained wherever possible. New grades shall be established in proper relation to the need to fulfill drainage requirements. Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of surface water without any damage to the developed or undeveloped land downstream or below the proposed development. 
b.  Street grading: The grading of the roadway where required or necessary shall extend the full width of the right-of-way only as necessary to achieve proper drainage, utilities and sidewalks. Wherever possible, grading within the right of way shall preserve significant trees, stone walls or other natural features. Where drainage swales directed away from the roadway pavement are impractical, planting strips shall be graded at a gradient of not less than two percent upward from the curb or edge of pavement to the property line. 
c.  Blocks: Each block shall be adequately drained, either through the streets or by the use of a ditch or other approved methods within the block. 
d.  Lots: Lots shall be graded so that water drains away from each building at a minimum grade of three (3) percent. 
e.  Drainage systems: Drainage systems shall be designed in accordance with all town ordinances and with the following manuals and/or methods where applicable: 
  Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Releases 55 (TR-55) and/or Technical Release 20 (TR-20), latest revisions. These manuals shall generally be used for comparing pre- and post-development peak flows, holding basin design and flow routing. 
  Rational Method (Q=CIA). This shall generally be used for design of catch basin spacing and pipe sizing. 
  State of Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, RI Department of Environmental Management and RI Coastal Resources Management Council, September 1, 1993, or latest revision. 
  Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, RI Department of Environmental Management, USDA Soil Conservation Service, RI State Conservation Committee, 1989, or latest revision. 
Manuals and/or methods, in addition to the above, used in the drainage system design shall be noted, along with the reason for their use. Construction details and materials specifications shall be obtained from the Town Engineer. 
(1)  Design criteria shall be as follows: 
  Type III storm distribution 
  24 hour storm duration 
  10 year storm frequency for catch basin spacing 
  25 year storm frequency for pipe sizing 
  100 year storm frequency for holding basin (detention or retention or combination) sizing. Holding basins must be designed to accommodate up to and including the 100-year frequency storm. 
  Zero (0) net increase in storm water runoff from the site when comparing pre- and post-development peak flows for the 2, 10, 25 and 100-year frequency storms. This shall apply to each subcatchment as well as the site as a whole. 
  Manning formula for pipe sizing: 
n = 0.015 for 12" and 15" RC pipe 
n = 0.012 for 18" and larger RC pipe 
(2)  Complete drainage system computations, stamped by a Rhode Island Registered professional engineer, based on the above criteria, shall be submitted and shall contain, but not be limited to the following: 
  A narrative discussing the proposed development 
  A plan of existing and proposed subcatchment areas 
  A comparison of pre- and post-development peak flows from the site 
  Methodology and design criteria used 
  Complete computations, including supporting data, charts, graphs, computer printouts, etc. 
  Summary and conclusions 
(3)  The above design criteria and contents of the computations for the drainage system design shall be construed as a minimum. Additional detail and information may be required depending on the proposed impact of the development. 
(4)  Off road drainage systems shall be extended to a watercourse, ditch, swale or other approved area of adequate size to receive the stormwater drainage. The subdivider shall dedicate to the town an easement of adequate size for future maintenance if and when it becomes necessary to locate the drainage outside of the street right of way. Off-road drainage systems shall be designed with adequate filtering devices, including swales, overland flow or vegetated buffer zones before any water is discharged into existing waterways or wetlands. 
(5)  Watercourses shall be left open unless approval to enclose a ditch is granted by the commission. Before the commission can give any approval to stormwater drainage systems involving freshwater wetlands or coastal features,the approval of the state department of environmental management and the state coastal resources management council must be granted. 
(6)  Ditches shall be adequately protected from erosion. The use of shallow grassy swales is encouraged in lieu of steep ditches. Where used, swales, ditches and open channels shall be seeded, sodded, riprapped or paved, depending on slopes, quantity of runoff and soil types. 
(7)  In no case shall the depth of a basin exceed six feet, with side slopes not to exceed 20 percent (5:1). The use of fences to surround a basin shall be avoided, and the commission shall require a fence only if it finds that there is no practical alternative to protect public safety. 
The drainage system may be comprised of natural and man-made elements. These include grass swales, retention and detention basins, curbs, catch basins, culverts, and stormwater pipes. The subdivider is encouraged to incorporate natural elements into the drainage design whenever possible. These elements (i.e. grass swales, wet basins) not only collect and transport stormwater, but also mitigate pollution, reduce sedimentation, provide visual amenities and provide potential wildlife habitat.( Reference: R.I. Stormwater Manual) 
(8)  Existing roads (private, or town accepted) incorporated into new subdivisions shall be provided with a drainage system along that road, as required by the town engineer and the commission. 
(9)  Connection to state drainage systems is allowed only with written approval from the state department of transportation. 
4.  Water supply. Water mains shall be installed when the public water system is adjacent and connection is possible. Installations shall conform to the specifications of the North Kingstown Water Department. Proof of adequate water supply to service the subdivision must be provided to the commission. Due to seasonal water supply shortages, homeowner's associations shall be prohibited from requiring mandatory lawn watering in subdivisions created subsequent to July 3, 2008. Automatic sprinklers shall also be prohibited in newly created subdivisions for this same reason. 
5.  Sewage disposal. 
a.  Sanitary sewers must be installed in all subdivisions constructed in areas planned to be serviced by a publicly approved sewer system. The applicant shall be required to cap the installed sanitary sewer system in order to render it unusable until such time as a connection is possible. 
b.  On-site sewage disposal systems must be approved by the state department of environmental management. No subdivision will be accepted until each proposed lot has an approved suitability determination from the state department of environmental management or has obtained permission to tie into an acceptable sewage disposal system. 
c.  Buffer zone: No part of a septic system shall be located within 150 feet of any river, stream, water body or wetland, unless a waiver from this regulation is allowed by the commission. 
d.  Future connection: In areas likely to be served by future public sewers, on-site systems shall be located to facilitate future connection with a sewer system, unless health, drainage and topographic considerations make an alternate location desirable. 
e.  Alternative: As an alternative to the installation of individual lot septic systems, the applicant may request the permission of the commission to connect the required subdivision sanitary sewer system to an alternative sewage treatment system. Such treatment system must be approved by the state department of environmental management and the commission. Such sewage treatment system shall not be construed to mean a communal septic tank. All required sanitary sewers shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the state department of environmental management and the town. 
6.  Street lights. Street lights may be required by the planning commission if it determines that lighting is necessary to ensure public safety in areas anticipated to have significant vehicular or pedestrian volume, or where necessary to address potentially dangerous conditions. The applicant shall pay the costs of installation of streetlights required by the commission, which shall meet the standards provided by the town department of public works. 
7.  Street signs. Street name signs, regulatory signs, warning signs, and development signs with supports shall be provided and erected by the subdivider in accordance with town standards. 
8.  Boundary markers. Permanent stone boundary markers shall be placed along one side of the street right of way at all points of curvature (P.C.) and points of tangency (P.T.), and at such other locations as the commission may designate. 
9.  Street trees, plantings and screening. The planning commission shall require the applicant to plant deciduous shade street trees appropriate for the native landscape, terrain, soil and climatic conditions encountered on the site. A list of suggested street trees is provided in exhibit A. Where feasible, existing natural tree coverage and other desirable natural vegetation shall be preserved within the street right-of-way and on all development sites to the maximum extent possible. New or relocated street trees shall be planted in accordance with the following conditions. 
a.  Location. Street trees shall be located within the street right-of-way as shown in the typical street cross-sections. Where the planning commission determines this to be infeasible, street trees may be located on the portion of building lots within ten feet of the street right-of-way line. No street trees shall be located that interfere with overhead or underground utility lines. When planted closer than seven feet from the edge of any pavement, vertical barriers shall be installed underground to prevent roots from damaging pavement. Alternative tree planting methods such as the use of "CU-structural soil (r) " to prevent damage to pavements and enhance tree growth is encouraged. 
b.  Spacing. Trees shall be planted approximately 30 to 40 feet on center, depending on anticipated ultimate size. Trees shall not be located within 30 feet of intersecting rights-of-way lines. The species and size of such trees must be approved by the planning commission at the time of preliminary approval. The commission or administrative officer may consult with the town tree warden on recommendations for proposed street trees. 
c.  Size. Minimum sizes for approved species shall be two to three inches caliper, measured at breast height (DBH) and at least eight feet of height in place. Street trees shall be of licensed nursery stock. Street trees shall be balled and burlaped with good root development and branching characteristics. No bare root stock shall be permitted. 
d.  Planting. Street trees shall be planted in holes at least six inches deeper and 11/2 times as wide as the root ball. Larger excavation may be required in gravel or sandy soils. Street trees shall be planted at their previous depth in good quality topsoil (not yellow dirt) conditioned with organic matters such as peat moss and a balanced time release fertilizer. Street trees shall be securely triple-staked with stakes of a minimum size of two inches by two inches by six feet. See exhibit A. 
e.  Inspection. The town shall inspect all street tree plantings and report to the director of public works whether the proper planting techniques and maintenance have been followed. 
f.  Maintenance. Street trees shall be maintained by the subdivider until accepted by the town. At the time of acceptance, the tree warden shall certify in writing to the director of public works that all street trees are acceptable. Dead or diseased trees shall be replaced by the subdivider prior to acceptance. 
g.  Species. Sustainable plant species are preferred for their tolerance of resistance to drought and dry soils, resistance to wind damage, and tolerance of ocean, roadside or aerial salt. Deciduous shade trees shall be planted in inland areas or areas that are not subject to salt, wind or sandy soil conditions. Coniferous trees or shrubs shall be used only in exposed areas where such conditions are anticipated. See exhibit A for a list of recommended street tree species. 
h.  Storage. All outdoor storage areas or facilities for materials, refuse collection, incineration, or similar such uses shall be enclosed by a wall or fence of solid appearance or tightly spaced evergreen hedge not less than six feet high where necessary to conceal such areas or facilities from nearby residences. 
10.  Erosion controls. Erosion controls shall be consistent with the most recent guidelines of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. 
11.  Regrading. 
a.  Finished contours shall direct surface drainage around structures rather than directly against them, using swales or other approved means. No grading or siting of structures shall be performed which creates insufficiently drained areas. 
b.  Where slopes are steep, terracing should be employed using properly stabilized slopes or retaining walls. Such terracing should be placed carefully in relation to structures, open portions of the site, and lot lines so that the terraces help create usable open spaces rather than dividing open spaces into less usable areas. 
12.  Reserved. 
13.  Communication lines (electric, telephone, and cable TV). All electric, communication (telephone, fire alarm and cable TV) and street lighting lines shall be required to be installed underground. In cases where underground installation is not feasible due to physical conditions of the site or other limitation, an alternative location for these utility lines shall be approved by the planning commission, if prior approval thereof has been obtained by the utility company involved. All underground utility work shall be completed prior to paving streets. 
14.  Repair of damages. The subdivider shall repair any environmental damage caused by development or construction. Repairs shall be as extensive as the damage warrants to restore the environment at least to its presubdivision state and shall be in accordance with the required improvements, design standards, site design criteria and construction specifications of these regulations. 
15.  Rate of development. 
a.  When any development can be expected to result in more than 25 school-age children, such developments will only be approved in stages. Each stage shall have 25 or fewer predicated school-age children. Not more than one stage will be approved during any 12-month period. 
b.  For the purpose of promoting orderly and progressive development, at least 50 percent of the required improvements as shown on any final plan must be installed to the satisfaction of the town engineer and the commission before final approval shall be given on any subsequent enlargement. 
c.  The commission shall not approve subdivisions which will allow dwelling units to be constructed in sufficient numbers to exceed any population growth rates which are adopted as part of the town comprehensive plan, as amended from time to time. 
16.  Off-street parking. Where off-street parking is required, parking areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance. Site plans for parking shall be approved by the director of planning and development or the town engineer as specified in the zoning ordinance. Descriptions of the parking lot design criteria are available from the department of planning and development. 
17.  Open space. See article 13, section 13.12. 
18.  Stump dumps. 
a.  All dumping and landfilling of tree stumps must be approved as a site plan review by the planning department if the stump dump is not part of a subdivision approved by the planning commission. 
b.  Rules and regulations for stump dumps: 
(1)  Only stumps and boulders native to the site may be buried. Brush, slash, saw logs, tree trunks or any other fill material or refuse shall not be disposed of in the dump. 
(2)  The stump dump must be shown on the record plans. Where the dump is located on a building lot, deed restrictions must be recorded for the site. 
(3)  The bottom elevation of the dump must be indicated on the plan and must be at least two feet above the wet seasonal high ground water table. 
(4)  A restoration plan must be shown on the plan. The restoration plan should include a minimum of one to 11/2 feet of subgrade material and four inches of loam and seed. A landscaping plan may be required. 
(5)  The dump shall be backfilled with soil in approximately five-foot lifts. Each lift shall be compacted thoroughly with the use of heavy equipment. 
(6)  The finished grade shall be sloped away from the stump dump to avoid puddling over the dump. 
(7)  A performance guarantee for the stump dump shall be required. The surety will be based on the construction estimate for the dump as prepared by the town engineer. Engineering inspection fees shall be required and will be assessed at two percent of the construction estimate. 
(8)  While the dump is open, there must be a means to control access. The barriers used must be maintained until the area is restored. The planning commission, or the planning department in the case of a commercial site plan review, shall determine the means for controlling access prior to the excavation of the dump. 
(9)  The use of acids used for the excavation of stumps to kill off the root system is prohibited. 
(10)  The use of herbicides to prevent root growth in the stump pile prior to burial is prohibited. 
(11)  Inspection by the engineering department is required. Inspections are required when the dump is excavated, at the time of compaction of each lift and at the time of closure. As required for any engineering inspection at least 48 hour notice shall be given to the engineering inspectors prior to the start of construction. 
c.  All applications for a tree stump dump must be accompanied by plans prepared by a state registered engineer or land surveyor showing the following: 
(1)  Proposed site for the stump dump. 
(2)  The depth, width, length and final grading plan of the excavation of the excavation/fill area. A cross section through the area must also be provided. 
(3)  Restoration plan and regrading plan as specified by the planning commission or planning department in the case of a commercial site plan review. 
(4)  Access control measures as determined by the planning commission or planning department in the case of a commercial site plan review. 
(5)  A copy of the deed restrictions. 
(6)  Certified seasonal high groundwater table elevation in the excavation area. 
(7)  Limits of disturbance. 
(8)  A landscaping plan may be required at the discretion of the planning commission or planning department in the case of a commercial site plan review. 
(9)  The location of the temporary stump pile. 
19.  Stone walls. Existing stone walls shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Stone walls shall be retained on site and designed to be incorporated into the overall site design. Where possible, they shall be used as property lines for proposed new interior lots, perimeter property lines, or to delineate open space areas from development areas. If existing stone walls are to be moved or destroyed, and the planning commission determines that preservation of the walls in their existing location is impractical, the Commission may require existing stone walls to be reconstructed on another location within the proposed development parcel. 
20.  Off-site improvements. The planning commission may require off-site improvements to be made by a developer or subdivider as provided in section 21-327 of the zoning ordinance. 
(Amd. of 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 14.2. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
    These regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions of land for industrial or commercial uses or purposes. These regulations shall be in addition to all other applicable requirements. 
(a)  Layout. Subdivisions shall be designed in such a manner so as to provide safe access, harmonious arrangements of land uses, separation of differing modes of transportation, areas for drainage runoff and possible retention, areas for solid waste and sewage disposal, buffers, parking, landscaping and other utilities. 
(b)  Location of buildings. No building shall be located closer than the minimum setback required by the zoning ordinance. Where no setback is specified, a minimum of ten feet shall separate all structures and paving from the lot line. 
(c)  Access. 
(1)  A paved road shall be provided to ensure adequate frontage for each lot. Such road shall be constructed in conformance with standards established by the town engineer. If access will be required for unusually heavy or bulky loads, the town engineer may increase the construction and design requirements. Roads serving primarily nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundary of adjacent land zoned for residential use or in residential use; nor shall primarily residential roads be used for access to industrial subdivisions. No portion of any lot shall be paved unless in accordance with an approved site plan. 
(2)  All subdivisions which are over five acres in size shall provide adequate bus pickup and dropoff areas. Said areas shall be marked with signs and pavement markings specifically designed for use in bus loading/unloading areas. 
(3)  Loading docks, truck parking, and/or truck turnaround areas shall be designated by the use of signs and pavement markings. These areas shall be completely separated from parking and access areas used by automobiles or pedestrian traffic. Roadways shall not be used for truck parking, standing or backing areas. The owner and/or occupant of the structure shall be responsible for the maintenance and enforcement of these requirements. 
(4)  All pedestrian bridges, underpasses, and grade crossings shall be indicated on the plans. The department of planning and development and/or the town engineer may require additional crossings. 
(5)  Fire lanes shall be required at all entrances and exits to structures and to storage facilities and at all locations of hydrants, siamese connections, shaftways, sprinkler controls, and in any other location indicated by the fire chief. Fire lanes shall be marked by signs and by yellow pavement striping in accordance with acceptable current standards and specifications. The owner and/or occupant of the structure shall be responsible for compliance with these requirements. 
(d)  Parking. All parking shall be designed in conformance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and of the subdivision regulations of the town. Parking lots shall be designated with signs and pavement markings. The owner and/or occupant of the structure shall be responsible for the maintenance of these requirements. 
(e)  Railroad construction. All construction of rail lines, sidings, or switching facilities shall be indicated on the plans. All construction shall be in accordance with American Railroad Association and Federal Railroad Administration specifications. The department of planning and development and/or the town engineer may require additional vehicular and/or pedestrian crossings. Rail crossings shall be signed and pavement markings shall be provided in accordance with current standards as established in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(f)  Buffers. 
(1)  All development which abuts land zoned residential or used for residential purposes shall be adequately buffered from nonresidential subdivisions. The buffer shall consist of one or a combination of the following: fences, berms, or plantings which are a minimum of six feet high and form a solid barrier. The designer of such barriers shall strive to be innovative on the architectural elements of the barriers, i.e., they shall be aesthetically pleasing yet functional. Where, in the opinion of the director of planning and development or of the town engineer, the proposed development may produce noise, traffic, dust, glare or odor, a planted greenbelt up to 100 feet in depth shall be provided. This greenbelt shall be planted in accordance with the U.S. Soil Conservation Service specifications for windbreak plantings. Species and quantities of plant material shall be shown on the plans. 
(2)  All areas for the outdoor storage of materials, waste, and finished products shall be indicated on the plans. The plans shall state the chemical composition and form of the materials, type of storage, length of storage, and height of the materials. All outdoor storage areas of facilities for fuel, materials, refuse collection, incineration, products, excepting auto merchandizing lots or similar such uses in which visibility from the street of items in parking areas is a necessary part of the business, shall be enclosed by a wall or fence of solid appearance or tightly spaced evergreen hedge not less than six feet high where necessary to conceal such areas or facilities (where visible) from nearby residences. The location and design of storage areas must be approved by the town engineer and by the fire chief. At the request of the town engineer and/or the fire chief, hydrants, fire lanes, security fences, dikes, sumps, alarm systems and any other safety facilities may be required. 
(g)  Bulkheads, piers, wharves, jetties, seawalls and riprap construction. Specifications for such construction shall be obtained from the office of the town engineer. All such construction shall conform to the regulations of the state department of environmental management, the Army Corps of Engineers, the coastal resources management council and the U.S. Coast Guard. 
(h)  Ponds and lagoons. All ponds and/or lagoons for the storage of any liquids shall be indicated on the plans. The design of same shall be submitted with the drainage calculations to the town engineer for review and approval. 
(i)  Waste management. 
(1)  All applicants shall file a waste disposal plan with the department of planning and development. The plan shall indicate the amounts, types, chemical composition, and method of disposal of all waste anticipated to be produced. 
(2)  All use, storage, and transportation of hazardous waste shall be in accordance with the laws, rules and regulations of the state department of environmental management. The applicant shall indicate on the subdivision plans materials which will be used, stored, transported, or generated which will be controlled by these regulations. The applicant shall indicate the location, amount, and chemical composition of all such wastes. No open storage of hazardous waste will be allowed. 
(j)  Environmental protection. 
(1)  Where deemed necessary by the town engineer, permanent groundwater monitoring wells shall be installed with a right-of-way provided to the town for sampling purposes. 
(2)  All discharges of wastewater shall be in accordance with the laws, rules, and regulation of the state department of environmental management. 
(3)  All industrial and commercial developments shall be in conformance with federal, state and local air pollution control laws, rules and regulations. 
(4)  In off-peak hours, all outdoor illumination shall be reduced to minimum levels necessary for security purposes. If necessary, automatic timers shall be employed to carry out this function. Shielding from glare shall be required if necessary in the design and/or building phase of this project. 
(5)  All septic systems shall meet the standards established by the state department of environmental management. In addition, the town engineer may impose such additional requirements as deemed necessary for the long-term proper functioning of the system. Plans must show the proposed septic systems, design and location, composition and quantities of waste and the method of disposal. 
(6)  All internal and external drainage systems, including but not limited to storm drains, subdrains, roof drains, floor drains, sumps, emergency sumps, toilet and kitchen drains shall be indicated on the plans. 
(7)  A drainage plan shall be submitted with all computations and backup data describing the storm drainage system. The system shall be designed in such a manner so as to minimize the disposal of stormwater off-site. The applicant shall make maximum use of on-site holding basins so as to minimize the downstream impact of the drainage from paved areas and roofs. The drainage system shall be designed to allow the separation of stormwater which may become contaminated by hazardous materials. 
(k)  Water system. Plans shall indicate the complete water system with estimated daily water consumption. The plan shall indicate wells, pumping facilities, water tanks, cisterns, water lines, hydrants, fire control siamese connections, and sprinkler systems. If private wells or other private water supply is to be used, proof shall be provided as to the quality and quantity of water available. The water supply system shall meet the standards set by the state department of health, the fire chief, and the town engineer. If the water supply is deemed to be inadequate in quantity or quality, the developer will be required to find an alternative source of supply. If private wells are used, proof shall be supplied to the town that the proposed drawdowns will not adversely impact any existing wells. If the municipal water system is incorporated in the subdivision design, the developer/contractor shall provide the town engineer with accurate as-built drawings showing the water line extensions. 
(l)  Snow storage. Developments which have paved parking, loading, and driveway areas in excess of 40,000 square feet shall provide snow storage areas. These areas shall be designed in such a manner so as to allow for the return of melt water to the ground rather than allowing the melt water to drain into the storm drainage system. 
(m)  Site engineering and construction specifications. All site construction shall be in accordance with the Rhode Island Standard Details and Rhode Island Standard Specifications, as amended, issued by the state department of transportation, division of public works, and with criteria set forth by the town engineer. 
Sec. 14.3. - Post Road district design standards and guidelines. 
    14.3.1. Purposes. In the Post Road District (PRD), the following architectural standards and guidelines are provided to establish and eventually maintain the PRD as a vibrant pedestrian-friendly mixed use corridor. The standards and guidelines recognize the importance of consistency in building materials, massing, scale and articulation, design elements and motifs that represent the region's architectural heritage and shall be used to shape development that is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the Post Road Corridor Plan. It is not the intent of these standards and guidelines to create a homogenous district in which all buildings closely resemble one another in a unified design concept. Rather, these standards and guidelines provide a framework for development that will ensure a high quality of design that is consistent with the most appealing aspects of North Kingstown's community character. 
    To allow for thoughtful and appealing deviation from these standards, the Director of Planning or the Planning Commission, as applicable, may provide waivers for each of these standards in the event that: 
1.  Existing site conditions provide significant hardship and preclude the implementation of any design standard; or 
2.  An applicant provides an alternative design that achieves the goals of the Comprehensive Plan and the Post Road Corridor Plan; or 
3.  Proposed architectural features represent a motif that is consistent with traditional New England design or other desirable motifs traditional to North Kingstown. 
    14.3.2. Site design (see figure 1). 
1.  The location of buildings, parking areas, walkways, outdoor gathering places, landscaping, utilities, loading areas, dumpsters, automobile access, travel lanes, and signs shall reflect a thoughtful approach that focuses primarily on providing optimal access and mobility for pedestrians on and between sites; 
2.  Parking areas shall allow for easy access between lots for automobiles and pedestrians. Where feasible, parking lots shall be connected by a travel lane within the rear yard to provide an opportunity for pedestrians and motorists to pass from one site to another without using established rights of way; 
3.  Within the front yard setback, clear pedestrian pathways shall be provided between buildings and across automobile travel lanes in the form of raised or distinct surfaces such as stamped concrete or grid pavers, arcades, colonnades or other similar features; 
4.  In complexes with multiple principal buildings, landscaped areas with walkways, courtyards or arcades shall be used in conjunction with compact site design to bring buildings closer together and enhance connectivity between them for residents and customers. 
    14.3.3. Building placement (see figures 1 and 2). 
1.  Building setbacks shall comply with the applicable provisions in Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  Street corridors entering Post Road shall be framed at their terminus with buildings of at least two stories at approximately equal setbacks. 
3.  On sites with multiple principal buildings, site design shall be as compact as is feasible. To the greatest extent practicable, pedestrians shall not need to cross parking areas to move from one building to another. 
    14.3.4. Loading, garages and driveways (see figures 1 and 2). 
1.  Loading docks, service areas and trash disposal facilities shall not face a public gathering space or a public street. 
2.  Drive-through service windows shall only be located on the side or in the rear of properties which are internal to the block or accessible from an alley. 
3.  Garages shall be subordinate in size, height and location to the overall building and shall be located with entrances behind the principal building(s); 
4.  Common or shared driveways and parking lots are encouraged to reduce curb cuts and enhance pedestrian circulation. 
    14.3.5. Building size, height and scale (see figures 3 and 4). 
1.  In order to modulate their scale, multi-story buildings shall clearly articulate the base, middle and top of the building through the use of cornices, stepbacks, borders of distinct material or other articulating features. 
2.  Larger buildings with long facades shall articulate the facade with varied rooflines, distinct signage for multiple tenants, awnings, arcades, pilasters, columns, recessed spaces and/or entrances and any other features that serve to add texture to these longer facades. Unbroken facades in excess of fifty (50) feet shall not be allowed. 
3.  Large, flat, unadorned, blank walls shall be avoided for any side or rear walls of buildings. Where windows are not feasible, raised or recessed vertical surfaces may be used in conjunction with awnings, window-shaped depressions and decorative lighting to make these surfaces more attractive. 
4.  Awnings shall be made of canvas and/or weather-coated materials or glass. Each awning should be distinct from its neighbor and continuous awnings over several stores are discouraged. 
    14.3.6. Entranceways (see figure 3). 
1.  All buildings shall have a principal facade and entry (with operable doors) facing a street or other area dedicated to pedestrian circulation. Buildings may have more than one principal facade and/or entry. Primary entrances not facing a street shall open onto sidewalks or other pedestrian features at least ten feet in width. 
2.  Main entrances shall incorporate architectural features that draw attention to the entrance. These features may include covered porches, porticos, recessed doorways and awnings. 
3.  Street level frontage shall be primarily devoted to entrances, shop windows or other displays. 
    14.3.7. Fenestration (see figures 3 and 5). 
1.  The width-to-height ratio of bays in facades above street level shall have a minimum width to height ratio of 1:2. Multiple bays may be placed immediately adjacent to one another in order to create larger window areas. 
2.  Windows on the ground floor shall begin no lower than two feet from street level and shall extend at a minimum height of seven feet from street level. 
3.  Mullion pattern and thickness shall reflect traditional New England design with broad decorative surfaces between windows. Any mullion finishes that would be highly reflective or industrial in nature shall be discouraged. 
4.  Clear, non-reflective glass with minimal tinting shall be used at street level to allow maximum visual interaction between pedestrians and the interior of the building. 
5.  Street level facades shall have a transparency of at least 60 percent. 
6.  All windows (except storefront windows) shall be operable. 
    14.3.8. Dormers (see figures 3 and 5). 
1.  On pitched rooflines, dormers shall be used to break up roof surfaces and shall be provided at a minimum frequency of one per 30 feet or fraction thereof. 
2.  Dormer styles may include doghouse, eyebrow or shed dormers. 
3.  Windows shall fill the face wall of the dormer to the maximum extent practicable and match the windows in the rest of the building. 
    14.3.9. Roofline articulation (see figures 3 and 6). 
1.  The roof design shall provide a variety of building heights and varied roofline articulation. Local models reflecting traditional New England architecture shall be considered in the selection of roof forms. These models include gables, gambrels, flat roofs, mansards and any jointed configuration of these styles. Decorative spires or towers may also be used to articulate rooflines and to provide focal points within a complex of principal buildings; 
2.  Industrial style metal roofing visible from the street shall not be permitted. Metal roofing that uses decorative finishes and textures may be allowed. 
3.  Where proposed, flat roofs shall have decorative cornices or parapets that shield all views of any mechanical systems located on the roof from the street or from windows at a lower elevation in adjacent buildings. 
4.  Downspouts shall match gutters in material and finish. 
5.  Utilities and protuberances through or on the front of roofs are highly discouraged and should generally be shielded from view. 
    14.3.10. Building materials (see figure 3). 
1.  Materials and building treatments shall be used that reduce the visibility of buildings from distant vantage points and shall be consistent and compatible with traditional New England design. 
2.  Where more than one material is used, traditionally heavier materials (stone, brick, concrete with stucco, etc.) shall be located below lighter materials (wood, fiber cement board, siding, etc). The change in material shall occur along a horizontal line, preferably at the floor level. 
3.  Natural materials, such as brick, stone, wood/concrete clapboards and shingles, and slate shall be used in contrast with industrial materials such as unfinished concrete, sheet metal, asphalt shingles, vinyl and plastic synthetic siding and windows and insulated steel doors; especially those that can be seen at the pedestrian level. 
    14.3.11. Landscaping. Requirement for landscaping and landscaping plans in the PRD shall be consistent with those listed in 21-276 and 21-277 of the zoning ordinance and the regulations for development plan review. 
    14.3.12. Lighting. Requirement for lighting and lighting plans in the PRD shall be consistent with those listed in 21-278 of the Zoning Ordinance, the regulations for development plan review with the exceptions or additions listed below (see figure 7): 
1.  Light standards shall not exceed 15 feet in height; and 
2.  Light posts and fixtures shall be decorative in nature and shall not use standard industrial-finish poles or shades. 
    14.3.13. Signage (see figure 8). 
1.  Wall mounted or projected signs should typically be located above the ground floor storefront and just below the second floor windows. Signs should not obscure architectural features or windows and should be integrated with the design of the building. 
2.  Sign colors should be selected to enhance sign legibility for both day and nighttime viewing. Contrasting colors can be used effectively to increase clarity. Sign colors and finishes should be compatible with the color of the building or development. 
3.  Sign materials should be of high quality and compatible with the design of the building and facade on which they are placed. 
4.  Externally illuminating signs should have downward-directed, wall mounted lights with fully-shielded decorative lamps that do not obscure the graphics of the sign. 
5.  Internally illuminated plastic or fiberglass cabinet (can) signs are not allowed. Where internal illumination or back-lighting is proposed, solid letters (reverse channel) are a preferred alternative. 
6.  Signage on awnings is permitted only on the apron portion of the awning for business identification or to advertise particular goods and/or services. 
7.  Free-standing single pole (lollipop) signs are not allowed. Free-standing monument or structured signs are preferred. Free-standing signs should incorporate design details, materials and colors of the associated buildings. The base or support elements of freestanding signs should be integrated with the surrounding environment and should incorporate ornamental landscaping where possible. 

For guideline B2, this image illustrates the type of travel lane connection that will facilitate travel between properties without the use of established rights of way. 

For guidelines B1, B4 and C3, these images illustrate how building and parking placement can affect the ability of pedestrians to easily access multiple buildings. 

For guideline C2, this image illustrates how new or existing side streets can enter Post Road with appropriately scaled buildings framing the entrance way. 

For guideline D2, this image illustrates how a drive through operation might fully screen this activity with the appropriate circulation pattern. 


For guideline E3, this image illustrates how unadorned side walls can detract from an otherwise attractive facade. 

For guidelines G1, G3 and G6, these windows illustrate potential styles that meet the dimensional, material and functional recommendations. 

For guideline H3, these images illustrate how window faces should be sized appropriately to the face of dormers to provide attractive roof level features. 

For guideline category "I. Roofline Articulation" this image illustrates the interplay between dormers and jointed roofs. In this case, a jointed gable configuration along with "doghouse" dormers reflects typical New England architecture. 

For guideline category "L. Lighting", these images illustrate how human-scale decorative lighting creates a more inviting environment for pedestrians. 

For guidelines M1 and M6, the poor placement of signs in this illustration shows how signage can detract from the architectural appeal of well designed buildings. 

The same buildings shown above are provided here with better signage scale and placement. 
(Amd. of 7-15-2008) 
ARTICLE 15.0 - CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS AND METHODS 

Sec. 15.1. - Required minimum construction specifications. 
(a)  Construction of required improvements in developments undertaken in accordance with all town ordinances and with these regulations shall comply with the standards contained in the following publications: 
Rhode Island Standard Specifications for Road & Bridge Construction, latest edition, with all corrections addenda. 
Rhode Island Standard Details, latest edition, with all corrections and addenda. 
Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, latest edition, with all corrections and addenda. 
Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, latest edition, with all corrections and addenda. 
American Water Works Association (AWWA) Standards, latest edition, with all corrections and addenda. 
Town of North Kingstown standard specifications and details contained in this appendix. 
(b)  In residential compounds and in the Pojac Point fire district, the commission may waive the requirement that streets be paved, and the commission may reduce the travel surface and right-of-way widths otherwise required by these regulations. See article 8. Such private roads shall be designed and constructed in relation to the volume of traffic which will use the roads and in relation to surrounding development and safety at intersections with other roads. 
(c)  Typical roadway sections, plans and details. See figures 1-12 in exhibit B. 
(d)  All required improvements shall be inspected by the town engineer to ensure satisfactory completion. In no case shall the installation of any improvement be started until prior notification is given to the town engineer. At least a 48-hour notice shall be given to the town engineer prior to any such start of construction. A final inspection of all required improvements, utilities and grading will be made to determine whether the work is satisfactory and in substantial agreement with the approved plan and the town's specifications. The general condition of the site shall also be considered. Such final inspection shall be required prior to any application to the town for street acceptance. 
(e)  The subdivider shall furnish to the administrative officer as-built drawings of the completed improvements. The as-built drawings must be received for review and approval by the town engineer prior to the release of 90 percent of the improvement guarantee as provided in article 7, section 7.2(i). 
A mylar sepia copy of the approved subdivision plans shall comprise the base plans for the as-built drawings. 
Any additions, deletions or modifications to the proposed improvements shall be shown by lining through the proposed information and inserting the as-built information. 
A state registered professional engineer and state registered land surveyor shall be responsible for the preparation of the as-built drawings and shall attest to it by stamping, signing and dating the cover sheet and all other pertinent sheets of the set of drawings. 
Generally, all information indicated as proposed on the original approved plans will be subject to verification as as-built. If no change has been indicated, then the original proposed information will be considered to be as-built. Exceptions to these criteria will be at the discretion of the administrative officer, after consultation with the town engineer. Any issues should be discussed with the town engineer prior to or during the preparation of the as-built drawings. 
ARTICLE 16.0 - TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR) 

Sec. 16.1. - General. 
    Transfer of development rights (TDR) is permitted in the town subject to all provisions within article XXIII of the zoning ordinance and applicable provisions within these regulations. The purpose of TDR is to focus redevelopment and new development in the designated receiving zones identified in the zoning ordinance, and to protect the most valuable lands from an agricultural and preservation perspective. 
(Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 16.2. - Certificate of development rights. 
16.2.1. Issuance and Maintenance 
    Upon master plan approval of a TDR sending area land development application, the planning commission shall authorize the issuance of a certificate of development rights and, if applicable, a certificate of retained development rights from the director of planning. Issuance and maintenance of these certificates shall be as follows: 
1.  Barring any appeals, the certificate of development rights and/or the certificate of retained development rights shall be issued within ten days of the expiration of the appeal period following the planning commission's approval pursuant to section 21-609 of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  The certificate shall be signed by the owner of the development rights and the administrative officer and stamped by the town clerk. 
3.  Copies of the original certificate shall be kept on file with the administrative officer and the town clerk. 
4.  The sale, transfer, conveyance or extinguishing of development rights shall be recorded with the director of planning. Revised certificates shall be issued upon change of ownership or upon the reduction of development rights vested in a certificate. 
5.  The original number of development rights vested in a certificate of development rights shall be based on the plans approved by the planning commission as described in section 21-609 of the zoning ordinance. Changes to the zoning ordinance or any other federal, state or local regulation that occur after the vesting of those rights shall not increase or decrease the number of rights originally approved by the planning commission. Development rights shall be considered viable as long as the easement that was established as part of their approval remains intact. However, development rights are the property of the bearer of the certificate and the town bears no responsibility as to the market value of these rights, the feasibility of landing those rights in a receiving area, or the feasibility of developing any retained development rights. 
(Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 16.3. - Allowable TDR transactions. 
    Pursuant to section 21-611 of article XXIII of the zoning ordinance, once the development rights have been approved by the planning commission and a certificate of development rights has been issued by the director of planning, the development rights may be transferred to a receiving area according to the transfer of development rights schedules for agricultural and conservation lands provided in these regulations. The transfer of development rights can occur using any of the following four individual approaches or combinations of these approaches as may be appropriate: 
1.  Development rights associated with single family homes may be used to develop multi-family homes in the receiving area. 
2.  Development rights associated with single family homes may be used to develop allowable non-residential uses in the receiving area. 
3.  Development rights associated with office space may be used to develop multi-family homes in the receiving area. 
4.  Development rights associated with office space may be used to develop allowable non-residential uses in the receiving area. 
    Development rights vested in a certificate of development rights may only be used for TDR transactions in the receiving area. These development rights may not be used as part of any future subdivision or land development application associated with the sending area parcel(s). Only those development rights associated with a certificate of retained development rights may be used for future development within the sending area. 
(Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 16.4. - Development right transfer capacity. 
1.  Certified development rights have different capacities to yield density bonuses in receiving area districts. The differing capacity of each development right shall depend on its status as "agricultural" or "conservation", and its score pursuant to the regulations. 
a.  Land owners in the sending area overlay district cannot obtain a TDR sending area land development permit without establishing a score for their property. 
(Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 16.5. - Scoring agricultural lands. 
16.5.1 Role of the state agricultural lands preservation commission. 
    Agricultural lands shall receive a score from the agricultural lands preservation commission (ALPC) through an application to that office pursuant to the Farmland Preservation Act, Title 42, chapter 82 of the Rhode Island General Laws as amended. This score shall serve as the basis for determining the available density bonuses in the receiving area. Agricultural operations not eligible to apply to ALPC because they contain less than five acres shall be eligible for TDR in accordance with the density bonus schedule contained in these regulations. 
16.5.2 Transferable Development Rights Schedule for Agricultural Lands. 
    Once the ALPC score is issued to the property owner, the Planning Commission shall use the score to determine the density bonuses that shall be allowable for each development right in accordance with the following schedules: 
1.  Using development rights associated with single family homes to yield multi-family dwellings as defined in the zoning ordinance 21-22. 
ALPC Score Number of Multi-Family Units Allowable for Each Development Right* Not Eligible for ALPC 
(less than five acres) 4 0-24 4 25-34 5 35-44 6 45-55 7 Above 55 8  
*One single family home is equal to one development right. 
2.  Using development rights associated with single family homes to yield non-residential use 
ALPC Score Additional Non-Residential Use Allowable for Each Development Right* Not Eligible for ALPC 
(less than five acres) 2,000 square feet 0-24 2,000 square feet 25-34 2,250 square feet 35-44 2,500 square feet 45-55 2,750 square feet Above 55 3,000 square feet  
*One single family home is equal to one development right. 
3.  Using development rights associated with office space to yield multi-family dwellings as defined in the zoning ordinance 21-22. 
ALPC Score Number of Multi-Family Units Allowable for Each Development Right* Not Eligible for ALPC 
(less than five acres) 4 0-24 4 25-34 5 35-44 6 45-55 7 Above 55 8  
*4,000 square feet of office use (gross floor area) is equal to one development right. No fractions of a development right shall be allowed. 
4.  Using development rights associated with office space to yield non-residential use 
ALPC Score Additional Non-Residential Use Allowable for Each Development Right* Not Eligible for ALPC 
(less than five acres) 4,000 square feet 0-24 4,000 square feet 25-34 4,500 square feet 35-44 5,000 square feet 45-55 5,500 square feet Above 55 6,000 square feet  
*4,000 square feet of office use (gross floor area) is equal to one development right. No fractions of a development right shall be allowed. 
(Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 16.6. - Scoring conservation lands. 
16.6.1. Standard procedures. 
    Lands proposed to be set aside as "conservation lands" as part of the TDR program shall receive a score from the Planning Commission. This scoring process shall take place as part of an application for a TDR Sending Area Land Development project. 
16.6.2. Conservation Land Score Checklist and Administrative Officer Review. 
    A property owner that wishes to make conservation lands eligible for TDR shall receive a property score from the Planning Commission by including a proposed Conservation Land Score Checklist, as provided for in these regulations, with his application for a TDR Sending Area Land Development permit. The applicant shall also submit a copy of the checklist to the Administrative Officer who shall provide a formal letter of review to the Planning Commission for its consideration. 
16.6.3. Site Visit for Scoring Conservation Lands. 
    The Planning Commission shall schedule a site visit in accordance with the procedures and requirements of Section 5.3.4.e of Article 3 provided that the site visit shall be conducted before the Master Plan hearing. Notification of the site visit shall be conducted in accordance with Section 5.3.4.d except that notification within the notice radius as specified in Section 5.3.5.t., which shall not be required. 
16.6.4. Criteria for scoring conservation lands. 
    The applicant shall use the following criteria and associated scoring system when developing a conservation lands score checklist. 
Criteria 0 5 10 1. Size of Parcel less than ten acres at least ten acres, but less than 30 acres greater than or equal to 30 acres 2. Location relative to the most recently amended groundwater protection areas map in the zoning ordinance* Contains no designated areas 50% or less of the site or less than or equal to ten acres of land within the district, whichever is less More than 50% of the site or more than ten acres of land within the district, whichever is less 3. Closest proximity to other protected lands greater than 1/2 mile Less than 1/2 mile but non-contiguous. Contiguous 4. Supports or is capable of supporting rare or endangered species No May not fall w/in a heritage area, but exhibits qualities that could support rare species as evidenced by field data collected by a professional biologist Falls w/in the heritage area of special concern 5. Location relative to the most recently amended historic and scenic resources map in the comprehensive plan Contains no historic or scenic resources 50% or less of the property is located in a designated area or the site includes a state or federally recognized historic structure More than 50% of the property is located in a designated area 6. Location relative to the Rhode Island Urban Service Boundary as referenced in the comprehensive plan Completely inside the urban service boundary Contains some developable land outside the urban service boundary Completely outside the urban service boundary 7. Location relative to the most recently amended water service area in the comprehensive plan Completely inside the water service area Contains some developable land outside the water service area Completely outside the water service area  
*Applicant shall apply the scores to the Zone 2 as designated on the Groundwater Protection Map. Parcels containing Zone 1 Areas shall be scored in the same manner but the score values shall be doubled. Where a property contains both Zone 1 and Zone 2 areas, the scores shall be cumulative. 
16.6.5 Transferable development rights schedule for conservation lands. 
1.  Using development rights associated with single family homes to yield multi-family units. 
Conservation Lands Score Number of Multi-Family Units Allowable for Each Development Right* 0-35 4 40-45 5 50-55 6 60-65 7 70 and over 8  
*One single family home is equal to one development right. 
2.  Using development rights associated with single family homes to yield non-residential use. 
Conservation Lands Score Additional Non-Residential Use Allowable for Each Development Right* 0-30 2,000 square feet 35-40 2,250 square feet 45-50 2,500 square feet 55-60 2,750 square feet 65 and over 3,000 square feet  
*One single family home is equal to one development right. 
3.  Using development rights associated with office space to yield multi-family units. 
Conservation Lands Score Number of Multi-Family Units Allowable for Each Development Right* 0-30 4 35-40 5 45-50 6 55-60 7 65 and over 8  
*4,000 square feet of office use (gross floor area) is equal to one development right. No fractions of a development right shall be allowed. 
4.  Using development rights associated with office space to yield non-residential use. 
Conservation Lands Score Additional Non-Residential Use Allowable for Each Development Right* 0-30 4,000 square feet 35-40 4,500 square feet 45-50 5,000 square feet 55-60 5,500 square feet 65 and over 6,000 square feet  
*4,000 square feet of office use (gross floor area) is equal to one development right. No fractions of a development right shall be allowed. 
16.6.6. Scoring conservation lands with prior approvals. 
    Where a property owner has received prior master plan, preliminary plan or final plan approvals, is eligible, and applies to participate in the TDR program pursuant to section 21-609(10) of the zoning ordinance, the planning commission shall score the property as part of a TDR sending area land development permit. The planning commission may combine the pre-application and master plan phases of this review into a single review. The applicant shall only be required to submit evidence of the prior approval and a completed TDR conservation land score checklist for the tract of land. A site visit and a review of the checklist by the administrative officer shall be performed in accordance with sections 16.6.2 and 16.6.3 of these regulations. 
(Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 16.7. - Partial preservation of larger tract of agricultural land for which an ALPC score has been issued. 
16.7.1. General. 
    The town recognizes the possibility that property owners may wish to preserve a portion of farm land that is part of a larger tract which previously received a score from ALPC. The planning commission may allow this to occur subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The smaller tract of land shall be completely contained within the larger tract that was previously scored by ALPC. 
2.  The agricultural value of the smaller tract is determined relative to the larger tract as provided for in Section 16.7.2. 
16.7.2. Using the relative agricultural value (RAV) of soils to compare the value of the smaller tract to the larger tract of agricultural land. 
    The planning commission may allow the property owner to apply the overall ALPC score to the smaller tract if the weighted average relative agricultural value (RAV) score for the entire site does not exceed the weighted average RAV score for the proposed smaller tract by more than ten percent. If the weighted average RAV score for the entire parcel does exceed the score of the smaller tract by more than ten percent and the applicant does not wish to amend the application, the smaller tract shall yield the lowest density bonus available with the section 16.5.2 of these regulations. 
16.7.3. Completing the preservation of a larger tract. 
    If the smaller tract of agricultural land in question represents the last remaining piece of the larger tract needed to completely preserve the area previously scored by ALPC, the planning commission shall waive any requirement to analyze RAV numbers and shall apply the original ALPC score to the remaining land. 
(Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
ARTICLE 17.0 - WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (WES) DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 17.1. - General. 
17.1.1. Wind Energy Systems. 
    Wind energy systems are devices that convert wind energy into electrical energy. WES are permitted subject to all provisions within articles 21-22 and 21-322 of the zoning ordinance, applicable provisions within these regulations, and any other applicable town, state and federal regulations. 
17.1.2. Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this section to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of wind energy systems. The design and performance standards for WES recognize the importance of the community character of North Kingstown and are intended to address any offsite impacts that could be caused by a WES. These standards shall be used to permit development that is consistent with the comprehensive plan. The standards and guidelines provide a framework for development that are intended to ensure a high quality of design and placement of WES that is consistent with the most appealing aspects of North Kingstown's community character while not unreasonably impacting surrounding uses. 
17.1.3. Findings. 
    The town finds that wind energy is a renewable and nonpolluting energy resource and that its conversion to electricity will reduce our dependence on nonrenewable energy resources. 
17.1.4. Authority. 
    The town zoning ordinance has established specific areas where WES systems are allowed, as well as the definitions in relation to WES. 
(Amd. of 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 17.2. - Design and performance standards. 
17.2.1. Design and Performance Standards for Building Mounted Wind Energy System (BMWES) 
    A BMWES shall be permitted in all zoning districts as provided for in the Zoning Ordinance, except the Historic District, subject to the following requirements and the appropriate permits and approvals: 
1.  The highest point of the system shall extend no more than 15 feet above the highest point of the building at the point of mounting, excluding spires, chimneys, flagpoles and other like features. 
2.  A plan shall be submitted with a description of the method of attachment to the building. 
3.  If the building is a pre-existing nonconforming building in regards to building setbacks, the BMWES shall not be placed or attached within the area that is nonconforming to the required setbacks for a parcel of land of the minimum parcel size for that zoning district. 
4.  The BMWES shall satisfy the requirements of the building official. 
5.  For residential applications, there shall only be one BMWES per residential lot. There shall be no limitation as to the number of BMWES allowed on commercial parcels or buildings. 
6.  Noise. The sound level generated by a BMWES shall not exceed 50 dB(A) measured at the property lines. 
7.  Shadow flicker. BMWES shall not cast significant shadow flicker on other uses. BMWES shall be sited in a manner that does not result in significant shadow flicker impacts assuming the statistical average of New England weather based upon reliable published data. Shadow flicker shall be significant if it falls for more than 30 hours per year on occupied buildings and other appurtenant features/uses. Applicants shall address insignificant shadow flicker through siting and/or mitigation measures. The applicant has the burden of proving that shadow flicker does not have significant adverse impacts. 
8.  Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the BMWES and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. 
9.  Lighting. There shall be no lighting of the BMWES unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
10.  Signs. The BMWES shall not display any permanent or temporary signs, writing, symbols, logos, or any graphic representation. Warning signs and manufacturer's signs not to exceed one square foot may be permitted. 
11.  Ancillary structures. No ancillary structures shall be attached to the BMWES tower that are not incidental to its primary use. 
12.  Wiring. Where applicable, wiring shall be installed underground. 
13.  Color. The BMWES shall have a non-reflective, neutral color, except the blades may be black. 
14.  Removal of defective or unsafe BMWES. Any BMWES found to be unsafe by the building official shall be repaired by the landowner to meet federal, state and local safety standards or removed within six months. In the event that the building official determines that an existing condition poses an imminent threat to public safety, the BMWES shall be removed immediately. 
15.  The planning department or building official may require that all BMWES have a device or mechanism that will automatically shut off the BMWES if an imbalance in the BMWES occurs. 
16.  Additional items that the planning department or building official may require the applicant to address: 
a.  Procedures for potential impacts to wildlife; 
b.  Ice throw; and 
c.  Maintenance and monitoring. 
17.2.2. Design and performance standards for met towers Met towers shall be permitted in all zoning districts as provided for in the zoning ordinance, except the historic district, subject to the following requirements and appropriate permits and approvals: 
1.  Met towers that receive a building permit shall be permitted on a temporary basis not to exceed 18 months from the date the building permit was issued. The owner of the property where a met tower is located shall be required to obtain a demolition permit and remove and properly dispose of the structure within 18 months of its installation. Within that time period the applicant/owner can request a six-month extension from the planning commission. 
2.  Met towers shall conform to the setback as defined in section 21-322 of the North Kingstown Zoning Ordinance from: a) Property lines; b) Any overhead utility lines, not including utility lines directly connected to the structure that will contain the met tower, unless written permission is granted by the affected utility. 
3.  Noise. The sound level generated by a met tower shall not exceed 50 dB(A) measured at the property lines. 
4.  Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the met tower and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. 
5.  Lighting. There shall be no lighting of the met tower unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
6.  Signs. The met tower shall not display any permanent or temporary signs, writing, symbols, logos, or any graphic representation. Warning signs and manufacturers signs not to exceed one square foot may be permitted. 
7.  Ancillary structures. No ancillary structures shall be attached to the met tower that are not incidental to its primary use. 
8.  A plan for maintenance and monitoring shall be submitted. 
9.  Proof of certification of the met tower by the manufacturer or by the design professional shall be submitted. 
10.  Proof of liability insurance shall be submitted at the time of application or at the time of a request for a building permit as determined by the planning commission. 
11.  Removal of defective or unsafe met towers. Any met tower found to be unsafe by the building official shall be repaired by the landowner to meet federal, state and local safety standards or removed within three months. In the event that the building official determines that an existing condition poses an imminent threat to public safety, the met tower shall be removed immediately. 
17.2.3. Design and performance standards for a small wind energy system (SWES). 
    A SWES shall be permitted in all zoning districts as provided for in the zoning ordinance, except the historic district, subject to the following requirements and appropriate permits and approvals: 
1.  Setbacks. A SWES shall conform to the setback as defined in section 21-322 of the zoning ordinance from: 
a.  Property lines; 
b.  Any public roads unless written permission is granted by the governmental entity with jurisdiction over the road; and 
c.  Any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted by the affected utility. 
2.  Tower height. The maximum tower height is defined in section 21-22 of the zoning ordinance. The tip of the rotor cannot be closer than 25 feet from the ground. 
3.  Noise. The sound level generated by a SWES shall not exceed 50 dB(A) measured at the property lines. The applicant or owner of the WES shall complete one year of monitoring the noise decibel data from the date of the certificate of occupancy of the WES and submit said data to the administrative officer upon completion. 
4.  Shadow flicker. SWES shall not cast significant shadow flicker on other uses. SWES shall be sited in a manner that does not result in significant shadow flicker impacts assuming the statistical average of New England weather based upon reliable published data. Shadow flicker shall be significant if it falls for more than thirty (30) hours per year on occupied buildings and other appurtenant features. The applicant shall address insignificant shadow flicker through siting and/or mitigation measures. The applicant has the burden of proving that shadow flicker does not have significant adverse impacts. 
5.  Access. The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of 12 feet above the ground. All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured against unauthorized access. 
6.  Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the SWES and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. 
7.  Lighting. There shall be no lighting unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
8.  Signs. There shall be no permanent or temporary signs, writing, symbols, logos, or any graphic representations attached to the unit. Warning signs and manufacturers signs not exceeding one square foot may be permitted. 
9.  Ancillary structures. No ancillary structures shall be attached to the tower that are not incidental to its primary use. 
10.  Wiring. Wiring shall be installed underground. 
11.  Color. The structure shall have a non-reflective, neutral color, except the blades may be black. 
12.  Automatic shutoff. The SWES shall have the capability to automatically shut off if an imbalance occurs. 
13.  Removal of defective, unsafe or abandoned units. Any SWES found to be unsafe by the building official shall be repaired by the landowner to meet federal, state and local safety standards or removed within six months. In the event that the building official determines that an existing condition poses an imminent threat to public safety, the SWES shall be removed immediately. Any SWES that is inoperable for a period of three years shall be considered abandoned, and shall thereafter be removed within six months unless the owner for cause shown obtains an extension of time from the planning commission. 
14.  Financial surety. The planning commission shall require the applicant to provide surety, either through escrow account, bond, performance bond, or otherwise to cover the cost of removal in the event the town must remove the WES. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount of surety shall be based on the estimated cost of removal at the end of the useful life of the facility. The amount and form of surety shall be determined by the body requiring the surety, but in no event shall the amount exceed 125 percent of the estimated future cost of removal and compliance with the additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the applicant and approved by the town. Such surety shall not be required for municipally or state-owned WES. 
15.  Additional items that the planning commission may require the applicant to address: 
a.  Procedures to minimize potential impacts on wildlife; 
b.  Procedures for addressing separation between towers; 
c.  Requirements for addressing public inquiries; 
d.  Landscaping; 
e.  Ice throw; 
f.  Alarms and security procedures; 
g.  Viewscape; 
h.  Maintenance and monitoring; 
i.  Certification of wind energy systems; 
j.  Liability; and 
k.  Insurance, financial responsibility and demolition bonds. 
17.2.4. Design and performance standards for medium wind energy (MWES) or large wind energy system (LWES). 
    MWES and LWES shall be permitted in all zoning districts as provided for in the zoning ordinance, except the historic district, subject to the following requirements and the appropriate permits and approvals: 
1.  Setbacks. MWES and LWES shall conform to the setback as defined in section 21-322 of the zoning ordinance from: 
a.  Property lines; 
b.  Any public roads unless written permission is granted by the governmental entity with jurisdiction over the road; and 
c.  Any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted by the affected utility. 
17.2.4.1. Design and aesthetic standards. 
1.  Color and finish. All components of the units shall have a neutral, non-reflective color, except the blades may be black. 
2.  Lighting. The units shall be illuminated only if required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Lighting of other WES components, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety, security, and operational purposes and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties and except as required by the FAA, shall be directed downward with full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution. Consideration should be given to lighting that does not attract birds or bats. 
3.  Signs. No permanent or temporary signs, writing, symbols, logos, or any graphic representation shall be affixed to the unit except there shall be signs necessary to identify the owner, provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number, and warn of any danger. Signs shall not exceed three square feet in size and shall be placed lower than 12 feet from the ground. 
4.  Advertising. WESs shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the wind energy facility not to exceed two square feet. Such reasonable identification shall be located within eight feet of the ground. 
5.  Utility connections. Utility connections from the WES shall be installed underground. 
6.  Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to WES shall be subject to regulations of this ordinance concerning the bulk and height of structures and determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage. All appurtenant structures, including but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations shall be architecturally compatible with each other and shall be contained within the turbine tower or other existing structures on the property whenever technically and economically feasible. Whenever reasonable, appurtenant structures shall be hidden or buffered from view by vegetation and/or located in an underground vault and joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts. 
7.  Support towers monopole towers are required. 
8.  Ancillary structures. No visible telecommunications dishes, antennas, cellular telephone repeaters or other similar devices shall be attached externally to the WES without prior approval of the planning commission. Internal locations for such devices are allowed. 
9.  Distance between WES. The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the planning commission that the proposed WES shall not have any negative impacts on other existing or proposed WES applications that have been submitted as of the date of the application that are consistent with and meet the requirements of these regulations. 
10.  Certification of system. All systems shall be installed by a designated and recognized authority acceptable to the planning commission. 
17.2.4.2. Safety and environmental standards. 
1.  Emergency services. The applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary and site plan to the fire and police departments. Upon request of the fire department and/or police department, the applicant shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. 
2.  Minimum rotor height from ground. The minimum rotor height for the tip of the rotor blade shall be no less than fifty (50) feet from the ground. 
3.  Access. WES, towers, and appurtenant structures shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access. WES shall not have climbable fixtures located within 15 feet of the ground. WES shall be equipped with appropriate security or alarms devices to prevent unauthorized access and to alert the owners of any unauthorized access. 
4.  Shadow flicker. The WES shall not cast significant shadow flicker on other uses. The WES shall be sited in a manner that does not result in significant shadow flicker impacts assuming the statistical average of New England weather based upon reliable published data. Shadow flicker shall be significant if it falls for more than 30 hours per year on occupied buildings and other appurtenant features. Applicants shall address insignificant shadow flicker through siting and/or mitigation measures. The applicant has the burden of proving that shadow flicker does not have significant adverse impacts. 
5.  Noise. The sound level generated by a WES shall not exceed 50 dB(A) measured at the property lines. 
6.  Land clearing and soil erosion. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the WES and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. Design and construction of the WES shall provide for control of site runoff and storm water management as provided for in the applicable sections of these regulations, specifically section 14.0, as well as appropriate sections of the zoning ordinance and Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
7.  Wildlife and habitat impacts. Potential adverse impacts to wildlife and habitats must be identified by the applicant and shall be minimized through appropriate facility siting and design. The best available mitigation techniques shall be utilized to address bat mortalities and other known wildlife impacts. 
8.  Waiver of development standards for setbacks and shadow flicker provisions. The planning commission, in its discretion, is authorized to waive the development standards of this section to the extent these provisions affect a non-participating property, provided the applicant submits the waiver request in writing, and if the applicant is not the property owner, the property owner's written consent to the waiver shall also be submitted. Setback waivers shall only be for waivers of section 17.2.4(1)(c). The waiver request shall contain (a) the non-participating property owner's acknowledgement of the setback or shadow flicker requirements of this chapter and what is proposed in lieu thereof, and (b) an affidavit of the non-participating property owner evidencing support for the applicant's waiver request, and shall describe the impact on the non-participating property owner. The non-participating property owner's affidavit shall be made part of the permit approval and shall be separately recorded with the town clerk's office in the land evidence records at the same time that the permit approval is recorded to provide notice to all subsequent purchasers of the non-participating property. All agreements between non-participating parties or abutter's and WES owners shall be in the form of a deed restriction or easement that shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the town. 
9.  Public inquiries and complaints. The WES owner shall maintain a phone number and identify a responsible person for the public to contact with inquiries and complaints throughout the life of the project. The WES owner/operator shall post an emergency telephone number that is clearly visible on a permanent structure(s) or post(s) within a reasonable distance from the WES to allow contact should any WES need immediate attention. 
10.  Ice throw. Controls to eliminate ice throw are required and shall be addressed at the time of application. 
11.  Electromagnetic interference. Electromagnetic interference shall be addressed if required by the planning commission after discussion at the preapplication meeting. 
17.2.4.3. Monitoring and maintenance. 
1.  Facility conditions. The owner shall maintain the WES in good condition. Maintenance shall include but not be limited to landscaping, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the fire and police departments. The owner shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the WES and any access road and the cost of repairing any damage to the WES occurring as a result of operation and construction. 
2.  Modifications. All material modifications to a WES made after the issuance of all required permits and approvals shall require the applicant to return to the appropriate authority for additional approvals. 
3.  Operation. If noise, electronic interference, or other adverse impacts resulting from the operation of the WES have exceeded allowable limits, the building/zoning official shall notify the owner in writing of the violation. If the violation is not remedied within 30 days the facility shall be shut down or be made inactive until the violation is remedied. 
17.2.4.4. Abandonment and/or decommissioning. 
1.  Removal requirements. A WES that reaches the end of its useful life or is abandoned shall be removed. When the WES is scheduled for decommissioning, the applicant shall notify the planning department and building department by certified mail at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal. The owner/operator shall physically remove the WES no more than six months after the date of discontinued operations. Upon removal, the WES site shall be restored to its preconstruction condition. More specifically, decommissioning shall consist of: 
a.  Physical removal of all WES, structures, equipment, security barriers, and transmission lines to no less than three feet below grade of the site. 
Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The planning commission may allow the owner to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption of vegetation. 
b.  Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local and state waste disposal regulations 
2.  Removal of defective, unsafe or abandoned units. Any WES found to be unsafe by the building official shall be repaired by the landowner to meet federal, state and local safety standards or removed within six months, provided, however, that in the event that the building official determines that an existing condition poses an imminent threat to public safety, the WES shall be removed immediately. Any WES that is inoperable for a period of one year shall be considered abandoned, and shall thereafter be removed within six months unless the owner obtains an extension of time for cause shown from the planning commission. If the owner fails to remove the WES in accordance with the requirements of this section, the town shall have the authority to enter the property and physically remove the WES. The costs incurred by the town shall constitute a lien on property in favor of the town and shall be recoverable from such parties in an action of contract. The town shall render an account to the MWES or LWES owner, operator and the landowner, as applicable. 
3.  Financial surety. The planning commission shall require the applicant to provide surety, either through escrow account, bond, performance bond, or otherwise to cover the cost of removal in the event the town must remove the WES. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount of surety shall be based on the estimated cost of removal at the end of the useful life of the facility. The amount and form of surety is to be determined by the body requiring the surety, but in no event shall the amount exceed 125 percent of the estimated future cost of removal and compliance with the additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the applicant and approved by the town. Such surety shall not be required for municipally or state-owned WES. 
(Amd. of 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 17.3. - Waivers of standards. 
    The planning commission for good cause shown may provide waivers from each of these standards in the event that: 
1.  Existing site conditions create significant hardship that substantially impedes implementation of any of the design standards; or 
2.  Proposed mitigation actions allow for the effective siting of WES that address offsite impacts and do not diminish the community character of North Kingstown; and 
3.  The applicant provides a design that achieves the goals of the comprehensive plan. 
(Amd. of 10-26-2010) 
ARTICLE 18.0 - APPLICATION CHECKLISTS[3] 
    The following checklists can be found in exhibit C. 
A.  Administrative subdivision 
B.  Pre-application meetings and concept review-Minor or major land development projects and minor or major subdivisions 
C.  Minor preliminary plan checklist-Minor land development projects and minor subdivisions 
D.  Minor final plan checklist-Minor land development projects and minor subdivisions 
E.  Major master plan checklist-Major land development projects and major subdivisions 
F.  Major preliminary plan checklist-Major land development projects and major subdivisions 
G.  Major final plan checklist-Major land development projects and major subdivisions 
H.  Checklist for Pojac Point Road 
I.  Checklist for planned unit development 
J.  Development plan review checklist 
K.  TDR Sending Area Land Development Project Pre-Application Review Checklist 
L.  TDR Sending Area Land Development Project Master Plan Review Checklist 
M.  Conservation Land Score Checklist. 
(Amd. of 7-15-2008; Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
  
  
  
  
  
Exhibit A 
Suggested Street Trees for Subdivision 
  
Town of North Kingstown 
  
  
  
  
  
Prepared by: 
  
Paul L. Santer, ASLA affiliate member 
RI Certified Arborist, Lic. No. 536 
Adopted September 17, 1996 
By the 
North Kingstown Planning Commission 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An amendment of February 17, 2009, renumbered former art. 16.0 as a new art. 17.0. Subsequently, an amendment of October 26, 2010, renumbered former art. 17.0 as a new art. 18.0. 

EXHIBIT A - SUGGESTED STREET TREES FOR SUBDIVISION 
Tree specifications 
Trees shall be minimally 11/2-2? caliper (approximately 10-12' tall). 
Trees shall be balled and burlapped. 
Trees shall have a straight, single stem, an intact central leader and be branched at an appropriate height (6-8'). 
Tree spacing 
Staggered alignments: Trees shall be spaced 25' minimally, and 50' maximally on each side of the street depending on the 30-year width of the selected tree (i.e., smaller trees shall be space at smaller intervals). 
Opposite alignments (allees): Trees shall be spaced 30' minimally, and 50' maximally on each side of the street, depending on the 30-year width of the selected tree (i.e., smaller trees shall be spaced at smaller intervals). 
Tree selection 
A mix of more than one tree species is recommended. 
Where cultivars (cultivated variety) are specified for any particular tree species, only those cultivars may be used. 
Where cultivars (cultivated variety) are not specified, selection of cultivars offering form variation (e.g., Fastigiata, Columnare, etc) of suggested trees species is acceptable. 
To avoid overuse in the landscape, the selection of the following trees should be limited: 
Gleditsia species Honey locust Pyrus calleryana Callery pear cultivars Tilia species Linden Ulmus species Elm Zelkova species Zelkova  
Tree staking 
Any tree staking apparatus must be removed no later than one year after installation of any tree. 
Tree pruning 
Street trees should be pruned to maintain a minimal branch height of eigth inches within two years of installation of the tree. 
Purpose 
The attached list of suggested street trees for subdivision streets was written in response to frequent requests from landscape architects, subdivision developers, and landscape contractors to increase and optimize street tree selections. 
The proposed list seeks to enhance selection options and design opportunities for landscape professionals and developers while providing a suitable diversity of street trees for the town landscape. 
The written specifications are meant to provide workable standards for the selection and installation of street trees for the town. 
SUGGESTED STREET TREES FOR SUBDIVISION STREETS IN NORTH KINGSTOWN 
Latin Name Common Name Height 
(30 yrs) Width 
(30 yrs) Power Line 
Suitability Salt 
Tolerant Comments Acer bergeranum Trident Maple 25 25 Yes Acer campestre Hedge Maple 35 30 Possible Acer griseum Paperback Maple 20 15 Yes Exfoliating bark Acer pseudoplatanus Sycamore Maple 40 60 No Yes Acer rubrum Red Maple 40 35 No State tree, fall color Acer saccharum Sugar Maple 45 40 No Fall color Acer tataricum Tatarian Maple 20 18 Yes Carpinus betulus European Hornbeam 35 30 Possible Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam 20 20 Possible Carpinus japonica Japanese Hornbeam 25 20 Possible Celtis laevigata Sugar Hackerry 40 30 No Cercidiphyllum japonica Katsura Tree 35 30 No Fragrant Cladrastis lutea American Yellowwood 40 45 No Fragrant Flowers Corylus colurna Turkish Filbert 30 40 No Exfoliating bark Evodia daniellii Korean Evodia 30 30 Possible Vigorous Grower Fraxinus pennsylanica Green Ash 45 40 No Fraxinus oxycarpa Little Leaf Ash 30 20 Possible Fall Color Ginkgo biloba Gingko 35 30 No Yes Spec. male trees Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Thornless Honey Locust 35 35 No Yes Gleditsia triacanthos inermis "Moraine" Moraine Honey Locust 45 40 No Yes Gleditsia triacanthos inermis "Shademaster" Shademaster Honey Locust 50 40 No Yes Gleditsia triacanthos inermis "Skyline" Skyline Honey Locust 50 40 No Yes Gymnocladis dioicus "Espresso" Espresso Kentucky Coffee Tree 40 30 No Yes Fruitless Halesia Carolina Carolina Silverbell 20 15 Yes Yes Attractive flowers Halesia Monticola Mountain Silverbell 40 35 No Yes Attractive flowers Koelreuteria paniculata Golden Rain Tree 30 30 Yes Attractive flowers Liquidambar styraciflua Sweet Gum 45 30 No Fall color Liquidambar stryaciflua "Rotundiloba" Sweet Gum 45 30 No Fruitless Liriodendron tulipfera Tulip Tree 60 35 No Maackia amurensis Amur Maackia 30 30 Yes Fragrant summer flowers Magnolia acuminata Cucumber Tree 50 35 No Magnolia x loebnerii "Merrill" Merrill Magnolia 30 30 Possible Attractive flowers Malus tschonoskii Tschonoski Crab Apple 25 20 Yes Excellent Form Nyssa sylvatica Tupelo 25 25 No Yes Fall color Ostrya virginiana American Hop Hornbeam 30 25 Possible Parrotia persica Persian Parrotia 25 20 Yes Exfoliating bark, fall color Platinus acerifolia London Plane Tree 50 40 No Yes Exfoliating bark Prunus maackii Maur Chokecherry 30 30 Yes Exfoliating bark Pyrus calleryana Callery Pear 35 30 Yes Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak 40 45 No Quercus alba White Oak 45 50 No Yes Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak 45 50 No Yes Fall color Quercus marcocarpa Bur Oak 35 25 No Yes Quercus palustris Pin Oak 35 30 No Yes Quercus robur English Oak 40 30 No Yes Quercus rubra Red Oak 40 30 No Yes Fall color Quercus velutina Black Oak 45 45 No Yes Sophora japonica Japanese Scholar Tree 40 40 No Yes Sorbus ainifolia Korean Mountain Ash 35 25 Possible Fall color Styrax japonica Japanese Snowbell 25 25 Yes Attractive flowers Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac 30 20 Yes Fragrant flowers Tiiia americana American Linden 45 35 No Fragrant Tiiia cordata Little Leaf Linden 45 30 No Yes Fragrant Tiiia tomentosa Silver Linden 45 35 No Fragrant Ulmus americana "New Harmony" New Harmony Am. Elm 50 45 No Disease resistant Ulmus americana "Valley Forge" Valley Forge Am. Elm 50 45 No Disease resistant Ulmus paryiflora Lacebark Elm 50 45 No Yes Disease resistant Ulmus x "Homestead" Homestead Hybrid Elm 50 30 No Yes Disease resistant Ulmus x "Patriot" Patriot Hybrid Elm 50 30 No Yes Disease resistant Zelkova serrata Japanese Zelkova 40 35 No  
  
  
  
  
  
Exhibit B 
Road Design 
  
  
  
  
  
Amended May 16, 2006 
EXHIBIT B. - ROAD DESIGN 

Figure 1. Arterial Street - No Parking Allowed 

Figure 2. Collector Street Parking Allowed 

Figure 3. Collector Street - No Parking Allowed 

Figure 4. Local Access - Parking Allowed (Double Loaded) 

Figure 5. Local Access Street - No Parking Allowed (Single Loaded) 

Figure 6. Local Private Street Typical Cross Section 

Figure 7. Cul-de-Sac Turnaround Details 

Figure 8. Typical Turnaround Details 

Figure 9. Private Common Driveway 

Figure 10. Buffer Along Street 

Figure 11A. Cul-de-Sac Design Loop Lanes 

Figure 11B. Cul-de-Sac Design Loop Lanes 

Figure 12. Typical Roadway Section 

Figure 13A. Street Light Details 

Figure 13B. Street Light Details 
  
  
  
  
  
Exhibit C 
Application Checklists 
  
Town of North Kingstown 
Rhode Island 
  
  
  
  
  
Amended May 16, 2006 
EXHIBIT C. - APPLICATION CHECKLISTS 
A.  CHECKLIST - ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION. 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer four "check prints" of the proposed plat for review. Plans shall include a certification that all plans and improvements conform to all standards of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Board of Registration for Land Surveyors. The following materials must be delivered in plan format to the administrative officer for review: 
(1)  Three review blue or black line prints prepared by a professional land surveyor at a scale no smaller than 1? = 40' with a sheet size of 24? × 36?. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. 
(2)  Name and address of the property owner(s) and applicant(s). 
(3)  Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s), if any. 
(4)  Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
(5)  Plat and lot numbers of the parcel being resubdivided. 
(6)  Zoning district(s) of the parcel being resubdivided. 
(7)  Existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way. 
(8)  Proposed property lines, drawn to distinguish them from existing property lines. 
(9)  Existing and proposed area(s) and dimensions of lot(s) being resubdivided. 
(10)  Location of wooded areas, stone walls, notable natural features, wetlands and coastal features. 
(11)  Location and size of existing and proposed buildings, structures, utilities, wells, individual sewage disposal systems, and improvements. 
(12)  Location, width and names of existing public and private streets within or immediately adjacent to the parcel being resubdivided. 
(13)  Certification (stamp) of a Rhode Island registered professional land surveyor that the plan and survey are correct according to the standards of class I survey. 
(14)  Completed application form signed by the applicant and the property owner. 
(15)  Administrative fee. See article 11, section 11.4.4.c 
(16)  Certificate of the tax collector that all taxes due on the land have been paid for a period of five years prior to the filing of the application for the administrative subdivision. 
(17)  Such other information as may be requested by the department of planning and development or the planning commission. 
(18)  Following completion of staff review and approval of the check print, the applicant shall submit a Mylar and four prints, at the same scale as the approved check print, for signature by the administrative officer and one print at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet. 
(19)  One copy of all plans shall be submitted on CD in AutoCAD .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format and as a PDF. 
B.  CHECKLIST FOR PRE-APPLICATION MEETINGS AND CONCEPT REVIEW FOR MINOR OR MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS AND MINOR OR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS. 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least eight blue or blackline copies of pre-application maps required below. In addition, 12 reduced set of all plans on 11? × 17? sheets shall be submitted. The scale of all plans shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required and shall be subject to the approval of the administrative officer. The plans must bear the stamp of the professional land surveyor and professional engineer who prepared them. Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format and as a PDF. 
    At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
A.  Existing features. A map or plan(s) of the parcel proposed for development, showing the following information: 
1.  ___ Name of the proposed subdivision. 
2.  ___ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ___ Name, address and telephone number of person or firm preparing pre-application plan. 
4.  ___ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ___ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ___ Plat and lot number(s) of the land being subdivided. 
7.  ___ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
8.  ___ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ___ Location of existing property lines, easements, and rights-of-way within and immediately adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
10.  ___ Area of the subdivision parcel and proposed number of buildable lots, dwellings or other proposed improvements. 
11.  ___ Location, and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the subdivision parcel. 
12.  ___ Location of wooded areas and notation of existing ground cover. 
13.  ___ Estimated location of land unsuitable for development/land with development limitations on or within 200 feet of the property being subdivided, as available from existing information. 
14.  ___ Areas of agricultural use. 
15.  ___ Existing topography (from available information) and showing all areas of slopes greater than 25 percent. 
16.  ___ Location and approximate size of existing buildings or significant aboveground structures on or immediately adjacent to the subdivision. 
17.  ___ Proposals, if any, for connection with existing water supply and sanitary sewer systems. 
18.  ___ Location of historic cemeteries on or immediately adjacent to the subdivision (if any). 
19.  ___ General location of any unique natural and/or archeological and historic features, including stonewalls. 
B.  Proposed development. A diagrammatic sketch plan overlay sheet shall be provided. This sheet shall be prepared to overlay a base map of existing information and features described in A., above. As an alternative, if surveys of the property proposed for development have not been prepared, a separate sketch plan may be submitted. 
1.  ___ Conceptual layout, on a separate drawing or overlay, if necessary to clearly portray areas proposed for development, areas proposed for open space and preliminary street layout. 
2.  ___ Initial yield plan. 
3.  ___ Aerial photograph at a scale not less than 1? = 400' showing areas within a radius of one-half mile of the proposed site. 
C.  Supporting materials. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer copies of a narrative report (actual number of copies to be determined by the administrative officer) providing a general description of the existing physical environment and existing use(s) of the property along with a general description of the uses and type of development proposed by the applicant. The narrative report shall include reduced copies (11? × 17?) of all plans required in A and B., above plus items 2-3, below: 
1.  ___ Administrative filing fee: See article 11, section 11.4.4.c. 
2.  ___ A site context map, as described in article 13, section 13.6. 
3.  ___ Completed application form signed by the applicant and the property .owner 
4.  ___ Certificate of tax collector that all taxes due on the land have been paid prior to filling the preapplication. 
5.  ___ Such other information as may be requested by the department of planning and development or by the planning commission. 
C.  MINOR PRELIMINARY PLAN CHECKLIST-MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS. 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least eight blue or blackline copies of the preliminary site plans required below. In addition, 12 reduced sets of all plans on 11? × 17? sheets shall be submitted. The scale of all plans shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required and shall be subject to the approval of the administrative officer. Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format and as a PDF. 
    At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
Drafting standards 
    Unless otherwise indicated, plans shall be drawn at the following scales: 
(a)  Record plan, not smaller than 1? = 100'; 
(b)  Site plan, not smaller than 1? = 100'; construction plans at a scale not smaller than 1? = 50' with street plan and profile, not smaller than horizontal 1? = 50' and vertical 1? = 5'. 
The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). 
    All sheets must contain the following basic information: 
1.  ___ Plan title block with proposed name of the development; name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s); owner(s), and designer(s) of the plan; date prepared; revision box to identify all changes from previous submissions; plat and lot number(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. 
2.  ___ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
3.  ___ Inset locus map at 1? = 2000'. 
4.  ___ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
5.  ___ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision or development, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
6.  ___ Area of the parcel(s) being developed, and proposed number of buildable lots, dwellings or other proposed improvements. 
7.  ___ Location and dimensions of existing property lines within or adjacent to the parcel(s) being subdivided or developed. 
8.  ___ Easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the parcel(s). 
9.  ___ Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
10.  ___ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets, with plat and lot numbers also indicated. 
11.  ___ Notation on plan if the parcel(s) being developed are located within any of the following areas: 
___  Natural Heritage Areas (RIDEM). 
___  Narrow River Special Area Management Plan. 
___  Zoning Overlay Districts. 
___  Groundwater Recharge Areas. 
___  Wellhead protection Areas. 
___  FEMA Flood Plain. 
Preliminary plan application checklist. 
A.  ___ Site context map. See article 13, section 13.6. 
B.  ___ Existing resources and site analysis map. See article 13, section 13.17. 
C.  ___ Sketch plan overlay sheet. As an overlay to the existing resources and site analysis map, the following features shall be shown so as to demonstrate to the planning commission that the design process provided in article 13, section 13.4 was followed: 
1.  Schematic layout indicating a general concept for land conservation and development. 
2.  Proposed open space areas. 
3.  Proposed location of buildings and major structures, parking areas, and recreational facilities. (Not required of developments involving only single household dwellings). 
4.  Proposed general street layout. 
5.  Proposed lot lines, with approximate lot areas and dimensions. Proposed lot lines shall be drawn so as to distinguish them from existing property lines. 
6.  General description of proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal, and stormwater management. 
7.  Description of pedestrian facilities (sidewalks, footpaths, trails). 
8.  Land proposed for dedication to the town. 
D.  ___ Supplementary information. 
1.  ___ Yield plan, modified from pre-application review (if necessary). 
2.  ___ Preliminary grading plan in sufficient detail to show proposed contours for all grading proposed for on and off-site street construction, drainage facilities and grading upon individual lots if part of proposed subdivision improvements (if applicable). 
3.  ___ Proposed drainage plan and drainage calculations prepared by a registered professional engineer, if required. 
4.  ___ Proposed utilities plan, including sewer, water, gas, electric, phone, cable TV, fire alarm, hydrants, utility poles, or other proposed above or underground utilities, as applicable. 
5.  ___ Location, dimension and area of any land proposed to be set aside as open space. 
6.  ___ Statement identifying any waivers from development standards, zoning variances or special use permits required or requested. 
7.  ___ Base flood elevation data. 
8.  ___ Certification by a Professional Land Surveyor that a perimeter survey of the land being subdivided has been performed and conforms to the survey requirements to a minimum of a class I survey. 
9.  ___ Open space use and management plan. See article 13, section 13.12.a. 
10.  ___ Density calculation based on land suitable for development. 
E.  ___ Supporting materials. 
1.  ___ Administrative fee. See article 11, section 11.4.4.c. 
2.  ___ Project review fee. See article 11, section 11.4.5. 
3.  ___ Written statement from the town water department that town water is available to the development with sufficient volume and pressure to meet fire flow requirements, based on water system model if required by the water department and that the town council has granted permission for water line extension. 
4.  ___ If individual sewage disposal systems are proposed, confirmation from the state department of environmental management that the soils are adequate for the use of ISDS. Either of the following: 
___ Preliminary subdivision suitability report No. _______/(3-5 lots). 
___ Water table verification No. _______/(2 lots). 
5.  ___ The names and addresses of all property owners, agencies or communities requiring notification as required by these regulations (required only if a street extension or creation is involved). 
___ Notification required ___ Notification not required 
6.  ___ Copies of return receipts for certified mail notices (if required in No. 5, above). 
7.  ___ Proposed arrangements for completion of the required public improvements, including construction schedule and financial guarantees. See article 7.0. 
8.  ___ Completed application form signed by the applicant and the property owner. 
9.  ___ Certificate of the tax collector that all taxes due on the land were paid for a period of five years prior to filing of the application. 
10.  ___ Such other information as may be required by the department of planning and development or by the planning commission. 
D.  FINAL PLAN CHECKLIST-MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS. 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer copies of final site plans and supporting materials as indicated below: 
A.  Plat plans to be recorded. One Mylar and four blue or black line prints at a sheet size of 24? × 36?. One Mylar and one blue or black line copy of the record plan will be recorded by the applicant with the town clerk following final approval and signature. Record plan scale not to be smaller than 1? = 100'. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). The following information shall be shown on the plans: 
1.  ___ Plan title block with proposed name of the development; name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s); owner(s), and engineer or land surveyor who prepared the plan; date prepared; with revision box to identify all changes from previous submissions; plat and lot number(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. 
2.  ___ Notation that the subdivision is located in the town. 
3.  ___Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
4.  ___ Inset locus map at 1?=2000'. 
5.  ___ Zoning district(s) of the parcel(s) being developed. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
6.  ___ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision or land development project, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
7.  ___Location and dimensions of existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way within or immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
8.  ___Location, width and names of proposed and existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being developed. 
9.  ___Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets, with plat and lot numbers indicated. 
10.  ___ Location of proposed permanent stone boundary markers. 
11.  ___ Location of all interior lot lines and street lines with accurate dimensions and bearings (or angles) indicated, including data for all horizontal curves. 
12.  ___ Location and number of all proposed lots, with accurate areas indicated. 
13.  ___ Proposed house numbers as provided by the town engineer. 
14.  ___ Developers lot number. 
15.  ___ Location and notation of type of easement(s) or existing easement(s) to remain (if any) with accurate dimensions and areas indicated. 
16.  ___ Location and notation of type of proposed open space areas. 
17.  ___ Notation of any special conditions of approval imposed by the planning commission. 
18.  ___ Notation of any permits and agreements with state and federal reviewing agencies. 
19.  ___ Phasing schedule (if any). 
20.  ___ Certification by a state professional land surveyor that all interior and perimeter lot lines and street lines of the land being subdivided have been designed to conform to a minimum of a class I survey, including the location of all proposed permanent monuments. 
21.  ___ Stamped and signed approval (endorsement) from the planning commission or administrative officer. See article 6.0. 
B.  Construction drawings. Four blue or blackline copies of construction plans drawn to a scale not smaller than 1? = 50' with street plan and profile not smaller than horizontal 1? = 50' and vertical 1? = 5'. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format and as a PDF. 
1.  ___ Final construction plans as listed in the preliminary plat checklist, including plans of any additional improvements as required by the planning commission as a condition of approval, to include the following (if required or applicable). All plans shall bear the stamp of the Rhode Island Registered professional engineer who prepared them. 
___  Proposed street plan and profiles. 
___  Proposed utility plans and profiles for water and sewer systems on a separate plan. 
___  Street cross-sections. 
___  Final detailed drainage plans and computations. 
___  Final detailed grading plans and computations. 
___  Soil erosion and sediment control plan. 
2.  ___ Proposed landscaping plan bearing the stamp of a landscape architect registered in the state (if required by the planning commission). 
3.  ___ For phased projects, as-built drawings for the previous phase (if applicable). 
4.  ___ Proposed street trees. 
5.  ___ At least one bench mark indicating that datum is mean sea level (MSL). 
6.  ___ Certification by a registered professional engineer that the plan is correct. 
7.  ___ One copy of all plans shall be submitted on CD in AutoCAD .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format and as a PDF. 
C.  Supporting materials. 
1.  ___ Administrative fee. See article 11, section 11.4.4.c. 
2.  ___ Certificate of the Tax Collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being subdivided have been paid for a period of five years prior to filing of the final plat and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
3.  ___ Written confirmation from the state department of environmental management pursuant to the RIDEM Rules and Regulations Governing the Enforcement of the Freshwater Wetlands Act, and any subsequent amendments thereto, that plans of the proposed development, including any required off-site construction, have been reviewed and indicating that the Wetlands Act either does not apply to the proposed site alteration or that approval has been granted for the proposed site alteration. 
4.  ___ In lieu of item 3 above, an affidavit signed by a qualified wetlands biologist stating that there are no freshwater wetlands present on or within 200 feet of the property being subdivided. 
5.  ___ A physical alteration permit (PAP) issued by the state department of transportation for any connection to or construction work within a state highway or other right-of-way (if necessary). 
6.  ___ Final approval from the coastal resources management council (if applicable). 
7.  ___ Approval from the US Army Corps of Engineers (if applicable). 
8.  ___ All other state and federal agency approvals (as applicable). 
9.  ___ One original signed copy of all legal documents describing the property, creating a Homeowners' Association, proposed easements and rights-of-way, dedications, restrictions or other required legal documents. One copy of the approved legal documents will be recorded by the applicant with the town clerk following final plan approval and signature. 
Specify: _____
_____
_____
_____ 
10.  ___ One original signed copy of an irrevocable offer to convey to the Town all public streets and/or other public improvements, accompanied by a metes and bounds description of said areas. 
11.  ___ Deed transferring land proposed for dedication to the town or other qualified group or agency for open space purposes. 
12.  ___ Letter of approval of all legal documents from the town solicitor. 
13.  ___ Open space use and management plan. See article 13, section 13.12.a. 
14.  ___ 911 emergency numbers. Proof of notification to the fire marshal with proposed new road names, if any, and all new house numbers assigned to each building lot or dwelling. To be shown on plans with a square box. 
15.  ___ Completed application form signed by the applicant and the property owner. 
16.  ___ Such other information as may be required by the planning commission as a condition of preliminary approval. 
17.  ___ Letters of approval from the town council or appropriate state or federal agency for the construction of any off-site improvements (if required). 
D.  Payment of required fees. Payment of the following fees or posting of financial guarantees, if required, to be prior to endorsement by the planning commission and recording of final plans: 
1.  ___ Administrative fee: See article 11, section 11.4.4.c. 
2.  ___ Final plat recording fee - Amount _____ . 
3.  ___ Financial guarantees in a form approved by the finance director. 
Initial amount _____ . 
Date set by planning Commission _____ . 
Date of expiration of surety _____ . 
4.  ___ Inspection fee - Amount _____ . 
5.  ___ Maintenance bond for acceptance of public improvements (if applicable). 
Amount _____ . 
Date of Council Acceptance _____ . 
Description _____
_____ . 
Date of Expiration of Maintenance Bond _____ . 
E.  CONCEPTUAL MASTER PLAN CHECKLIST-MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS. 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least eight blue or blackline copies of conceptual master plan maps required below. In addition, 12 reduced sets of all plans on 11? × 17? sheets shall be submitted. The scale of all plans shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required and shall be subject to the approval of the administrative officer. Plans shall bear the stamp of the professional land surveyor and professional engineer who prepared them. Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format and as a PDF. 
    At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
Master plan application submission requirements. 
    The submission requirements for master plan applications for major land developments and major subdivisions shall consist of the following five elements and shall be prepared in accordance with the drafting standards and plan requirements set forth below. 
A.  Site context map. 
B.  Existing resources and site analysis map. 
C.  Sketch plan overlay sheet. 
D.  Supplementary information as set forth in other parts of this ordinance. 
E.  Supporting materials. 
Drafting standards. 
    Unless otherwise indicated, plans shall be drawn to a scale of either 1 inch = 100 feet or 1 inch = 200 feet, whichever would best fit on a standard size sheet (24? × 36?), unless otherwise approved by the administrative officer. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). 
    All sheets must contain the following basic information (if applicable): 
1.  ___ Plan title block with proposed name of the development; name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s); owner(s), and designer(s) of the plan; date prepared; revision box to identify all changes from previous submissions; plat and lot number(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. 
2.  ___ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
3.  ___ Inset locus map at 1? = 2000'. 
4.  ___ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
5.  ___ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
6.  ___ Area of the parcel(s) being developed and proposed number of buildable lots, dwellings or other proposed improvements. 
7.  ___ Location of existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
8.  ___ Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
9.  ___Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent street, with plat and lot numbers also indicated. 
Master plan application checklist. 
A.  ___ Site context map. See article 13, section 13.6. 
B.  ___ Existing resources and site analysis map. See article 13, section 13.17. 
C.  ___ Sketch plan overlay sheet. As an overlay to the existing resources and site analysis map, the following information shall be shown so as to demonstrate to the planning commission that the design process provided in article 13, section 13.4 was followed: 
1.  ___ Schematic layout indicating a general concept for land conservation and development. 
2.  ___ Proposed open space areas. 
3.  ___ Proposed location of buildings and major structures, parking areas, and recreational facilities. (Not required of developments involving only single household dwellings). 
4.  ___ Proposed general street layout. 
5.  ___ Proposed lot lines, with approximate lot areas and dimensions. Proposed lot lines shall be drawn so as to distinguish them from existing property lines. 
6.  ___ Description of pedestrian facilities (sidewalks, footpaths, trails). 
7.  ___ Land unsuitable for development. 
D.  ___ Supplementary information. The following information shall be presented in the form of a written narrative report, supplemented as necessary with drawings, sketches or plans to convey intent. The narrative report shall include reduced copies of all plans required in No. 1 above plus items 1-14, below. The number of copies shall be determined by the Administrative Officer, based upon the required distribution to the planning commission, and other agencies listed in E.4, below. 
1.  ___ Proposals, if any, for connection with existing water supply and sanitary sewer systems. If wells and ISDS are proposed, a general description of their location shall be provided. 
2.  ___ Provisions for collecting and discharging stormwater. 
3.  ___ Density calculation based on exclusion of land unsuitable for development. 
4.  ___ Notation and description if the property being developed is located within any of the following areas: 
___ Natural heritage areas (RIDEM). 
___ FEMA flood plain. 
___ Zoning overlay districts. 
___ Groundwater recharge areas. 
___ Wellhead protection areas. 
___ Narrow river special area management plan. 
5.  ___ Base flood elevation data, from FEMA maps. 
6.  ___ Location of water table test holes and soil percolation tests in areas proposed for development, with test hole data. Depth to groundwater shall be shown in locations of proposed ISDS, foundations, roadways, and stump dumps as determined by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor. 
7.  ___ An estimate of the approximate population of the proposed subdivision. 
8.  ___ An estimate of the number of school-aged children to be housed in the proposed subdivision. 
9.  ___ Fiscal impact statement. 
10.  ___ Proposed phasing, if any. 
11.  ___ Open space use plan. 
12.  ___ Yield plan, if modified from the pre-application stage of review. 
13.  ___ Architectural schematic drawings (if two-, three- or four-unit dwellings are proposed). 
14.  ___ Preliminary determination from CRMC. 
15.  ___ Written statement from the town water department that town water is available to the development with sufficient volume and pressure to meet fire flow requirements, based on water system model if required by the water department. 
16.  ___ Certificate of the tax collector that all taxes due on the land have been paid prior to conceptual master plan application. 
17.  ___ Such other information as may be requested by the department of planning and development or the planning commission. 
E.  ___ Supporting materials. 
1.  ___ Administrative fee. See section article 11, 11.4.4.c (plus required mailing and advertising expenses). 
2.  ___ Project review fee. See article 11, section 11.4.5. 
3.  ___ Completed application signed by both the applicant and the property owner. 
4.  ___ The names and addresses of owners of all properties, agencies or communities requiring notification as required by these regulations. 
5.  ___ Initial written comments on the master plan from the following agencies: (Provided by the administrative officer) 
Local agencies 
A. ___ Planning department Date: _____B. ___ Public works Date: _____ C. ___ Building inspector Date: _____ D. ___ Solicitor Date: _____ E. ___ Conservation comm. Date: _____ F. ___ Recreation dept. Date: _____ G. ___ Police dept. Date: _____ H. ___ Fire district Date: _____ I. ___ School dept. Date: _____ J. ___ Water dept. Date: _____ K. ___ Land trust Date: _____ L. ___ Narrow River land trust Date: _____ M. Other (specify) _____ Date: _____  
Adjacent communities (specify) 
A. _____ Date: _____B. _____ Date: _____ C. _____ Date: _____ D. _____ Date: _____ E. _____ Date: _____  
State agencies 
A. ___ Environmental Management Date: _____B. ___ Transportation Date: _____ C. ___ Other (specify) Date: _____  
Federal agencies 
A. ___ U.S. Army Corps Engineers Date: _____ B. ___ FEMA Date: _____  
F.  PRELIMINARY PLAN CHECKLIST-MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS. 
Preliminary plat application submission requirements. 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least eight blue or blackline copies of the preliminary site plans required below. In addition, 12 reduced set of all plans on 11? x 17? sheets shall be submitted. Plans shall include a certification that all plans and improvements conform to all existing and amended standards of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Board of Registration of Land Surveyors. Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format and as a PDF. 
Drafting standards. 
    Unless otherwise indicated, plans shall be drawn at the following scales: 
(a)  Record plan, not smaller than 1? = 100'; 
(b)  Site plan, not smaller than 1? = 100'; construction plans at a scale not smaller than 1? = 50' with street plan and profile, not smaller than horizontal 1? = 50' and vertical 1? = 5'. 
The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). 
    All sheets must contain the following basic information (if applicable): 
1.  ___ Plan title block with proposed name of the development; name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s); owner(s), and designer(s) of the plan; date prepared; revision box to identify all changes from previous submissions; plat and lot number(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. 
2.  ___ Name, address and telephone number of engineer or land surveyor. 
3.  ___ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
4.  ___ Inset locus map at 1? = 2,000'. 
5.  ___ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
6.  ___ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision or phase, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
7.  ___ Area of the parcel(s) being developed and proposed number of buildable lots, dwellings or other proposed improvements. 
8.  ___ Approximate area and dimensions of all lots proposed for development. 
9.  ___ Location and dimensions of existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way within or immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
10.  ___ Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
11.  ___ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets; with plat and lot numbers also indicated. 
12.  ___ Certification by a Professional Land Surveyor that a perimeter survey of the land being subdivided has been performed and conforms to the survey requirements to a minimum of a class I survey. 
Preliminary plat application checklist. 
    A proposed conditions map(s) to show the following: 
1.  ___ Proposed improvements including streets, lots, lot lines, with approximate lot areas and dimensions shown. Proposed lot lines shall be drawn so as to distinguish them from existing lot lines. 
2.  ___ Location of permanent stone boundary markers, including markers sufficient to delineate the location of open space areas. 
3.  ___ Location and dimension of all proposed utilities within and immediately adjacent to the subdivision, including gas, electric, phone, cable TV, fire alarm, hydrants, utility poles, stormwater drainage facilities or other proposed above or underground utilities. 
4.  ___ Preliminary utility plans and profiles for water and sewer systems on a separate plan. 
5.  ___ Land unsuitable for development and land with development limitations. See article 14, section 14.1.1. 
6.  ___ Grading plan to show existing and proposed contours at no greater than two-foot intervals showing limits of disturbance, location of proposed houses and/or nonresidential buildings and other structures, on-site sewage disposal systems, streets, entrances and exits, bicycle facilities, sidewalks and pedestrian walkways, public transportation, parking areas and driveways. 
7.  ___ Cross sections of all areas of cuts and fills showing existing and proposed surface elevations and verified wet season maximum ground water elevation. 
8.  ___ Calculations of volume in cubic yards of net requirement of soil materials (loam, sand, gravel) to be removed from the site or brought to the site as borrow material. 
9.  ___ Maintenance plan and program for drainage detention/retention systems and swales, with proposed erosion and sediment controls. 
10.  ___ Landscaping plan with specifications for landscaping of drainage detention/retention basins, restoration and revegetation for erosion and sediment controls, and restoration of existing disturbed open space. 
11.  ___ Soil erosion and sediment control plan. 
12.  ___ Proposed street plan and profiles drawn at a scale no smaller than 1?= 50' horizontal and 1? = 5' vertical. 
13.  ___ Street cross-sections, with location of utilities indicated. 
14.  ___ Construction notes and details. 
15.  ___ Proposed street names. 
16.  ___ Proposed sidewalks or bike paths. 
17.  ___ Boundaries of land proposed for dedication to the town. 
18.  ___ Street lighting plan (if required). 
19.  ___ Proposed street trees, with planting plan and specifications for proposed species, size and planting details. 
20.  ___ Proposed drainage plan showing surface and subsurface drainage facilities, lengths, slope, types and sizes of storm sewers and mathematical computations prepared by a registered professional engineer certifying that the proposed drainage system is adequate to service the drainage area in which the subdivision is located. See article 14. 
21.  ___ Location, dimension and area of any land proposed to be set aside as open space. 
22.  ___ Location of proposed stump dumps with depth to groundwater. 
23.  ___ Location of temporary access roads and other temporary construction activities. 
24.  ___ Open space use and management plan. See article 13, section 13.12.a. 
25.  ___ Yield plan, if modified from the master plan stage of review 
Supporting materials. 
1.  ___ Administrative fee. See article 11, section 11.4.4.c. 
2.  ___ Written confirmation from the state department of environmental management pursuant to the RIDEM Rules and Regulations Governing the Enforcement of the Freshwater Wetlands Act, and any subsequent amendments thereto, that plans of the proposed subdivision, including any required off-site construction, have been reviewed and indicating that the Wetlands Act either does not apply to the proposed site alteration or that approval has been granted for the proposed site alteration. 
3.  ___ Written statement from the town water department that town water is available to the development with sufficient volume and pressure to meet fire flow requirements, based on water system model if required by water department. 
4.  ___ A physical alteration permit (PAP) issued by the state department of transportation for any connection to or construction work within a state highway or other right-of- way (if necessary. 
5.  ___ Preliminary subdivision suitability determination by the department of environmental management for the use of individual sewage disposal systems (if proposed). 
6.  ___ Final approval from the coastal resources management council (if applicable). 
7.  ___ Approval from the US Army Corps of Engineers (if applicable). 
8.  ___ All other state and federal agency approvals (as applicable). 
9.  ___ The names and addresses of owners of all properties, agencies or communities requiring notification as required by these regulations. 
10.  ___ Copies of return receipts for certified mail notices (No. 9, above). 
11.  ___ Two draft copies of all legal documents describing the property, proposed easements and rights-of-way, dedications, restrictions, or other required legal documents. 
Specify: _____
_____
_____ 
12.  ___ Proposed arrangements for completion of the required public improvements, including construction schedule and financial guarantees. See article 7.0. 
13.  ___ Statement identifying any waivers from development standards, zoning variances or special use permits required or requested. 
14.  ___ Final written comments on the preliminary plan by the following: (Provided by the administrative officer) 
A. ___ Planning department Date: _____ B. ___ Public works Date: _____ C. ___ Building inspector Date: _____ D. ___ Solicitor Date: _____ E. ___ Conservation comm. Date: _____ F. ___ Other (specify) Date: _____  
15.  ___ Completed application signed by the applicant and the property owner. 
16.  ___ Letters of approval from utility companies (as applicable). 
17.  ___ Letters of approval from the town council or appropriate state or federal agency for the construction of any off-site improvements (if required). 
18.  ___ Density calculation based on land suitable for development. 
19.  ___ Aerial photograph at a scale not less than 1? = 400' showing the areas within a radius of one-half mile of the proposed project site. 
20.  ___ Certificate of the tax collector that all taxes due on the land have been paid prior to conceptual master plan application. 
21.  ___ Such other information as may be requested by the department of planning and development or the planning commission. 
G.  FINAL PLAN CHECKLIST-MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS. 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer copies of final site plans and supporting materials as indicated below: 
A.  Plat plans to be recorded. One Mylar and four blue or black line prints at a sheet size of 24? × 36?. One Mylar and one blue or black line copy of the record plan will be recorded by the applicant with the town clerk following final approval and signature. Record plan scale not to be smaller than 1? = 100'. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format and as a PDF. The following information shall be shown on the plans: 
1.  ___ Plan title block with proposed name of the development; name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s); owner(s), and engineer or land surveyor who prepared the plan; date prepared; with revision box to identify all changes from previous submissions; plat and lot number(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. 
2.  ___ Notation that the subdivision is located in the town. 
3.  ___Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
4.  ___ Inset locus map at 1?=2,000'. 
5.  ___ Zoning district(s) of the parcel(s) being developed. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
6.  ___ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision or land development project, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
7.  ___ Location and dimensions of existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way within or immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
8.  ___ Location, width and names of proposed and existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being developed. 
9.  ___ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets, with plat and lot numbers indicated. 
10.  ___ Location of proposed permanent stone boundary markers. 
11.  ___ Location of all interior lot lines and street lines with accurate dimensions and bearings (or angles) indicated, including data for all horizontal curves. 
12.  ___ Location and number of all proposed lots, with accurate areas indicated. 
13.  ___ Proposed house numbers as provided by the town engineer. 
14.  ___ Developers lot numbers. 
15.  ___ Location and notation of type of easement(s) or existing easement(s) to remain (if any) with accurate dimensions and areas indicated. 
16.  ___ Location and notation of type of proposed open space areas. 
17.  ___ Notation of any special conditions of approval imposed by the planning commission. 
18.  ___ Notation of any permits and agreements w/state and federal reviewing agencies. 
19.  ___ Phasing schedule (if any). 
20.  ___ Certification by a state professional land surveyor that all interior and perimeter lot lines and street lines of the land being subdivided have been designed to conform to a minimum of a class I survey, including the location of all proposed permanent monuments. 
21.  ___ Stamped and signed approval (endorsement) from the planning commission or administrative officer. See article 6.0. 
B.  Construction drawings. Four blue or black line copies of construction plans drawn to a scale not smaller than 1? = 50' with street plan and profile not smaller than horizontal 1? = 50' and vertical 1? = 5'. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). 
1.  ___ Final construction plans as listed in the preliminary plat checklist, including plans of any additional improvements as required by the planning commission as a condition of approval, to include the following (if required or applicable). All plans shall bear the stamp of the state registered professional engineer who prepared them. 
___  Proposed street plan and profiles. 
___  Proposed utility plans and profiles for water and sewer systems. 
___  Street cross-sections. 
___  Final detailed drainage plans and computations. 
___  Final detailed grading plans and computations. 
___  Soil erosion and sediment control plan. 
2.  ___ Proposed landscaping plan bearing the stamp of a landscape architect registered in the state (if required by the planning commission). 
3.  ___ For phased projects, as-built drawings for the previous phase (if applicable). 
4.  ___ Proposed street trees. 
5.  ___ At least one bench mark indicating that datum is mean sea level (MSL). 
6.  ___ Certification by a registered professional engineer that the plan is correct. 
C.  Supporting materials. 
1.  ___ Administrative fee. See article 11, section 11.4.4.c. 
2.  ___ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being subdivided have been paid for a period of five years prior to filing of the final plat and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
3.  ___ One original signed copy of all legal documents describing the property, creating a homeowners' association, proposed easements and rights-of-way, dedications, restrictions or other required legal documents. One copy of the approved legal documents will be recorded by the applicant with the town clerk following final plan approval and signature. 
Specify: _____
_____
_____
_____ 
4.  ___ One original signed copy of an irrevocable offer to convey to the town all public streets and/or other public improvements, accompanied by a metes and bounds description of said areas. 
5.  ___ Deed transferring land proposed for dedication to the town or other qualified group or agency for open space purposes. 
6.  ___ Letter of approval of all legal documents from the town solicitor. 
7.  ___ Open space use and management plan. See article 13, section 13.12.a. 
8.  ___ 911 emergency numbers. Proof of notification to the fire marshal with proposed new road names, if any, and all new house numbers assigned to each building lot or dwelling. To be shown on plans with a square box. 
9.  ___ Completed application form signed by the applicant and the property owner. 
10.  ___ Such other information as may be required by the planning commission as a condition of preliminary approval. 
D.  Payment of required fees. Payment of the following fees or posting of financial guarantees, if required, to be prior to endorsement by the planning commission and recording of final plans: 
1.  ___ Administrative fee. See article 11, section 11.4.4.c. 
2.  ___ Final plat recording fee - Amount _____ 
3.  ___ Financial guarantees in a form approved by the finance director. 
Initial amount _____ 
Date set by planning commission _____ 
Date of expiration of surety _____ 
4.  ___ Inspection fee - Amount _____ 
5.  ___ Maintenance bond for acceptance of public improvements (if applicable). 
Amount _____ 
Date of Council Acceptance _____ 
Description _____
_____ 
Date of Expiration of Maintenance Bond _____ 
H.  CHECKLIST FOR POJAC POINT ROAD. 
    The applicant shall submit the following materials to the administrative officer for Pojac Point Road plan review. Plans shall include a certification that all plans and improvements conform to all existing and amended standards of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Boards of Registration for Professional Engineers, Landscape Architects, and Land Surveyors. 
1.  ___ Certification that the legal owner of the proposed road is requesting the approval. 
2.  ___ One Mylar and three blue or black line copies of all plans for the proposed road at a scale no smaller than 1? = 100' on sheets not to exceed 24? × 36?. For recordation with the town clerk, one Mylar and one print will be utilized. 
3.  ___ Stamp of the registered professional engineer and/or land surveyor and who prepared the plans. 
4.  ___ Road construction specifications, finished grades, elevations, drainage improvements, and materials to be used. 
5.  ___ Plans for control of erosion and sedimentation. 
6.  ___ Documents showing the legal ownership of that part of the proposed road. 
7.  ___ Documents conveying or to convey to the present and future owners of each lot for which the frontage required by section 21-37(b) of the zoning ordinance could be measured along said road a right to pass over said road and roads connected thereto from said lot to a public road as a primary means of access to and egress from said lot to such public road. 
8.  ___ Drainage plan showing surface and subsurface drainage facilities, lengths, slope, types and sizes of storm sewers and mathematical computations prepared by a registered professional engineer establishing that the proposed drainage system is adequate to service the drainage area in which the subdivision is located. The drainage system shall be designed in accordance with articles 14.0 and 15.0 of the subdivisions and land development regulations, and the latest revision of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, Technical Release 55 (TR-55). 
9.  ___ Materials for recordation with the town clerk shall include assessor's lot numbers, house numbers as provided by the town engineer, developer's lot number and stamped approval from the planning commission or administrative officer. 
10.  ___ A preliminary determination report from CRMC and RIDEM wetlands permit, where applicable. 
I.  CHECKLIST FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. 
    For each stage of approval, the applicant shall submit 11 copies of all materials on sheets not to exceed 30? × 40? at a scale to be determined by the planning department unless otherwise specified. 
Required materials for staff conference and pre-application review. 
    For the purposes of the staff conference and pre-application review, the applicant is encouraged to use existing data such as that available from USGS, and RIGIS. 
1.  ___ Proposed name of the development; names and addresses of applicant, owners, and designers of the plan; and north arrow. 
2.  ___ Site boundary; plat and lot numbers, zoning districts as available from the town assessor records. 
3.  ___ Existing land use of site and surrounding area within one-half mile of the perimeter of the site. 
4.  ___ Existing roadway networks designating limited access highways, arterials, collectors and local roads. 
5.  ___ Soil classifications and drainage patterns. 
6.  ___ Topography at ten-foot contours, slopes, vistas, kettle holes, and bedrock outcrops. 
7.  ___ Drainage swales, wetlands, streams, ponds, groundwater recharge areas, groundwater reservoirs, and wellhead areas. 
8.  ___ Calculation of approximate area with development limitations as described in article 14, section 14.1.1.4.c. and based upon the submittal of the above items. 
9.  ___ Certification from the tax collector that all taxes due on the land have been paid prior to the filing of the application. 
10.  ___ The applicant shall provide a concept plan and report showing the following information regarding the development: 
a.  Delineation of residential and nonresidential use areas. The approximate number of residential units and nonresidential units. 
b.  Delineation of open space. Plans shall show both open space areas retained for passive recreation and wildlife habitat and those anticipated for active recreation. 
c.  A list of the proposed uses. 
d.  Demonstration that there are 100 acres of land suitable for development. 
e.  Information on existing water and sewer system, capacity if any, and how it compares to the project's estimated requirements. 
11.  ___ Fees as set forth in article 11, section 11.4 of these regulations. 
Required materials for zoning map amendment. 
    The application shall be filed with the town clerk and shall be signed by the property owner(s) and/or applicant(s) and shall include: 
1.  ___ Fees as set forth in section 9-4 of the North Kingstown Revised Ordinances, licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations. 
2.  ___ Notwithstanding any other requirements stated elsewhere in the zoning ordinance, the names and mailing addresses of all persons owning property within 500 feet of the proposed development according to the most recent list of the tax assessor. The list shall include the plat map and lot designations as listed on the tax records. 
3.  ___ The applicant shall provide a concept plan and report showing the following information regarding the development: 
a.  Delineation of residential and nonresidential use areas. The approximate number of residential units and nonresidential units. 
b.  Delineation of open space, including open space areas retained for passive recreation and wildlife habitat and those anticipated for active recreation use. 
c.  A list of the proposed uses. 
d.  Demonstration that there are 100 acres of suitable land for development. 
e.  Information on existing water and sewer capacity if any and how it compares to the project's estimated requirements. 
Required materials for master plan approval. 
    All applications for master plan approval to establish a planned unit development district shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  ___ Fees as adopted by the town council. 
2.  ___ Maps and plans at a scale of 1? = 200', which shall include: 
a.  A description and map of the soils on the site based upon the soil conservation service soils map. 
b.  Flood hazard areas, including base flood elevations. 
c.  Topographic contours at a minimum of ten-foot intervals showing existing grades. 
d.  Existing vegetation, landforms and water bodies. 
e.  Proposed circulation patterns, including roadway plans for primary and secondary traffic, pedestrian and bicycle pathways showing proposed and existing rights-of-way and easements. 
f.  Utility plans. 
g.  Delineation and timeframe for development phases and acreage of each phase. 
h.  Delineation of residential and nonresidential use areas. 
i.  Delineation of required and proposed bonus open space. 
j.  Each sheet shall show: north arrow, engineering scale, title of development, date of plan, name and address of owner/developer, and name of persons/firms preparing the plan. 
3.  ___  Land use and land use plan. Half-mile land use and zoning map at a scale of 1? = 400'. 
4.  ___ Land use analysis including: 
a.  Calculation of acreage for residential and nonresidential density and information demonstrating how the calculations were derived. 
b.  Number and types of residential units. 
c.  Number, types, and floor areas of nonresidential structures. 
d.  Acreage of open space and the percentage of open space to total acreage. 
e.  Density provided and proposed density bonuses. 
f.  Summary table of residential uses, nonresidential uses, and open space planned for each development phase and for the entire development. 
5.  ___  Certification from the tax collector that all taxes due on the land have been paid prior to the filing of the application. 
6.  ___ Environmental and community inventory and impact analysis. 
a.  Generally. The application for a planned unit development shall be accompanied by an environmental and community inventory and impact analysis. The analysis shall clearly and methodically assess the relationship of the proposed development to the natural and built environment of the town. This report shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary team of professionals qualified, experienced, and, where applicable, licensed, in their fields. Such team may typically consist of civil engineers, traffic engineers, architects, landscape architects, land-use planners, hydrogeologists, hydrologists, biologists and other environmental professionals. The applicant shall bear the cost of this analysis. The applicant is encouraged to utilize existing available town, state, and federal reports to assist in this analysis such as the comprehensive plan, Town of North Kingstown Water Supply Systems: System Hydraulic Model, Capital Improvement Program. 
b.  Use of ECIIA. The environmental and community inventory and impact analysis report will serve as a guide to the planning commission in its deliberations and its decision-making process. 
c.  Mitigation program. For the components of the environmental and community inventory and impact analysis, each of the following concerns must be separately addressed and contain a proposed mitigation program: 
(1)  The environmental and community impacts of the proposed development, environmental and community impacts, both beneficial and adverse, anticipated as a result of the proposed development shall be assessed. This section shall include impacts resulting from the construction phase as well as those resulting after the project's completion. The report shall describe the kinds and magnitudes of adverse impacts which cannot be reduced in severity or which can be reduced in severity, but not eliminated. 
(2)  Measures to be used to mitigate adverse environmental and community impacts. Corrective and protective measures which will be taken, as part of the project, to minimize adverse impacts shall be described in detail. 
(3)  Phasing program. If the project is to proceed in phases, the report should be organized to present the various impacts for each phase. See section 21-487(p). 
d.  Natural environment. 
(1)  Stormwater impact. The impact of stormwater runoff on adjacent and downstream surface water bodies and subsurface groundwater shall be evaluated. Dangers of flooding as a result of increased downstream runoff, especially peak runoff, shall be determined. The impact of the proposed project on water table levels shall also be analyzed. 
(2)  Soils. Compatibility of the proposed development with existing soils; the impact of any soils or other materials to be removed from the site; and the potential dangers and impacts of erosion and sedimentation caused by the proposed development shall be assessed. 
(3)  Plants and wildlife. The impact that the proposed project may have on wildlife habitat and on any rare or endangered plant or animal species known to exist in the area shall be determined. 
(4)  Water supply. The average and peak daily demand and the impact of such demands upon the municipal water system shall be determined. In determining the demand and impacts, the applicant shall use the Town of North Kingstown Water Supply System: System Hydraulic Model. The applicant shall bear the cost of the use of the model. 
(5)  Sewage disposal. The average and peak daily disposal and the impact of such disposal on groundwater shall be assessed. 
e.  Public services. 
(1)  Schools. The following shall be determined: expected impact on the school system both elementary and secondary levels; the number of students; number of students anticipated; age distribution of anticipated students and the standards used in deriving the number of students; and projections of future school building needs resulting from the proposed project. All impacts shall be based upon standards set forth by the comprehensive plan, services and facilities element. 
(2)  Police. The expected impact on police services, time and manpower needed to protect the proposed development and service improvements and costs necessitated by the proposed development. 
(3)  Fire. Expected fire protection needs; on-site firefighting capabilities; on-site alarm or other warning devices; fire-flow water needs, source and delivery system and other needs shall be presented. Fire department service improvements and costs necessitated as a result of the proposed project shall also be discussed based upon consultation with the fire department. 
(4)  Recreation. On-site recreation provisions shall be detailed and off-site recreation demands shall be estimated. Provision for public open space, either dedicated to the town or available to its residents, shall be described. Open space available primarily or exclusively for PUD residents or employees shall also be described. 
(5)  Solid waste disposal. Analysis of the projected volume and type of solid waste to be generated by the proposed development and methods of removal, as well as costs to the town. 
(6)  Traffic. See subsection h. 
(7)  Highway. Protected need, responsibility and costs to the town of roadway maintenance shall be analyzed. Impacts of construction equipment on area roadways shall also be discussed. 
f.  Aesthetics. 
(1)  Architecture. The general architectural design scheme shall be described, in particular, with reference to how massing, scale and design type(s) of buildings will be compatible with traditional New England building styles in the town. Sketch drawings of typical building elevations will be included. 
(2)  Landscaping. Provisions for landscaping shall be described including type, location and function of all plantings and materials. 
(3)  Canopy trees shall be deciduous shade trees planted at three inches in caliper with a mature height of at least 35 feet. Understory trees shall be deciduous shade, evergreen or fruit trees planted at two inches in caliper with a mature height of at least 12 feet. 
(4)  Screening may also consist of any existing growth of trees or shrubs. It is preferable that existing growth be left instead of replacement with other growth. Existing growth may be augmented as set forth above. 
(5)  The planning commission may, in order to protect an important view along a road, decrease the buffer requirements. 
(6)  Visual. Views into the site and from the site shall be described. Included shall be long-distance views as well as views to and from adjacent properties. 
(7)  Minimum setbacks. The planning commission shall determine the minimum setback requirements and/or building envelopes for each phase in order to ensure continuity of building location and to be in keeping with the design considerations of each phase. 
g.  Planning. 
(1)  Analyze the compatibility of the proposed development and its alternatives with the goals and objectives of the most recent town comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Market analysis justifying proposed uses. A description of proposed business uses and their local and regional service areas. 
h.  Traffic impacts. 
(1)  Roadway network. Describe the traffic circulation network, which at a minimum shall consist of all roadways and intersections that are located within one mile of the closest boundary of the site and are projected to receive at least five percent of the anticipated average daily or peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed development. The description shall document all existing and proposed roadway links, intersections, traffic signals and other control devices, and public transportation services and facilities. Describe the proposed site access to the planned unit development. 
(2)  Existing traffic volumes. Describe current traffic volumes for all roadways, streets and intersections that are part of the traffic circulation network as defined above. 
  Roadways links. 
(a)  Existing weekday volumes shall be based on automatic recorder traffic counts for three 24-hour weekday periods. 
(b)  Indicate average annual weekday and a.m./p.m. peak-hour volumes for all links. 
  Intersections. 
(a)  Peak-hour turning movements shall be based on manual counts taken over two-hour periods (e.g., 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m., 4:00 p.m. - 6:00 p.m.) broken into 15-minute segments. 
(b)  Data shall be presented for weekday morning and afternoon peak hours. 
  General. 
(a)  Make peak seasonal adjustments when applicable. 
(b)  Volume data that are factored to base year levels should be no more than two years old. 
(c)  Identify and provide citations for any adjustment factors or growth rates used in the analysis. 
(d)  Saturday peak-hour conditions shall be included (in addition to weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hours) for projects with significant retail components. 
(e)  Present existing condition on a traffic flow map covering the study area. 
(3)  Capacity and level of service analysis: Analyze existing capacities and levels of service for the study area roadway network and present the results in tabular form. Include delay, volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratios, and queue lengths. Methodologies shall be in accordance with the Highway Capacity Manual, 1985 edition (Special Report 209 of the Transportation Research Board). 
(4)  Trip generation: Present an analysis of traffic projections for the proposed development, indicating total average weekday and peak-hour trips allocated to proposed phases and uses. 
  ITE rates: Whether or not it is accompanied by an analysis using other trip generation rates, an analysis should be presented that uses unadjusted trip generation rates for the appropriate land use code(s), as listed in Trip Generation, fourth edition (Institute of Transportation Engineers, 1987). Rates should be developed from "fitted curve" equations and used according to the methods outlined. 
  Alternative rates: An analysis using other rates may be presented for comparative purposes, if appropriate. In such case, capacity analyses of baseline and future conditions should be provided for both the ITE rate and any alternative trip generation analysis. 
(5)  Trip distribution: Document all vehicle trips to or from the site through all access points. 
(6)  Future conditions: Analyze projected traffic impacts from the planned unit development together with projected impacts of other developments approved for development and affecting the same elements of the traffic circulation network. 
  Traffic volumes: Generate trip tables for the planned unit development, and add to the existing volumes to generate build out volumes. 
  Capacity analysis: Compute future conditions capacity and LOS for no-build and build, the latter both with and without mitigation measures in place. The performance indicators tabulated for existing conditions should be tabulated in a corresponding manner for future conditions. 
  Summary: Provide a tabular summary comparing the base case to the future no-build and build scenarios. 
(7)  Mitigative measures: Describe recommended traffic circulation network improvements and traffic control devices. Present capacity analyses as outlined above for existing conditions for all mitigative measures. The effects of all mitigative measures should be quantified, and the analytical basis documented. The town encourages the use of commuter and mass transit alternatives to mitigate traffic impacts. 
(8)  Evaluation of traffic impacts: Unless the applicant demonstrates that other standards are appropriate given the nature of the proposed project or applicable road systems, the planning commission shall evaluate the traffic impacts from the planned unit development on the basis of "level of service" (LOS). LOS is a qualitative measure of traffic flow and congestion, which relates traffic volumes to a theoretical roadway or intersection capacity. 
i.  Cost/benefit analysis. The planning commission shall require a cost/benefit analysis. This municipal cost/benefit analysis should follow standard and usual procedures for measuring both the benefits to be derived and costs to be incurred by the town as a result of the proposed development. This element should also estimate net benefits or costs of nonquantifiable environmental impacts. 
j.  Phasing. A determination of the phasing of the project will be established as part of the master plan approval. 
Required materials for subdivision/site plan approval-Preliminary and final. 
    The following materials shall be required for submission of the PUD for subdivision/site plan approval and are in addition to the materials required under article 16.0, checklists, of the subdivision and development regulations sections B and C. 
    The PUD must conform with all requirements, standards, and specifications as required in articles 14.0 and 15.0 of the town subdivision and land development regulations. Fees as set forth in article 11, section 11.4. of the subdivision and land development regulations shall be submitted with each application. 
    Preliminary subdivision/site plan submittal requirements: For preliminary subdivision/site plan, the submission requirements are set forth in checklist I of the subdivision and development regulations. In addition, for nonresidential uses the submission requirements set forth in article 14, section 14.2 of the subdivision and development regulations constitute additional requirements. 
    Final subdivision/site plan submittal requirements: For final subdivision/site plan, the required submission as set forth in checklist G of the subdivision and land development regulations must be met and where nonresidential uses are proposed, the submission requirements as set forth in article 14, section 14.2 of the subdivision and land development regulations must be submitted. In addition, the following additional materials will be required of all final subdivision/site plan submittals: 
1.  ___ Erosion and sedimentation control plans. A plan for erosion and sedimentation control covering all proposed excavation, filling and grade work for improvements shall be required. Said plan shall be prepared and certified by a registered engineer, a landscape architect or a Soil and Water Conservation Society certified erosion and sedimentation control specialist. Such plans shall show proper measures to control erosion and reduce sedimentation. Contents of the plan shall include: 
a.  Location of areas in roadways, open space and within 100 feet of any wetlands, to be stripped of vegetation and any other exposed or unprotected areas. 
b.  Seeding, sodding, or revegetation plans and specifications for all unprotected or unvegetated areas. See 3. Landscaping Plan, below. 
c.  Location and design of structural sediment control measures, such as diversions, waterways, grade stabilization structures, debris basins, etc. 
d.  General information relating to the implementation and maintenance of the sediment control measures. 
2.  ___ Lighting. The type, design, location, function and intensity of all exterior lighting facilities shall be described. Attention will be given to safety, privacy, security, and daytime and nighttime appearance shall be detailed. All utility lines shall be underground. 
3.  ___ Landscaping plan. A plan for landscaping and plantings shall be required. Said plan shall be prepared and certified by a qualified landscape designer. Such landscaping plan shall consist of: 
a.  Locations, species (common and scientific names) and size (at planting and at maturity) of all trees and shrubs to be planted. 
b.  Methods to be used to plant such trees and shrubs and for supporting such materials. 
c.  Specifications and imposition of grass seed to be used in unpaved right-of-way areas. 
d.  Location of all sidewalks. 
e.  Maintenance plan for landscaping for areas which are to be dedicated to the town. 
4.  ___ Delineation of residential, nonresidential and mixed use areas. 
J.  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST. 
TOWN OF NORTH KINGSTOWN 
Development Plan Review Checklist 
The applicant shall submit eight (8) copies of a plan drawn to scale, not smaller than 1"=100', by a registered architect, landscape architect, engineer or land surveyor, as applicable and the Town may require multiple drawings, including maps, plans, elevations, sections, and narrative documents along with a development plan review application available in the planning department. Plans shall include as much of the following information as the planning department deems necessary to evaluate the proposed project. The project will not be scheduled for review unless the planning department is satisfied as to the content of the submission based upon the following checklist. 
1.  ___ Name of proposed project, name and address of property owner, applicant, and designer(s), date prepared, revision box to identify all changes from previous submissions, plat(s) and lot(s) for the proposed development. 
2.  ___ Site boundary, north arrow, lot(s) area, soil area calculations, street names, zoning district(s), zoning district boundaries, building envelopes, plat and lot numbers of abutting lots, and the scale of drawings, including graphic scale. 
3.  ___ Existing and proposed dwellings, non-residential buildings, or other improvements, 
4.  ___ Itemized requested zoning variances or special use permits required. 
5.  ___ Location and dimensions of existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the development. 
6.  ___ Two-foot contours on the site and best available contours within a one hundred (100) foot perimeter of the site. 
7.  ___ Drainage plan prepared by a registered engineer showing all drainage facilities, establishing that the proposed drainage system is adequate to service the drainage area in which the development is located. The drainage system shall be designed in accordance with Article 14.0 of the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations. 
8.  ___ Preliminary plans and profiles for water and sewage systems on a separate plan. 
9.  ___ Plan and profiles and cross-sections of all proposed streets and utilities. 
10.  ___ Construction notes and details. 
11.  ___ Limits of existing tree cover and physical features of special interest (e.g. existing historic buildings, large trees, stone walls, historic cemeteries). 
12.  ___ Location and surveyed boundaries of any coastal or freshwater wetlands, water bodies, coastal features, or flood zones. 
13.  ___ Existence of any overlay district, as defined in the zoning ordinance that the proposed development falls within. 
14.  ___ Traffic impact analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer demonstrating existing conditions and future conditions with the proposed development if it may generate 100 or more additional peak hour trips, based on the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Handbook, or if the department of planning and development reasonably believes that cause exists to request an analysis. 
15.  ___ Nitrate loading analysis, water supply analysis (domestic and fire) and/or municipal service impact analysis. 
16.  ___ Fire Department review of proposed street names and hydrant locations. 
17.  ___ Maintenance plan and program for drainage systems and swales, and erosion and sedimentation controls. 
18.  ___ Landscape plan prepared by a registered landscape architect, which complies with the Zoning Ordinance, with planting plan and specifications for street trees, landscaping of drainage structures, restoration and revegetation for erosion and sedimentation controls, and restoration of existing disturbed open space. 
19.  ___ Location of temporary access roads and other temporary construction activities. 
20.  ___ Cross-sections, at one acre intervals, of all areas of cuts and fills showing existing and proposed surface elevations and verified wet season maximum groundwater elevation. 
21.  ___ Calculations of volume of material (cy) of soil (loam, sand, gravel) to be removed from the site or brought to the site. 
22.  ___ Completed application signed by the applicant and property owner. 
23.  ___ Application fee. 
24.  ___ Final approval from the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management, Division of Freshwater Wetlands. 
25.  ___ RIDEM ISDS approval or System Suitability Determination. 
26.  ___ Zoning Board of Review approval. 
27.  ___ All other state and federal agency approvals, as applicable. 
28.  ___ A map showing the proposed development to the areas within a radius of one-half (1/2) mile using a United States Geological Survey (USGS) quadrangle map or a GIS map. Said location map shall identify the location of all brooks, streams, ponds, lakes, wetland areas, public drinking water reservoirs, groundwater reservoirs, groundwater recharge areas, and public wells, wellhead protection areas, and other public facilities, within 1,000-feet of the proposed development. 
29.  ___ Aerial photograph at a scale not less than 1? = 400' showing the same area covered by the one-half (1/2) mile radius map. The aerial shall be of the most recent flight available. 
30.  ___ Soil classification map showing location of soil types on the development site, classifications and descriptions, soils limitation districts, and area calculations of soils. 
31.  ___ Such other information as may be required by the Department of Planning and Development or the Planning Commission. 
(Amd. of 7-15-2008) 
K.  CHECKLIST - TDR SENDING AREA LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW. 
    The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer at least eight blue or blackline copies of pre-application maps required below. In addition, 12 reduced set of all plans on 11? × 17? sheets shall be submitted. The scale of all plans shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required and shall be subject to the approval of the administrative officer. The plans must bear the stamp of the professional land surveyor and professional engineer who prepared them. Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD dwg, GIS shapefile or dxf file format and as a PDF. The purpose of this requested information is to determine the basic maximum number of single family house lots or other allowable uses on the parcel(s), not to regulate the uses or activities on the parcel(s). 
A.  Existing Features and Information 
1.  ___ Name and address of property owner, applicant, and designer(s), date prepared, revision box to identify all changes from previous submissions, plat and lot numbers. 
2.  ___ A location map showing the physical relationship of the site to the areas within a radius of one-half (1/2) mile using a United States Geological Survey (USGS) quadrangle map. In addition to information readily available on a USGS quadrangle map, the applicant shall identify the full extent of the Sending Area Overlay District as it covers the site, public drinking water reservoirs, aquifers, groundwater recharge areas, public wells, wellhead protection areas, and other public facilities, within 1,000-feet of the site. 
3.  ___ Aerial photograph at a scale not less than 1" = 400' showing the same area covered by the one-half (1/2) mile radius map. The aerial shall be of the most recent flight available. 
4.  ___ Site boundary, north arrow, lot(s) area, list of zoning districts including any overlay districts and all associated district boundary lines, plat and lot numbers of abutting lots, and the scale of drawings, including graphic scale. 
5.  ___ Location of existing buildings or structures. 
6.  ___ Location and dimensions of existing property lines within or adjacent to the development, easements and rights-of-way. 
7.  ___ Location and names of existing streets adjacent to or within the site. 
8.  ___ Existing topography from available information on the site and within a 100-foot perimeter of the site. 
9.  ___ Identification of any slopes that may exceed 25%. 
10.  ___ Limit of and identification of areas currently set aside for agricultural activities. 
11.  ___ Limits of existing tree cover and physical features of special interest (e.g. existing historic buildings, large trees, stone walls, historic cemeteries, scenic vistas, meadows). 
12.  ___ Location of any open space directly adjacent to the property. 
13.  ___ Location and extent of any wetlands identified by digital data available from the Town of North Kingstown. 
14.  ___ Location of any state identified habitat for rare and endangered species. 
15.  ___ Soils map available from Rhode Island Geographic Information Systems and the NRCS showing location of soils on the site, soil classifications and descriptions, and soils limitation districts. 
16.  ___ Conceptual delineation and calculation of the amount of buildable area on the site. 
B.  Conceptual Development Layout 
1.  ___ Right-of-way showing width and all other appropriate dimensions (curve radii, etc.). 
2.  ___ Location of lots and buildings. 
3.  ___ Proposed number of development rights and calculations. 
4.  ___ Parking areas and/or driveways as applicable. 
5.  ___ Areas reserved for landscaping. 
6.  ___ Undisturbed areas. 
7.  ___ Areas reserved for stormwater and wastewater management. 
8.  ___ Delineation of conceptual drainage areas. 
C.  Supporting Materials 
1.  ___ Administrative filing fee. (Section 11.4.4.c) 
2.  ___ Completed application form signed by the applicant and the property owner. 
3.  ___ Certificate of tax collector showing that all taxes due on the land have been paid prior to filing the pre-application. 
4.  ___ Any additional information requested by Planning Department or the Planning Commission. 
5.  ___ If available and as applicable, official documentation of the property score as issued by the Agricultural Lands Preservation Commission (ALPC). 
6.  ___ If available and as applicable, a completed checklist for scoring proposed conservation lands for the purposes of participating in TDR. 
(Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
L.  CHECKLIST - TDR SENDING AREA LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT MASTER PLAN REVIEW. 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least eight blue or blackline copies of pre-application maps required below. In addition, 12 reduced set of all plans on 11? × 17? sheets shall be submitted. The scale of all plans shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required and shall be subject to the approval of the administrative officer. The plans must bear the stamp of the professional land surveyor and professional engineer who prepared them. Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format and as a PDF. The purpose of this requested information is to determine the basic maximum number of single family house lots or other allowable uses or activities on the parcel(s), not to regulate the uses on the parcel(s). 
A.  Existing features and information. 
1.  ___ Name and address of property owner, applicant, and designer(s), date prepared, revision box to identify all changes from previous submissions, plat and lot numbers. 
2.  ___ Aerial photograph at a scale not less than 1? = 400' showing the same area covered by the one-half-mile radius map. The aerial shall be of the most recent flight available. 
3.  ___ Site boundary as determined by a Class 4 Survey, north arrow, lot(s) area, list of zoning districts including any overlay districts and all associated district boundary lines, plat and lot numbers of abutting lots, and the scale of drawings, including graphic scale. All electronic files associated with the Class 4 survey shall be submitted to the Town in CAD compatible format. 
4.  ___ Location of existing buildings or structures. 
5.  ___ Location and dimensions of existing property lines within or adjacent to the development, easements and rights-of-way. 
6.  ___ Location and names of existing streets adjacent to or within the site. 
7.  ___ Existing topography from available information on the site and within a 100-foot perimeter of the site. 
8.  ___ Identification of any slopes that may exceed 25%. 
9.  ___ Limit of areas currently set aside for agricultural activities. 
10.  ___ Limits of existing tree cover and physical features of special interest (e.g. existing historic buildings, large trees, stone walls, historic cemeteries, scenic vistas, meadows). These items may be waived for agricultural parcels. 
11.  ___ Location of any open space directly adjacent to the property. 
12.  ___ Location and extent of any wetlands identified by digital data available from the Town of North Kingstown. 
13.  ___ Location of any state identified habitat for rare and endangered species. 
14.  ___ Soils map available from Rhode Island Geographic Information Systems and the NRCS showing location of soils on the site, soil classifications and descriptions, soils limitation districts, and area calculations of soils. 
15.  ___ Where agricultural lands are involved, a weighted average Relative Agricultural Value (RAV) for all on-site soils. 
16.  ___ Conceptual delineation and calculation of the amount of buildable area on the site. 
B.  Conceptual development. 
1.  ___ Right-of-way showing width and all other appropriate dimensions (curve radii, etc.). 
2.  ___ Location of lots and buildings. 
3.  ___ Proposed development rights. 
4.  ___ Parking areas and/or driveways as applicable. 
5.  ___ Areas reserved for landscaping. 
6.  ___ Undisturbed areas. 
7.  ___ Areas reserved for stormwater and wastewater management. 
8.  ___ Delineation of conceptual drainage areas. 
9.  ___ Where applicable, a separate plan showing the building envelope where any retained development rights will be built in the future and the calculated area of that building envelope. 
C.  Supporting materials. 
1.  ___ Administrative filing fee. (Section 11.4.4.c) 
2.  ___ Completed application form signed by the applicant and the property owner. 
3.  ___ Certificate of tax collector showing that all taxes due on the land have been paid prior to filing the pre-application. 
4.  ___ Proposed language that will be used as part of the conservation, preservation or agricultural restrictions on the site including a description of any easements granted to the Town of North Kingstown. 
5.  ___ Any additional information as may be requested by the Planning Department or the Planning Commission. 
6.  ___ As applicable, official documentation of the property score as issued by the Agricultural Lands Preservation Commission (ALPC). 
7.  ___ As applicable, a completed Conservation Land Score Checklist for the purposes of participating in TDR. 
(Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
M.  CONSERVATION LAND SCORE CHECKLIST. 
    The applicant shall submit this completed form with a master plan application for a TDR sending area land development permit. The applicant shall use the criteria and associated scoring range located in section 16.6.4 of these regulations. The applicant shall be responsible for developing all maps required to substantiate the proposed scores in the above checklist as may be requested by the planning commission. 
Criteria Proposed Score Explanation 1. Size of Parcel 2. Location relative to the most recently amended Groundwater Protection Areas Map in the Comprehensive Plan 3. Closest proximity to other protected lands 4. Supports or is capable of supporting rare or endangered species 5. Location relative to the most recently amended Historic and Scenic Resources Map in the Comprehensive Plan 6. Location relative to the Rhode Island Urban Service Boundary as referenced in the Comprehensive Plan 7. Location relative to the most recently amended Water Service Area in the Comprehensive Plan Proposed Total Score  
  
This scorecard is submitted to the Town of North Kingstown with written signature from the property owner or his/her duly assigned representative certifying that the information provided herein is accurate to the best of his/her knowledge and may be used as part of the permit review process associated with a TDR Sending Area Land Development Project. 
Signed: _____ Date: _____  
(Amd. of 2-17-2009) 
REVISED ORDINANCES COMPARATIVE TABLE 1974 REVISED ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Revised Ordinances of those sections of the 1974 Revised Ordinances, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1974 Revised Ordinances, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1974 
Revised 
Ordinances 
Section Section  
of these 
Revised 
Ordinances 1-1-1-1-1-7 1-1-1-7 1-1-8-1-1-13 1-8 2-1-1 2-1 2-1-2 2-66 2-1-3 2-371 2-1-5 20-16 2-2-1-2-2-4 2-286-2-289 2-3-1 2-166 2-3-3 2-168 2-5-1-2-5-24 14-1-14-24 2-6-1, 2-6-2 2-141, 2-142 2-7-1 19-1 2-7-2 19-21 2-7-5-2-7-7 19-23-19-25 2-9-1-2-9-5 2-261-2-265 2-10-1-2-10-3 2-311-2-313 2-11-1, 2-11-2 2-191, 2-192 2-12-1, 2-12-2 2-116, 2-117 2-13-1-2-13-4 2-236-2-239 3-1-1-3-1-16 3-1-3-16 3-1-17 3-22 3-1-19, 3-1-20 3-17, 3-18 3-1-21-3-1-24 3-19 3-1-25 3-20 5-1-1 5-21 5-1-4-5-1-7 5-22-5-25 5-2-1-5-2-3 5-46-5-48 5-2-4-5-2-12 5-71-5-79 5-2-13 5-101 5-2-14-5-2-18 5-102 5-2-19-5-2-26 5-103-5-110 6-2-1-6-2-6 13-26-13-31 6-2-7-6-2-13 13-32 6-4-1 13-1 6-4-2 13-4 6-4-3, 6-4-4 13-2, 13-3 6-4-5 13-5 6-4-6 13-4 7-1-2-7-1-7 8-11-8-16 7-2-1-7-2-5 8-21-8-25 7-3-1-7-3-5 6-1-6-5 7-3-7, 7-3-8 6-22, 6-23 7-3-10, 7-3-11 6-25, 6-26 7-3-12-7-3-20 6-27 7-4-1-7-4-6 8-41-8-46 7-5-1-7-5-4 8-61-8-64 7-5-5 8-64 8-1-1 9-66 8-1-2-8-1-7 9-86-9-91 8-1-8-8-1-12 9-67-9-71 8-1-14-8-1-17 9-72-9-75 8-1-18 9-77 8-1-19 9-76 8-2-1-8-2-4 11-81-11-84 8-2-5-8-2-8 11-84-11-87 8-2-9 8-17 9-1-1 9-3 9-1-2, 9-1-3 9-1, 9-2 9-1-4 9-4 9-2-1-9-2-3 9-141-9-143 9-2-5-9-2-7 9-145-9-147 9-2-8, 9-2-9 9-127, 9-128 9-2-10 9-126 9-3-1-9-3-3 9-211-9-213 9-4-1-9-4-3 9-236-9-238 9-4-4-9-4-6 9-238-9-240 9-4-7 9-227 9-4-8 9-226 9-5-1 9-21 9-5-2-9-5-4 9-22 9-5-5 9-23 9-6-1 9-41 9-6-3-9-6-5 9-42-9-44 9-6-6-9-6-8 9-45 9-6-9-9-6-12 9-46-9-49 9-8-1-9-8-3 9-166-9-168 10-1-1 9-101 10-1-2-10-1-7 9-111-9-116 10-1-9, 10-1-10 9-102, 9-103 11-1-1-11-1-11 10-1-10-11 11-2-1-11-2-6 10-36-10-41 12-1-1-12-1-6 11-1-11-6 12-1-7 11-9 12-1-8 11-11 12-1-9 11-7 12-2-1-12-2-3 11-31-11-33 12-2-4 11-34, 11-45 12-2-5-12-2-13 11-35-11-43 12-2-13.1 11-43 12-3-1-12-3-6 11-8 12-4-1, 12-4-2 11-66, 11-67 12-4-3 11-66 12-5-1 11-10 12-6-1 11-9 13-1-1 12-1 13-1-2 12-3 13-1-3, 13-1-4 12-5, 12-6 13-1-5 12-2 13-1-8-13-1-10 12-7-12-9 13-1-11 12-4 13-1-12-13-1-14 12-10 13-1-15, 13-1-16 12-11, 12-12 13-1-17 17-2 13-1-18 6-7 13-1-19 8-18 13-1-20-13-1-22 9-256-9-258 13-1-23 12-13 14-1-1, 14-1-2 15-11, 15-12 14-1-3-14-1-8 15-31-15-36 14-1-8.1 15-13 14-1-9, 14-1-10 15-14, 15-15 14-1-11-14-1-13 15-16 14-1-14, 14-1-15 15-17, 15-18 14-1-16 15-37 14-1-17-14-1-25 15-19-15-27 15-1-2-15-1-4 17-1 15-3-1-15-3-8 17-46-17-53 15-4-1-15-4-12 16-1-16-12 16-1-6 18-1 17-2-4 21-40 17-3-1-17-3-5 21-61-21-65 17-5-1 21-110 17-6-1-17-6-5 21-131-21-135 17-8-1-17-8-6 21-181-21-186 17-9-1-17-9-8 21-211-21-218 17-14 21-362 17-14-1 21-361 21-363 21-364 17-14.1 21-366 17-16-1-17-16-6 21-401-21-406 17-17-1-17-17-8 21-426-21-433 17-18-1-17-18-4 21-456-21-459 17-18-4 21-460 17-21-1 21-306 app. B, § 1, app. B, § 2 20-17, 20-18 app. B, § 4-app. B, § 12 20-19-20-27 app. B, § 15 20-16 app. B, § 16 20-30  
REVISED ORDINANCES COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within these Revised Ordinances of those ordinances adopted since the 1974 Revised Ordinances, as supplemented, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1974 Revised Ordinances, as supplemented. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
of these Revised Ordinances 83-3  2-14-1982 1(7-6-14) 8-94 83-1  1-24-1983 1 21-181 2 21-188 83-2  2-14-1983 9-4 83-3  2-14-1983 1(7-6-1)- 
1(7-6-13) 8-81-8-93 1(7-6-15)- 
1(7-6-19) 8-95-8-99 83-4  3-14-1983 1 21-40 83-5  3-14-1983 9-4 83-7  6-27-1983 9-4 83-8  6-27-1983 21-363 83-9  6-27-1983 21-363 83-10  7-25-1983 1 11-37 83-11  7-25-1983 1 21-215 83-12  8-29-1983 1 9-104 83-13  8-29-1983 9-4 83-14  8-29-1983 1(9-2-1)- 
1(9-2-7) 9-141-9-147 1(9-2-8), 
1(9-2-9) 9-127, 9-128 1(9-2-10) 9-126 1(9-2-11), 
1(9-2-12) 9-148, 9-149 1(9-2-12.1) 9-150 1(9-2-13) 9-129 83-15 11-14-1983 1 11-68 83-16 11-14-1983 1 11-9 83-17 11-14-1983 1 6-21 1(a) 6-6 2 6-22, 6-23 6-26, 6-27 83-18 12-12-1983 1 19-26 84-1(A)  1- 9-1984 1 11-44 84-1  1-23-1984 9-4 84-2  1-23-1984 1 11-9 84-3  1-23-1984 1(6-5-1), 
1(6-5-2) 13-56, 13-57 84-4  3-12-1984 9-4 84-5  3-12-1984 1 3-6 3-16 84-6  3-12-1984 9-4 84-7  3-26-1984 21-363 84-8  4- 9-1984 1 11-8 84-9  4- 9-1984 1 9-181-9-184 9-196-9-200 84-11 10-22-1984 1 9-127 85-1  1-28-1985 1 9-149 85-2  1-28-1985 1 9-150 85-3  1-28-1985 1 9-151 85-4  2-11-1985 9-4 85-5  2-11-1985 2 21-110 3 21-136 85-6  3-11-1985 9-4 85-7  4-22-1985 9-4 85-8  5-29-1985 1 9-150 85-9  5-29-1985 1 9-151 85-11  6-10-1985 21-363 85-12  8-13-1985 21-363 85-13  9- 9-1985 9-4 85-14  9- 9-1985 21-363 85-15  9-23-1985 1 13-58 85-16 10-15-1985 1 11-37 85-17 10-15-1985 1 21-214 85-18 12- 9-1985 21-61 21-64 86-1  1-27-1986 9-4 86-2  1-27-1986 9-4 86-3  1-27-1986 9-4 3-21 86-5  2-25-1986 2 6-1 86-6  3-17-1986 1-2-1- 
1-2-7 2-2 86-7  4-14-1986 21-363 86-8  5-27-1986 21-363 86-9  5-27-1986 21-363 86-10  5-27-1986 21-363 86-11  6- 9-1986 21-363 86-12  6- 9-1986 1 21-214 86-13  7-28-1986 21-363 86-15  8-25-1986 9-4 86-16  8-25-1986 9-4 86-17  8-25-1986 9-4 86-17A  8-25-1986 21-363 86-20 10-27-1986 1 11-10 86-21 10-27-1986 1 9-114 2 9-104 86-24 11-24-1986 1 11-84 86-25 12- 8-1986 9-4 87-1  1-26-1987 21-363 87-2  1-26-1987 1 19-27 87-3  2- 9-1987 1(17-19-1)- 
1(17-19-4) 21-481- 
21-484 87-4  2- 9-1987 9-4 87-5  3- 9-1987 21-363 87-6  3-23-1987 1 19-28 87-7  3-30-1987 1(13-2-1- 
13-2-5) 12-14 87-8  5-11-1987 9-4 87-9  5-11-1987 9-4 87-10  5-11-1987 9-4 87-12  5-11-1987 1 11-10 87-13  5-11-1987 1 11-66 87-14  6- 8-1987 21-363 87-15  6- 8-1987 21-363 87-16  6-22-1987 2, 3 6-25, 6-26 87-17  6-22-1987 9-4 87-18  9-14-1987 1 11-8 87-19  9-14-1987 9-4 87-21  9-28-1987 9-4 87-22 10-26-1987 21-363 87-23 10-26-1987 21-363 87-24 12-14-1987 21-363 88-1  1-11-1988 21-363 88-2  1-11-1988 9-4 88-3  1-11-1988 9-4 88-4  1-11-1988 9-4 88-5  1-25-1988 11-37 88-6  2- 8-1988 21-363 88-7  3-14-1988 21-363 88-8  3-14-1988 21-363 88-9  5- 9-1988 9-4 88-10  6-13-1988 1 11-66 88-11  6-13-1988 9-4 88-12  6-13-1988 1 6-25 88-13  7-18-1988 9-4 88-14  9-12-1988 21-363 88-15  9-12-1988 9-4 88-16  9-12-1988 1 11-9 88-17  9-26-1988 1 11-66 88-18  9-26-1988 2 2-321-2-324 88-19  9-26-1988 1 11-9.1 88-20 10-11-1988 1 9-4 88-21 10-24-1988 1 21-186 88-22 11-14-1988 1 11-37 89-2  1-24-1989 1, 2 11-37 89-3  1-24-1989 1 9-4 89-4  1-24-1989 1 11-66 89-5  2-13-1989 1 9-4 89-6  2-27-1989 1 11-37 89-7  3-13-1989 21-363 89-8  3-13-1989 1 6-50-6-68 89-9  3-27-1989 21-363 89-12  4- 4-1989 1 11-66 89-13  5-22-1989 1 9-4 89-14  5-22-1989 1 9-4 89-15  6-26-1989 1 11-37 89-16  6-26-1989 1 10-11 89-19  8-14-1989 1, 2 9-4 89-17  8-15-1989 21-363 89-20  8-15-1989 1 11-10 89-21  8-15-1989 1 11-37 89-22  8-15-1989 1 11-66 89-23  9-11-1989 1 11-66 89-24 10-10-1989 1 11-37 89-25 10-17-1989 1 9-4 89-26 12-18-1989 1 18-1 89-27 12-18-1989 1 9-24 89-28 12-18-1989 1(a) 20-16, 20-17 20-19 20-25 20-27, 20-28 1(b) 20-20-20-25 20-28 20-30 2 17-46 90-1  2-12-1990 1 21-186 3 21-186 90-2  2-26-1990 1, 2 9-4 90-3  3-12-1990 21-363 90-4  3-26-1990 1 11-66 90-5  4- 9-1990 1-4 11-81-11-84 5 11-88 90-6  4-23-1990 1 21-331-21-340 90-7  5-14-1990 21-363 90-8  5-29-1990 1 9-126 2, 3 9-141, 9-142 4 9-145 5, 6 9-149, 9-150 90-9  5-29-1990 1 9-4 90-10  5-29-1990 1 10-40 90-11  5-29-1990 1 19-26 90-12  6-18-1990 1 9-4 90-14  7- 9-1990 1, 2 11-37 90-15  8-14-1990 1 11-66 90-16  8-28-1990 1 17-21-17-27 90-17  9-17-1990 1 11-66 90-20 11-13-1990 1 20-24 91-1  2-11-1991 1 21-186 91-3  2-11-1991 1, 2 9-4 91-4  2-11-1991 1 9-4 91-5  2-11-1991 1, 2 11-66 91-7  3-11-1991 1 9-1 91-6  4-11-1991 1-3 9-4 91-8  6- 3-1991 1, 2 11-37 91-9  6- 3-1991 1 9-4 91-10  8-13-1991 21-363 91-11  8-13-1991 21-363 91-13  9- 9-1991 1 11-8 91-15 11-12-1991 21-363 91-16 11-12-1991 1 11-66 91-17 11-12-1991 1 9-4 92-2  2-10-1992 1 9-141 92-3  3- 9-1992 21-363 92-4  3- 9-1992 21-363 92-5  3- 9-1992 1 9-4 92-6  3- 9-1992 9-4 92-7  3- 9-1992 1 20-16 2-5 20-27-20-30 92-8  5-11-1992 21-363 92-9  5-11-1992 1 9-4 92-10  6- 8-1992 21-363 92-11  6- 8-1992 9-4 92-12  7-13-1992 21-363 92-14  7-13-1992 1 9-4 92-15  9-21-1992 1 8-120-8-123 92-17 10-19-1992 21-363 92-18 10-26-1992 1 9-4 92-19 11-16-1992 21-363 92-20 11-16-1992 1 21-186 92-21 11-16-1992 1 11-66 92-22 12-21-1992 1 11-66 93-1  1-11-1993 1 11-37 93-2  1-25-1993 1 11-37 93-3  2- 8-1993 1 9-145 93-4  2- 8-1993 1 9-271, 9-272 9-281-9-288 93-5  2-22-1993 1 11-66 93-6  4-12-1993 21-363 93-7  4-12-1993 1 11-66 93-8  4-12-1993 1 11-8 93-9  5-10-1993 1 11-37 93-11  6-14-1993 1 9-4 93-12  7-12-1993 1 11-66 93-14  9-13-1993 1 6-6 3 6-21 5 6-30-6-38 6 6-80-6-88 93-15  9-13-1993 1 9-4 93-16  9-13-1993 1 11-37 93-17 10- 4-1993 1 21-61, 21-62 21-64 93-18 10-18-1993 1 11-37 93-19 12-13-1993 1 11-66 94-1  1-10-1994 1 11-66 94-2  2-14-1994 1 21-485-21-487 94-3  3-14-1994 1 11-66 94-4  3-14-1994 1 19-29 94-6  4-11-1994 21-363 94-7  4-11-1994 1 9-4 94-8  4-11-1994 1 13-76 94-9  5- 9-1994 1 19-26 94-10  5- 9-1994 1 9-4 94-11  6- 6-1994 1 9-4 94-12  6-27-1994 1 21-1-21-23 21-136 21-182 21-186 21-188 21-212 21-429 21-487 94-13  7-11-1994 1 11-66 94-14  8-15-1994 1 21-241-21-252 94-15  8-15-1994 1, 2 9-4 94-16  9-12-1994 1 21-363 94-18 10-17-1994 1 21-19 94-19 10-17-1994 1 11-66 2 11-37 94-21 10-24-1994 1 9-144 2 9-150 94-20 11-14-1994 1 9-4 94-22 11-14-1994 1 21-363 94-23 11-14-1994 1 11-66 94-24 11-14-1994 1 9-4 94-25 11-14-1994 1 12-15 94-26 12-12-1994 1 11-37 94-27 12-12-1994 1 11-66 95-1  2-13-1995 1 19-30 95-2  3-13-1995 1 7-1-7-4 7-21-7-24 7-46-7-54 7-76-7-81 7-106-7-118 7-128-7-130 94-4  5- 8-1995 1 21-363 95-3  5- 8-1995 1 Ch. 21, Art. III, 
Ch. 21, Art. IV 21-22 21-24 21-36-21-39 21-61-21-65 21-86-21-91 21-110 21-307- 
21-314 21-320, 
21-321 21-325 95-5  6- 5-1995 1 9-4 95-6  6-19-1995 1, 2 11-37 95-7  6-19-1995 1 15-50-15-52 95-8  7-10-1995 1 9-4 95-9  9-11-1995 1 11-9 95-10 10-16-1995 1 15-51 2 15-53 95-11 10-23-1995 1 Ch. 21, Art. IV 2 21-113 95-12 11-13-1995 1 9-4 95-13 11-13-1995 1, 2 11-66 95-14 11-13-1995 1 21-363 95-15 12-11-1995 1, 2 9-4 96-2  1- 9-1996 1 3-5 3-7 2 9-4 96-3  1- 9-1996 1 11-9 96-4  3-11-1996 1 11-9.1 96-7  5-12-1996 5 9-4 96-6  5-13-1996 1 2-1 96-7  5-13-1996 1 13-56, 13-57 3 13-58 96-8  5-13-1996 1 9-4 2 20-16 20-20, 20-21 20-23-20-29 96-9  6-10-1996 1 15-60-15-65 96-10  6-10-1996 1 9-4 96-11  7- 8-1996 1 11-37 96-12  7- 8-1996 1 9-4 96-13  7- 8-1996 1 3-23 96-14  7- 8-1996 1 2-321 96-15  9-16-1996 1 21-363 96-18  9-18-1996 1-3 9-4 96-16 10- 7-1996 1 9-1 96-17 10- 7-1996 1 2-1 96-19 11-18-1996 1 11-66 96-20 11-18-1996 1 21-325 2 Ch. 21, Art. III 97-1  1-13-1997 1 11-66 97-2  1-13-1997 1, 2 9-4 97-3  2-10-1997 1 21-363  2-18-1997(Amd.) App. A, § 15-6 App. A, § 15.1- 
App. A, § 15.5 App. A, § 15.7, 
App. A, § 15.8 97-4  3-10-1997 1 2-330-2-333 97-5  4- 7-1997 1 19-40 97-6  4-14-1997 1 19-35 97-7  4-14-1997 1 11-37 97-8  5-12-1997 1 9-4 97-10  6- 9-1997 1 9-4  7- 1-1997(Amd.) App. A, § 13.1 97-11  8- 4-1997 1 11-66 97-12  8- 4-1997 1 20-22 97-13  8-18-1997 1 21-500-21-512 97-14 10- 6-1997 1 6-55 97-15 10- 6-1997 1 9-4 12-16-1997(Amd.) App. A, § 5.1 App. A, § 7.1, 
App. A, § 7.2 App. A, § 11.4 App. A, § 13.1 98-1  1-12-1998 1 2-340-2-342 2 2-192 98-2  1-12-1998 1, 2 9-4 98-3  2- 9-1998 1 9-300-9-303 98-5  4-13-1998 1 20-30 98-6  4-13-1998 1-4 9-4 98-7  5-11-1998 Ch. 21, Art. III, 
Ch. 21, Art. IV 21-7 21-22 21-34-21-36 21-92 21-110-21-113 21-160, 21-161 21-183-21-185 21-189 21-214, 21-215 21-217 21-268-21-281 21-284 21-307 21-311 21-325 21-361-21-363 21-429 21-432 98-8  5-11-1998 1, 2 21-311 98-9  5-11-1998 1 9-4 98-10  6-29-1998 1 21-511 98-11  7-13-1998 1, 2 11-66 98-12  8- 3-1998 1-3 21-503-21-505 4 21-509 98-13  9-14-1998 1 21-22 2 Ch. 21, Art. III 3 21-272 98-14 10- 5-1998 1 11-37 2 20-28 98-15 10- 5-1998 1, 2 21-186, 21-187 3 21-367 98-18 12-14-1998 1 9-4 99-1  1-11-1999 1 21-363 99-2  1-11-1999 1-3 9-4 99-3  1-11-1999 1 8-140-8-161 99-4  1-11-1999 1, 2 11-66 99-5  5-10-1999 1 21-186 99-6  5-10-1999 1 20-20 2 20-22 3 20-28 4 9-4 99-7  5-10-1999 1 20-23 2, 3 20-25, 20-26 4 20-28 5 9-4 99-8  6- 7-1999 1 11-66 99-9  6- 7-1999 1-3 9-4 99-11  6- 7-1999 1 21-363 99-12  6-21-1999 1 21-511 99-13  6-21-1999 1 2-1 99-14  6-21-1999 2-7 6-22-6-27 8, 9 6-50, 6-51 10 6-53 11 6-55 99-15  7-12-1999 1 11-66 99-16  7-12-1999 1 21-363 99-17  7-12-1999 1 21-363 99-18  8- 2-1999 1 2-311 99-19  9-13-1999 1 11-8 2 11-37 3 11-66 99-20  9-13-1999 1 7-4 2 7-82 3 7-107 99-21 10- 4-1999 1 21-363 99-22 10- 4-1999 1 21-506 99-23 11- 8-1999 1 19-25 99-25 12-13-1999 1 21-363 00-1  1-10-2000 1 19-36, 19-37 00-2  1-10-2000 1 19-38 00-3  1-10-2000 1 19-26 00-4  1-10-2000 1, 2 9-4 00-5  2-14-2000 1 21-363 00-6  2-14-2000 1 21-367 00-7  3-13-2000 1 11-66 00-8  3-13-2000 1 9-4 00-9  3-13-2000 1 21-22 2 21-25 3 Ch. 21, Art. III 00-10  4-10-2000 1 3-9 00-11  4-10-2000 1 17-60-17-63 17-66-17-68 17-74-17-76 17-81, 17-82 17-90 17-92 17-96-17-102 00-12  5- 8-2000 1 12-16 00-13  5- 8-2000 1 21-363 00-14  6-12-2000 1 21-504 2 21-511 00-15  6-12-2000 1 13-2 00-16  6-12-2000 1 21-363 00-17  7-10-2000 1 21-367 00-18  7-10-2000 1 21-363 00-19  7-10-2000 1 9-4 2 7-110(a)(2) 00-20 10- 2-2000 1 11-37 00-21 10- 2-2000 1 11-66 00-22 12-11-2000 1 21-363 01-1  2-12-2001 2 21-9 3 21-13 4, 5 21-18, 21-19 6 21-22 7 21-112 9 Ch. 21, Art. III 10, 11 21-214, 21-215 12 21-243 13, 14 21-325, 21-326 15 21-284 01-2  2-12-2001 1 9-4 01-3  2-26-2001 1 9-4 01-5  4- 2-2001 1 21-363 01-6  4- 2-2001 1 11-66 01-7  5- 7-2001 1 21-22 21-325 01-8  5- 7-2001 1 10-11 01-9  5- 7-2001 1 21-363 01-10  6-12-2001 1 9-4 01-11  6-12-2001 1 11-66 01-12  6-12-2001 1 19-26 01-13  7- 9-2001 1-3 21-509-21-511 01-14  8- 6-2001 1 Ch. 21, Art. III 2 21-275 3 21-362 01-15  8- 6-2001 1 17-67 2 17-98 01-10  9-10-2001 1 11-66 01-17 10- 1-2001 1 21-363 01-18 10- 1-2001 1 21-311 2 21-325 01-19 11- 5-2001 1 9-4 2 13-76 01-20 12-10-2001 1 21-363 01-21 12-10-2001 1 9-4 2, 3 13-56, 13-57 01-22 12-10-2001 1       Added 5-120-5-123 02-1  4- 8-2002 1 11-66 02-2  4- 8-2002 1 11-66 02-3  5-13-2002 1-8 Adopt. Ord, p. xi 02-4  6-10-2002 1 21-511 02-5  6-10-2002 1 9-4 02-6  7- 8-2002 1 11-37 02-7  7- 8-2002 1 21-40 2 21-91 3 Ch. 21, Art. III 02-8  8- 5-2002 1 19-26 02-9  8-19-2002 1 20-30 02-10  9- 9-2002 1 21-363 02-11 10- 7-2002 1 11-66 02-12 10- 7-2002 1 21-363 02-13 10- 7-2002 1 21-363 02-14 10- 7-2002 1 21-14(b)(2) 2 21-15 3       Rpld 21-131-21-136 4 21-250 5, 6 21-279(d)(13)a.3., c.1. 7       Added 21-341 02-15 11-18-2002 1 11-66 02-16 11-18-2002 1 9-4 2 11-3 02-17 11-18-2002 1 9-4 02-18 11-18-2002 1, 2 9-4 02-19 11-18-2002 1 9-4 02-20 11-18-2002 1 21-9(a)(3) 2       Added 21-93 3 ch. 21, art. III 4 ch. 21, art. IV, table 2.B 5 21-242 7       Added 21-243(27) 8       Added 21-244(11) 9 21-271 10 21-275(b)(2) 11 21-277(h)(4)a. 12 21-277(h)(4)b. 13 21-332(c) 14 21-361-21-363 03-01  2-10-2003 1 7-1(b) 2 7-78 3       Added 7-83 4 7-107(g), (k) 5 7-110(c)(1) 6 7-114(b) 03-02  2-10-2003 1       Added 17-110-17-113 03-03  2-10-2003 1 21-37(b)(2) 03-04  3-10-2003 1 21-363 03-05  5-12-2003 1 21-362, 21-363 03-06  5-12-2003 1 3-9 2 3-22 3 3-23(d) 03-7  6- 9-2003 1 21-511 03-8  6- 9-2003 1 21-17 2, 3 ch. 21, art. III 4, 5 ch. 21, art. IV 6 21-242 7 21-244(3) 8 21-249(a)(1)a. 9 21-250(3), (4) 10 21-277(h)(4) 11 27-341 12 27-363 03-09  7- 7-2003 1 21-22 03-10  9- 8-2003 1 2-168 03-11  9- 8-2003 1 19-26(c)(1) 03-12  9- 8-2003 1 21-362, 21-363 03-13  9- 8-2003 1 21-16(b)(3) 2 21-186(d)(3) 3 21-311(g) 03-14  9-29-2003 1       Added 2-377-2-381 03-15  9-29-2003 1       Added 2-388-2-390 03-16  9-29-2003 1 11-7 2 11-66 03-17  9-29-2003 1 11-9 03-18 11- 3-2003 1 9-4 03-19 11- 3-2003 1 9-4 03-20 11- 3-2003 1 9-4 03-21 12- 8-2003 1 9-4 04-01  3- 8-2004 1-3 11-66 04-02  3- 8-2004 1       Added 2-396-2-398 04-03  5-10-2004 1 9-4 04-04  5-10-2004 1 11-66 04-05  5-10-2004 1       Added 5-130 2 9-4 04-06  5-10-2004 1       Added 7-55 2 9-4 04-07  6- 7-2004 1       Added 3-8(h) 04-08  6- 7-2004 1 9-4 2 13-32(d) 04-09  6- 7-2004 1 19-26(b)(1)-(3) 04-10  6- 7-2004 1 9-4 04-11  6- 7-2004 1 21-511 04-12  6- 7-2004 1 21-37(b) 04-13  8- 2-2004 1 21-362, 21-367 04-14  8-23-2004 1 9-4 04-15  8-23-2004 1 9-4 04-16  8-23-2004 1 11-37 04-17  8-23-2004 1       Added 11-12 04-18  9-13-2004 1 21-362, 21-363 04-19  9-13-2004 1 21-362, 21-363 2 ch. 21, art. III 04-20 10- 4-2004 1 21-362, 21-363 04-21 10- 4-2004 1 9-4 04-22 10- 4-2004 1 11-37 04-23 11- 8-2004 1 21-66 04-24 11- 8-2004 1 9-4 04-25 11- 8-2004 1 9-4 04-26 12-13-2004 1 21-362, 21-363 05-01  2-14-2005 1 21-511 Amd. of  3-15-2005 App. A, §§ 7.2(b), (i) 15.2(1), 15.3(1) 15.4(1), 15.5(2) 05-03  4-11-2005 1 21-362, 21-363 05-04  4-11-2005 1 3-8(h) 05-05  4-11-2005 1, 2 9-4 05-06  4-11-2005 1 9-4 05-07  5- 9-2005 1 9-4 05-09  5- 9-2005 1 9-4 05-10  5- 9-2005 1 9-4 05-11  6-13-2005 1 2-330(c) 2 2-331 3 2-332(3) 4 2-333 05-12  6-13-2005 1 9-4 05-13  6-13-2005 1 9-4 05-14  6-13-2005 1 21-362, 21-363 05-15  6-27-2005 1 21-511 Amd. of  7- 5-2005 App. A, § 11.4 05-16 11-14-2005 1 Ch. 21, art. III 05-17 12-12-2005 1 2-330 05-18 12-12-2005 1 9-4 05-19 12-12-2005 1 13-57(d) 2 9-4 05-20 12-12-2005 1       Added 19-39 06-03  2-13-2006 1       Added 8-201-8-214 06-04  4-10-2006 1 9-320, 9-321 06-05  4-10-2006 1       Rpld 21-11(c)(4) 2 21-12(b)(4) 3 21-16 4-7 21-22 06-06  4-10-2006 1, 2 21-22 3 ch. 21, art. IV, tab. 2A 4       Rpld 21-211-21-218       Added 21-211-21-220 5       Added 21-327 06-07  5- 8-2006 1 9-4 06-08  5- 8-2006 1 21-362, 21-363 Amd. of  5-16-2006 App. A, Arts. 1.0-16.0 06-09  6-12-2006 1 21-511 06-10  8- 7-2006 1 11-37 06-11  9-18-2006 1       Added 21-482(n) 06-12  10-23-2006 1       Added 2-401-2-404 06-13  11-20-2006 1 21-362, 21-363 06-14  11-20-2006 1 9-4 07-02  2- 5-2007 1 21-13(c) 2 21-18(a) 3 21-19(a) 4 21-20 5, 6 21-22 7 21-64(c) 8 ch. 21, art. III 9 Ch. 21, art. IV 10-12 21-186 13 21-271(i) 07-04  2- 5-2007 1 2-1 07-05  2-26-2007 1 20-22(d)(1) 2 20-23(j) 3 20-26(f) 07-06  3-12-2007 1 9-4 07-07  3-12-2007 1 11-37 07-08  5-14-2007 1, 2 19-26(a), (b) 3 19-28(b) 07-10  6-11-2007 1 21-362, 21-363 07-11  6-11-2007 1 21-505(a) 2 21-511 07-12  6-11-2007 1 21-13 2 21-22 3-6 21-186 7 21-216 8 21-321 07-13  6-11-2007 1 9-4 07-14  7- 9-2007 1, 2 9-4 07-15  7- 9-2007 1 11-66 07-16  7- 9-2007 1 21-362, 21-363 07-17  8- 6-2007 1 11-66 07-19  8-20-2007 1 20-22(d)(1) 2 20-22(d)(2) 07-20  9-10-2007 1-8 9-4 07-21  9-10-2007 1, 2 21-22 3 21-600-21-605 07-22  9-10-2007 1 21-22 2 21-325(17) 07-23  9-24-2007 1-3 21-22 4 ch. 21, art. III 5 21-214 6 21-215 7 21-216 8 21-325(7) 9       Added 21-325(16) 07-24 11- 5-2007 1 9-4 07-25 11- 5-2007 1 9-4 07-26 11- 5-2007 1 11-37 07-27 11- 5-2007 1 11-66 08-01  1-14-2008 1 2-1 08-02  2-11-2008 1 11-66 08-03  2-25-2008 1 11-37 08-04  3-10-2008 1 21-362, 21-363 08-05  4- 7-2008 1 21-308(b) 2       Added 21-308(f) 08-06  5-12-2008 1       Added 2-500-2-512 08-07  6- 9-2008 1       Added 14-25 08-08  6- 9-2008 1       Rnbd 21-24, 21-25       as 21-328, 21-329 2 21-329(g) 3       Added 21-330 08-09  6- 9-2008 1 21-605 08-10  6- 9-2008 1 21-13(h) 08-11  6- 9-2008 1-3 6-55 08-12  6- 9-2008 1       Rnbd 9-320, 9-321       as 12-17, 12-18 2 9-281 3       Added 9-320-9-323 4 9-4 08-13  6- 9-2008 1 9-4 08-14  6-23-2008 1 7-108 2 9-4 08-15  7- 7-2008 1-3 5-22-5-24 08-16  7- 7-2008 1 9-4 2 20-30(e) 08-17  7- 7-2008 1 21-22 2 ch. 21, art. III 3       Added 21-325(18)-(20) 08-18  7- 7-2008 1 21-22 2       Added 21-94 3 ch. 21, art. III 4 ch. 21, art. IV 5       Added 21-131-21-133 6 21-186, 21-187 7 21-270-21-272 21-277, 21-284 Amd. of 7-15-2008 app. A, art. 2.0 app. A, §§ 5.3.6 14.1.2, 14.3 app. A, art. 16.0 ex. C 08-19  8- 4-2008 1 21-22 2 ch. 21, art. III 3       Added 21-243(28) 4       Added 21-325(21) 08-20  9-15-2008 1 21-362, 21-363 08-21 10-20-2008 1, 2 19-40 08-23 10-20-2008 1 20-50-20-71 08-25 10-20-2008 1 21-361-21-363 08-26 10-20-2008 1 21-22 2       Added 21-190 3       Added 21-620-21-625 08-27 10-20-2008 1       Added 9-330-9-335 2 9-4 08-28 11-25-2008 1       Added 2-195-2-198 08-30 11-25-2008 1 9-4 08-31 11-25-2008 1 11-37 08-32 11-25-2008 1, 2 9-4 08-33 11-25-2008 1       Added 8-250-8-258 08-34 11-25-2008 1 2-510 2 3-5 3 3-7 4 3-16 5 11-1 6-8 11-3-11-5 08-35 11-25-2008 1 7-1 2 7-78 3 7-81 4 7-82 5 7-107 6 7-108 09-01  2- 9-2009 1 2-330(c) Amd. of  2-17-2009 app. A, art. 2.0 app. A, §§ 5.1-5.3       Rnbd app. A, art. 16.0       as app. A, art. 17.0       Added app. A, art. 16.0 09-03  5-11-2009 1 9-331 2 9-333(b) 09-04  5-11-2009 1 9-149(b) 09-06  6-22-2009 1 11-37 09-08 10- 5-2009 1 9-4 09-09 12-14-2009 1 11-66 09-10 12-14-2009 1 Special Acts, §§ 44, 46 19-22 2 Special Acts, §§ 44, 46 19-23 10-01  1-11-2010 1 9-4 10-02  2- 8-2010 1 9-4 10-03  2-22-2010 1 21-482 10-04  2-22-2010 1 21-22 2       Added 21-94.B.(7), (8) 3 ch. 21, art. III 4 21-186 10-05  3- 5-2010 1 ch. 21, art. III 10-06  4-26-2010 1 21-94.3 2 ch. 21, art. IV 3 21-221 4 21-275 5 21-276 6 21-277 7 21-325 8 21-623 9       Added 21-624 10       Rnbd 21-624       as 21-625 11       Rnbd 21-625       as 21-626 10-07  5-10-2010 1 21-325(21)a. 10-08  5-24-2010 1 11-66 10-09  5-24-2010 1 19-40(a) 2       Added 19-40(g) 10-10  7-10-2010 1 19-40(f) 10-11  6-28-2010 1-3 9-4 10-12  8-16-2010 1 9-4 10-13  8-16-2010 1 21-22 21-325(7) 10-14  8-16-2010 1 ch. 21, art. III 10-15  9-15-2010 1 2-401 2-402 2-403(i) 10-16  9-27-2010 1 21-22 2 ch. 21, art. III 3       Added 21-322 4       Rpld 21-325(18)-(20) 10-17  9-27-2010 1 11-66 10-18  9-27-2010 1 19-40(f) 10-19  9-27-2010 1 20-30 10-20 10-18-2010 1 21-188 Amd. of 10-26-2010 App. A, §§ 5.1, 5.2       Rnbd App. A, Art. 17.0       as App. A, Art. 18.0       Added App. A, Art. 17.0, §§ 17.1-17.3 10-21 11-22-2010 1 9-4 11-01  1-10-2011 1 21-40(d)(1) 2       Added 21-100 3 ch. 21, art. IV 4       Rpld 21-284.B.(1)(c) 5       Added 21-284.B.(4) 6 21-325(2)c. 7 21-362(b) 11-02  1-10-2011 1 21-190(a), (c) 2 21-620(2) 3 21-622(1) 4       Added 21-623(13) 5 21-624(5) 11-03  1-24-2011 1 2-286(c) 11-04  1-24-2011 1       Added 8-221-8-229 2 9-4 11-05  1-24-2011 1       Added 8-236-8-244 2 9-4 11-06  2- 7-2011 1 9-4 11-07  2-28-2011 1 11-66 11-08  4-25-2011 1       Added 8-271-8-277 11-09  5-23-2011 1 21-94(b)(1) 11-10  5-23-2011 1 21-186(c)(1) 11-11  5-23-2011 1 21-306       Added 21-305 2       Rpld 21-364 11-12  5-23-2011 1 6-57 11-13  5-23-2011 1 9-4 11-14  5-23-2011 1 9-4 11-18  6-27-2011 1 21-22 2       Rpld 21-94(b)(7), (8) 3 Ch. 21, Art. III 4       Added 21-325(22) 11-19  9-19-2011 1 9-4 11-20 10- 3-2011 1 3-1, 3-2 3-5 3-7-3-16 2 3-3 11-21 11- 7-2011 1 14-25(a)(2) 2 14-25(b) 3 14-25(e)(5) 11-22 11-21-2011 1 21-22 2 Ch. 21, Art. III 3 21-322 11-23 11-21-2011 1 9-4 11-24 11-21-2011 1 11-39 11-25 12- 5-2011 1 21-243(10) 12-01  1- 9-2012 1 9-4 12-02  1-30-2012 1       Added 14-26 12-03  2-27-2012 1 21-22 2 21-325(17) 3       Added 21-95 4       Added 21-186(d)(4) 5 21-186(g)(5) 6       Added 21-622(2)(b) 12-04  4-30-2012 1       Added 2-600-2-603 12-05  4-16-2012 1 7-1(b) 2 7-80(b) 3 7-83 4       Added 7-84 12-06  5-21-2012 1 11-37 12-07  5-21-2012 1 9-4 12-08  7-30-2012 1       Added 2-700, 2-701 12-09  9-17-2012 1-3 11-66 12-10 10- 1-2012 1 6-50 2 6-55 3 6-57 12-11 10- 1-2012 1 9-4 12-12 10- 1-2012 1 9-149(b) 12-13 10-22-2012 1 21-13 2       Added 21-94(c)(5) 3 21-95(3)c. 4 ch. 21, art. IV, table 2B 5 21-249(a) 6 21-272 7 21-325(1) 8 21-326 12-14 11-26-2012 1 9-4 12-15 11-30-2012 1 21-362 2 21-363 12-16 11-30-2012 1 21-362 2 21-363 12-17 12-17-2012 1 9-4 13-01  3-25-2013 1       Added Ch. 20, Art. III, Div. 1(tit.) 2       Added 20-90-20-97 20-110-20-119 20-130-20-135 20-150-20-164 13-02  4-29-2013 1 Ch. 21, Art. III 13-03  5-20-2013 2       Added 11-101-11-103 13-04  6-10-2013 1 9-4 13-05  7-15-2013 1 2-330(c) 13-07  7-15-2013 1 21-362 2 21-363 13-08  8-26-2013 1 9-4 13-10  8-26-2013 1 21-362 2 21-363 13-11  9- 9-2013 1       Added 3-24 13-12  9- 9-2013 1 2-330(c)(1) 13-13  9-23-2013 1 20-58(a) 2 20-59 3       Rpld 20-64       Rnbd 20-65-20-71       as 20-64-20-70 4 20-90 5       Added 20-98 6       Added 20-116 7       Added 20-118 8 20-119 9 20-130 13-14  9-23-2013 1 21-188 13-15 10- 7-2013 1       Added 19-31 13-16 10- 7-2013 1 19-40 13-17 11-25-2013 1 20-116(5)c 2 20-133 13-19 12- 9-2013 1 21-22 2       Added 21-96 3 ch. 21, art. III 4 ch. 21, art. IV 5 21-186(d)(2) 6 21-622 7 21-362 8 21-363 13-20 12- 9-2013 1 ch. 20, art. III 2 21-325 13-21 12- 9-2013 1 21-22 13-22 12-16-2013 1 21-186 14-01  1-16-2014 1 7-107(f) 2 9-4 14-02  1-16-2014 1 9-4 14-03  1-16-2014 1 21-320(b) 2 21-321(a) 14-04  2-10-2014 1 ch. 21, art. IV, table 2A 2 21-311(f) 14-05  2-10-2014 1 7-84 14-07  5- 5-2014 1 21-186(c) 2       Added 21-186(c)(3) 3       Rpld 21-367 14-08  5- 5-2014 1 21-325 14-09  6- 2-2014 1 9-4 14-10  6- 2-2014 1       Added 11-46 14-12  6-16-2014 1 9-4 14-15  6-23-2014 1 21-362 2 21-363 14-16  6-23-2014 1 20-22(d) 14-17  9-15-2014 1 9-4 14-18  9-15-2014 1 9-4 14-19  9-15-2014 1       Rpld 20-119 2 9-4 15-01  1-12-2015 1 9-4 15-02  1-12-2015 2 21-363 15-03  3- 9-2015 1 11-12(c) 15-04  3-30-2015 1 ch. 21, art. III 2, 3 21-325 15-06  5-18-2015 1 2-389 15-07  6- 1-2015 1 3-8 15-08  6-22-2015 1 9-4 15-09  7-18-2015 1 21-601 15-10  8- 3-2015 1 2-388 2 2-390 15-11 10-19-2015 1 21-242 2 21-244 3 21-249 16-01  1-11-2016 1 9-4, table VI 16-02  1-11-2016 1 21-94 2 art. IV, table 2-B 16-05  5-23-2016 1, 2 19-26(a), (b) 3 19-289(b) 16-07  3-23-2016 1 21-362 2 21-363 16-08  3-23-2016 1 21-362 2 21-363 16-09  6-27-2016 1 9-4, table VIII 16-10  7-18-2016 1 9-4, table VI 16-11  7-18-2016 1 11-66 16-12 10-24-2016 1 9-4, table VI 16-13 11-21-2016 1 7-46(d) 2 7-106(e) 17-01  1- 9-2017 1 9-4, table VI 17-02  1- 9-2017 1 9-4, table XIII 17-03  1- 9-2017 1 11-37 17-04  2-13-2017 1 11-66 17-05  3- 6-2017 1 7-1(b) 2       Rpld 7-78(a)(2)       Rnbd 7-78(a)(3)       as 7-78(a)(2) 3 7-80(c)(2) 4       Rpld 7-107(d)       Rnbd 7-107(e)-(t)       as 7-107(d)-(s) 5       Rpld 7-108(m) 6 7-113(e), (g) 7       Rpld 7-118 17-06  3-13-2017 1 20-90 2 20-116 2 20-116(1)a. 20-116(1)d. 20-116(1)f. 20-116(1)h. 20-116(2)a.2. 20-116(2)b.1.i. 20-116(2)b.2., 20-116(2)b.2.i.       Added 20-116(2)b.1.ii., 20-116(2)b.2.ii., 20-116(2)b.2.iii., 20-116(2)b.3. 3 20-130(a) 17-07  4-17-2017 1 21-22 2 ch. 21, art. III 3       Added 21-325(24), (25) 17-08  5- 1-2017 1 21-362 2 21-363 17-09  6-12-2017 1 ch. 21, art. III 17-10  6-26-2017 1       Added 19-2 17-11  6-26-2017 1-6 21-270-21-275 17-12  6-26-2017 1 21-362 2 21-363 17-13  7-17-2017 1       Added 3-5(e) 2 3-7(c) 3       Added 3-9(d) 4 3-15 5       Added 3-21(b)(4) 17-14  7-17-2017 1 20-98 2       Added 20-99 17-15  7-17-2017 1 ch. 21, art. III 17-16  8-28-2017 1, 2 21-363 17-17  9-11-2017 1 11-66 17-18  9-25-2017 1 21-22 17-19 11-20-2017 1 9-4(table VI) 17-20 11-20-2017 1 9-4(table VI) 17-21 11-20-2017 1 20-22(d) 18-01  1- 8-2018 1 3-6 18-02  1- 8-2018 1 21-22 2 ch. 21, art. III 3       Added 31-323 18-03  3- 5-2018 1       Added 2-710-2-712 18-04  3- 5-2018 1 3-6(a) 2       Added 3-8(h) 18-05  3- 5-2018 1 ch. 9, art. 10(title), Charter ref., state law ref. 2 9-236 18-06  3- 5-2018 1       Added 19-41 18-07  3-26-2018 1       Added 3-25 18-08  3-26-2018 1       Added 9-259, 9-260 18-09  3-26-2018 1 11-37 18-10  3-26-2018 1 21-362 2 21-363 18-11  5- 7-2018 1 21-22 2 ch. 21, art. III 3 21-323(b), (d) 18-12  7-16-2018 1 9-4(table VIII) 18-13  7-16-2018 1 9-4(table XIII) 18-14  7-30-2018 1       Added 9-340-9-347 18-15  7-30-2018 1 9-4(table XIII) 18-16  7-30-2018 1 20-90 2 20-98 3 20-116 4 20-130(a) 5 20-150(b)(2) 6 20-151 18-17  9-10-2018 1 2-261-2-265 18-18  9-10-2018 1 2-116 18-21 10-15-2018 1 9-4(table VI) 18-22 10-29-2018 1 21-13(b) 18-23 10-29-2018 1 21-600-21-604 18-25 11-19-2018 1       Added 19-32 18-26 11-19-2018 1 9-4(table (VI) 18-28 11-26-2018 1       Added 21-191 18-29 11-26-2018 1 21-93 18-30 11-26-2018 1 ch. 21, art. IV, table 2B 18-31 11-26-2018 1 21-362 2 21-363 18-33 11-26-2018 1 21-362 2 21-363  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Revised Ordinances, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to State Law. 
RIGL 1956 Section  
of these 
Revised 
Ordinances 1-3-1 et seq. 21-22 1-3-19 21-11 2-1-18 et seq. 8-210 2-1-18 21-188 2-1-20 21-22 2-1-20.1 21-22 2-12-1 et seq. 5-21 2-14-1- 
2-14-10 17-67, 17-68 2-14-2 17-66 2-14-2-2-14-11 17-60 2-14-8 17-90 2-15-1- 
2-15-17 17-67, 17-68 2-15-8(b) 17-96 2-23-4 21-186 2-23-5 3-19 6-2 tit. 2, ch. 23.1 12-17 2-23.1-4 12-18 2-23.1-6 12-18 2-319.5-1 et seq. ch. 20 3-1-1 et seq. 12-1 3-7-3 9-4 3-7-7, 3-7-8 9-4 3-7-11 9-4 3-7-13, 
3-7-14 9-4 3-7-14.1 9-4 3-7-16 9-4 4-1-1 et seq. ch. 3 4-3-12 1-2 4-4-5 3-14 4-4-18 ch. 3 4-13-1 ch. 3 3-5 4-13-4 3-21 9-4 4-13-9 3-21 4-13-10 3-25 9-4 4-13-13 ch. 3 4-13-15 3-3 4-13-19 3-8 4-13-29 3-12, 3-13 4-13-31 3-10 4-13.1-1 et seq. 3-8 4-13.1-9(a)- 
4-13.1-9(c) 9-4 4-13.1-9(d)(1) 9-4 4-15-1 3-5 4-15-1 et seq. ch. 3 3-3 4-15-9 3-5 4-30-4 9-4 tit. 5 ch. 9 Char. art. XI 5-2-1 et seq. ch. 9 5-2-10 ch. 9, art. V 5-2-11 9-4 5-5-1 9-4 5-6-1 et seq. ch. 4 5-11-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. VI 9-146 5-11-1.1 9-144 5-11-18 9-4 9-144 5-15-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. VI 5-15-5 9-4 5-16-2 9-4 5-17-1 et seq. 12-10 5-20-1 et seq. ch. 4 5-21-1 9-4 9-76 5-21-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. IV 5-21-2 9-88 5-21-4 9-89 tit. 5, ch. 22 9-321 5-22-1 ch. 9 5-22-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. XII 5-22-4 ch. 9 9-4 5-22-5 ch. 9 5-22-7-5-22-9 9-44 5-22-11 ch. 9, art. X 9-44 5-22-12 ch. 9 9-4 5-22-18 9-272 5-23-1 et seq. ch. 9 ch. 9, art. X 5-23-2 9-4 9-236, 9-237 5-23-6 9-227 5-24-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. XI 5-24-1-5-24-5 9-256 5-25-7 21-22 5-27-a 21-22 5-53-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. VIII 5-53-2-5-53-5 ch. 9, art. X, 
div. 2 ch. 5-56 21-188 5-56-1 et seq. ch. 20 ch. 5-56.1 21-188 5-57-1 et seq. ch. 15, art. V 5-72-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. XIII 6-1-2 9-4 6-11-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. IV 6-11.1-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. IV 6-11.1-5 9-70 6-13.2-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. IV 6-14-1 et seq. ch. 9 6-14-6 9-4 6-28-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. VIII 9-142 6-42-3 9-4 6A-9-525 9-4 tit. 7, ch. 6 21-22 7-6-4 9-126 8-8-3(a)(4) 2-507 8-8-3.2 2-507 8-18-3 2-507 2-510 8-8-4 2-510 8-18-9 2-507 9-31-3 2-2 tit. 10, ch. 2 20-62 tit. 11 ch. 12 11-13-1 9-4 11-19-30 9-4 11-30-1 12-8 11-30-1 et seq. 8-11 11-30-1- 
11-30-13 ch. 8, art. II 11-40-1 et seq. ch. 9 ch. 9, art. X 11-44-1 12-12 11-44-24 12-12 17-2 11-44-26 12-13 11-45-1 12-6 11-47-12 9-4 11-47-15.1- 
11-47-18 ch. 15 11-47-16 9-4 11-47-39 9-4 11-47-40 9-74 11-47-47 9-74 11-47-58 9-74 12-7 12-14-12 ch. 11, art. II 12-20-6 9-4 12-21-1 1-5 12-44-4 ch. 11 16-2-18.1 9-4 15-2-9 9-4 tit. 17 Char. art. XII 19-26-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. IV 20-1-2 21-188 20-2-15, 
20-2-16 9-4 20-13-1- 
20-23-15 12-7 21-27-1 et seq. ch. 8, art. V 9-142 9-147 21-28-1.02(26) 21-22 21-28.6 21-22 21-28.6-12 21-22 21-28.6-16 21-22 23-1.10-16 12-2 23-2-16 et seq. ch. 8 23-3-25 9-4 23-6-1 8-15, 8-16 23-6-1 et seq. ch. 8 23-6-2 8-14 23-7.1-1 et seq. ch. 8 23-8-1 et seq. ch. 8 23-18-1 et seq. 12-15 23-18-10.1 12-15 23-18-11.1 12-15 23-18.8-1 et seq. ch. 6 ch. 6, art. IV 23-18.9-1 et seq. ch. 6 ch. 6, art. II, 
ch. 6, art. III 23-19-1 et seq. ch. 6 23-19.1-1 et seq. 2-237 ch. 6 ch. 6, art. III 6-30 6-50 6-80 21-22 21-186 23-19.1-4 6-50 23-19.2-1 ch. 3 3-19 23-19.2-1 et seq. 6-2 ch. 8 23-19.2-2 ch. 8, art. III 8-25 23-19.2-8 ch. 4 23-19.4-1-23-19.4-5 8-25 ch. 23-19.5 21-188 23-19.7-1 et seq. ch. 6 21-456 23-19.7-6 ch. 2, art. V, 
div. 2 2-236 23-19.7-8 2-239 23-19.9.4(4) 6-30 ch. 23-19.15 21-188 23-20.8-3 9-4 23-22.5-11 ch. 13, art. II 23-23-1 et seq. 5-21 23-23.1-1 et seq. 5-21 ch. 23-24.3 21-188 ch. 27.3 21-188 21-325 21-341 23-27.3-1 et seq. ch. 4 23-27.3-1.1 et seq. 2-313 23-27.3-3, 23-27.3-5 ch. 4 23-27.3-100.0 et seq. ch. 2, art. IV, 
div. 5 2-313 9-67 9-166 9-285 10-2 15-63 23-27.3-107.1.1 21-10 23-27.3-108.1 21-188 23-27.3-122.3 21-188 23-27.3-127.2 ch. 2, art. V, 
div. 5 23-28.1-1 et seq. ch. 5 ch. 5, art. II 10-2 10-8 23-28.1-2 ch. 5 9-4 23-28.1-2(b)(3) 5-120 23-28.2-1 et seq. ch. 5, art. II 23-28.5-1 et seq. ch. 4 23-28.16-8 ch. 9, art. VII 23-28.28-10 9-4 23-34.1-1 et seq. ch. 8, art. IV 23-37-1 et seq. ch. 5, art. III, 
div. 2 23-43.3-1 et seq. ch. 20 24-3-1 et seq. ch. 17 24-3-23 17-1 24-4-1 et seq. ch. 17 24-5-1 et seq. ch. 17 24-6-1 et seq. ch. 17 App. A, § 6.3 24-7-1 et seq. ch. 17 24-14-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. IV 9-89 24-14-6 9-89 25-1-1 et seq. ch. 9 25-3-1 et seq. ch. 9 28-21-1 et seq. 20-90 28-60-1 et seq. 14-25 29-4-1 et seq. 2-371 Char. § 818 29-4-5, 29-4-6 ch. 2, art. V, 
div. 9 30-15-1 et seq. ch. 2, art. IV, 
div. 4 30-15-12 2-166 30-15-13 2-168 31-5-28 9-76 31-12-11- 
31-12-13 ch. 11 31-13-3 ch. 11 31-14-2 11-10 31-16-1 et seq. Char. § 108 31-21-1 et seq. ch. 11, art. II 31-22-14 11-45 31-23.2-10 9-4 31-24-53 9-147 31-25-9 6-7 31-37-8 9-142 tit. 31, ch. 41.1 2-507 31-41.1-4 11-3 31-42-1 et seq. ch. 11, art. IV 31-43-4 2-507 31-43-9 ch. 11 31-44-1 et seq. ch. 10 31-44-1.7 ch. 10, art. II tit. 32 ch. 13 32-3-1 ch. 13 33-7-1 9-4 33-22-11 9-4 33-22-21 9-4 tit. 34, ch. 35 7-111 34-8.4-1 et seq. 7-1 34-13-7-34-13-9 9-4 34-35-1 et seq. 7-49 34-36.1-3.16 21-487 tit. 34, ch. 39 21-218 21-625 34-39-1 et seq. App. A, § 3.1 34-41.1-4 2-510 37-15.1-1 et seq. ch. 6, art. III 6-30 38-2-4 9-4 tit. 39, ch. 1 20-64 tit. 39, ch. 5 20-64 39-4-7 20-64 39-4-19-39-4-24 20-64 39-15-5-39-15-10 20-64 39-26-5 19-41 40-9.1-1, 
40-9.1-2 3-11 40.1-24-1 et seq. 21-22 42-14.2-1 et seq. ch. 9, art. IV ch. 42-17.1 21-188 ch. 42-17.6 21-188 42-28.2-8 ch. 15 42-28.6-1 et seq. ch. 15 42-35-1 8-202 42-35-15 8-159 tit. 42, ch. 46 App. A, § 5.3.4 42-45-1 et seq. 12-15 42-46-1 et seq. 21-336 42-72.1-1 et seq. 21-22 tit. 42, ch. 82 21-625 App. A, § 16.5 42-128-8.1(d)(1) 21-22 21-601 43-3-3, 43-3-4 1-2 43-3-6 1-2 21-22 43-3-11, 43-3-12 1-2 tit. 44 ch. 19 44-3-1 et seq. 19-29 44-3-3 ch. 19 44-3-3(a)(48) 19-41 44-3-3(a)(49) 19-41 44-3-3(17) 19-25 44-3-4(a)(viii) 19-27 44-3-4(e) 19-27 44-3-13.3 19-28 44-3-21 19-41 44-5-1 et seq. ch. 19 44-5-3 et seq. ch. 19 44-5-3(c)-(e) 19-41 44-5-8.1 19-2 44-5-13.3 Part II, § 51 44-5-26 20-61 44-5-30 20-61 44-5-31 20-61 44-7-11 9-4 20-16 20-27 44-18-15.1- 
44-19-15.2 ch. 9, art. III 44-44-3.1 9-142 tit. 45 ch. 2 tit. 45, ch. 18 et seq. ch. 5 45-1-1 et seq. Char. §§ 101-1403 45-2-2 ch. 19 45-2-55 2-500 2-507 3-25 45-5-5 21-22 45-5-6 ch. 12 45-6-1- 
45-6-8 1-8 45-6-2 1-4 45-6-2.3 ch. 20 45-6-3 12-2 45-6-7, 
45-6-8 1-8 45-6-10 ch. 9, art. V 45-6.1-1 et seq. ch. 11, art. II 45-6.1-1- 
45-6.1-7 11-3 45-6.2-1 et seq. ch. 11 45-7-7 15-13 45-12-2 20-55 45-14-1 et seq. ch. 20 45-18-1 et seq. ch. 5, art. III 45-19-19 15-52 45-21.3-1 et seq. ch. 4 45-22.2-1 et seq. 20-134 ch. 21 21-3 21-22 21-500 App. A, § 12.4 ch. 45-22.2 20-134 45-22.4-5(c), 
45-22.4-6(a) 21-509 45-23-1 et seq. ch. 18 21-131 App. A, § 1.1 45-23-1- 
45-23-24 App. A, § 1.7 45-23-14 et seq. ch. 18 45-23-20 ch. 18 45-23-22 ch. 18 45-23-40(D)(1) 21-486 45-23-41, 45-23-42 21-486 45-23-42 App. A, § 12.1 45-23-42(B)-(D) 21-486 45-23-43 21-486 45-23-46(I) App. A, § 7.2 45-23-53(B), (C) App. A, § 5.3 45-23-66 App. A, § 12.1 45-23-71 App. A, § 12.4 45-24-1 et seq. 16-12 ch. 21 21-3 21-22 21-500 45-24-13 et seq. ch. 18 45-24-20 21-338 45-24-27 et seq. App. A, § 12.4 45-24-30(10) 21-188 45-24-37(e), (f) 21-325 45-24-42 21-22 45-24-44 App. A, § 5.3 45-24-47 App. A, § 1.6 45-24-49 21-191 App. A, § 1.6 45-24-53 21-486 45-24-53(E) App. A, § 10.1 45-24.1-1 et seq. 21-331 21-335 45-24.2-1 et seq. ch. 4 45-24.2-5 ch. 2, art. V, 
div. 8 2-340 tit. 45, ch. 24.3 21-325 21-341 45-24.3-1 et seq. 2-192 2-507 45-24.3-16 ch. 2, art. V, 
div. 8 2-342 45-24.3-16(c) 2-340 45-24.5-1 et seq. ch. 8, art. III 8-140 45-24.5-2, 
45-24.5-3 8-141, 
8-142 45-24.6-1 et seq. 21-22 45-35-1 2-286 45-35-1-45-35-4 ch. 2, art. V, 
div. 4 45-35-2 2-285 45-35-3 2-287 45-36-1 et seq. 19-36-19-38 45-45-5 21-22 tit. 45, ch. 53 21-16 45-53-1 et seq. 21-12 21-22 45-53-3(5) 21-22 45-53-3(10) 21-16 45-53-4(4)(xii) 21-16 tit. 46 ch. 7, art. III ch. 46-12 7-82 21-188 ch. 46-13.2 21-188 46-4-6.4 ch. 2, art. IV, 
div. 2 ch. 7 7-1 7-76 46-12-1 et seq. 8-211 ch. 20 46-12-1(b) 21-22 46-12-39- 
46-12-41 7-82 46-13.1-3 21-22 46-15.6-6 20-28 46-22-14 ch. 7, art. III ch. 46-23 21-188 46-23-1 et seq. 21-22 tit. 46, ch. 42 2-381  
