The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
C:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions; Penalties
[Adopted 1-26-1976 by Ord. No. 112 as Ch. 1 of the 1976 Code]
§ 1-1. Definitions; rules of construction.1
A. Definitions. As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COUNCIL, TOWN COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of
Portsmouth, Rhode Island.
COUNTY — Newport County, Rhode Island.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OWNER — Applied to any property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such property.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural
person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes every species of property except
real property, as herein defined.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SIDEWALK — That part of the street exclusively reserved for
pedestrians and constructed for such purpose.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION — Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.
STREET — Includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches
thereto within the Town and shall mean and include the entire width
thereof between the abutting property lines.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, includes any
person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or
a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
YEAR — A calendar year.
B. In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances of the Town,
the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would
be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town Council:
1. Editor's Note: Original § 1-1, How code designated and cited, of the 1976 Code, which
immediately preceded this section, was repealed 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03-11.
§ 1-1 CHARTER § 1-1
C:3
§ 1-2. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, underlined above each
section, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor
as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended
or reenacted.2
(1) Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if
the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
(2) Gender. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the
feminine and neuter.
(3) Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
(4) May. The word "may" is permissive.
(5) Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the
plural includes the singular.
(6) Oath. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation
in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having conscientious
scruples against taking an oath. An affirmation has the same effect
as an oath.
(7) Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory.
(8) State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to
mean the State of Rhode Island.
(9) State law references. Whenever reference is made to the "General
Laws" or "Gen. Laws," this shall mean the General Laws of Rhode
Island, 1956, as amended. Whenever reference is made to "Public
Laws" or "P.L.," this shall mean the Public Laws of Rhode Island.
(10) Tense. Words used in the present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
(11) Town. The words "the Town" or "this Town" shall be construed as if
the words "of Portsmouth, Rhode Island," followed them.
(12)Written; in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be
construed to include any representation of words, letters or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
2. Editor's Note: Original §§ 1-4, Provisions deemed continuation of prior ordinances, and
1-5, Severability of parts of Code, of the 1976 Code, which immediately followed this
section, were repealed 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03-11.
§ 1-1 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 1-3
C:4
§ 1-3. General penalty. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-03-11]
A. Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code, other ordinances
of the Town or state law, whenever in this Code, or in any other
ordinance or resolution of the Town Council, or in any rule, regulation,
notice or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the Town under
authority duly vested in him or her, any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful
or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided
therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any other
ordinance or resolution of the Town Council or such rule, regulation,
notice or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding an amount of
$500 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days in some jail or house of
correction and/or shall require restitution in cases involving property
damage or personal injury in an amount up to $2,500 and/or shall
require voluntary community restitution for a Town agency for not more
than 10 days for any one offense, unless other penalties therefor, or
penalties within other limits, are specifically prescribed by statute, to
be prosecuted by some officer appointed for that purpose and to be
recovered to the use of the Town, or of the person or persons, and in the
proportions that the Council in its ordinances and regulations
designates.
B. Except where otherwise provided, every day any violation of this Code
or any other ordinance or resolution of the Town Council or such rule,
regulation, notice or order shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 1-3 CHARTER § 1-3
C:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03-11]
§ 1-4. Adoption of Code; copy on file.
There is hereby adopted by the Town Council that certain Code entitled
the "Code of the Town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island," containing certain
ordinances of a general and permanent nature as compiled, consolidated,
codified and indexed in Chapters 1 to 405, together with an Appendix, of
which Code not less than one copy has been and is now filed in the office of
the Town Clerk.
§ 1-5. Effective date; repealer.
The provisions of such Code shall be in force on and after March 11, 2013,
and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted on or before
June 25, 2012, and not contained in such Code are hereby repealed from
and after March 11, 2013, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-6. Effect on prior actions; ordinances saved from repeal.
The repeal provided for in § 1-5 of this ordinance shall not affect any
offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred
or any contract or right established or accruing before March 11, 2013;
nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to March 11, 2013; nor shall such repeal affect
any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money for the Town or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the Town
or any evidence of the Town's indebtedness or any contract or obligation
assumed by the Town; nor shall it affect the annual tax levy; nor shall it
affect any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the
Town Council on any person or corporation; nor shall it affect any ordinance
adopted for purposes which have been consummated; nor shall it affect
any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special,
although permanent in effect; nor shall it affect any ordinance relating to
the compensation of the Town's officers or employees or serve to reduce
the compensation of any present Town officer or employee; nor shall it
serve to deprive any person of any lawful retirement, disability, death or
other benefit accrued or accruing; nor shall it affect any ordinance naming,
renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets, alleys or rights-of-way in
the Town; nor shall it affect any ordinance adopted after June 25, 2012; nor
shall it affect any of the following ordinances or amendments thereto:
A. Any ordinance establishing a speed limit or prima facie safe speed for
vehicles; designating a one-way street, a through street, a stop or yield
intersection, a street or part of street or other area or locality where the
parking of a vehicle is prohibited at any time or is restricted in any
manner; designating a crosswalk, safety zone, school zone, zone of
quiet, play street, loading zone, taxicab stand, bus stop or reserved
§ 1-4 CHARTER § 1-6
C:7
§ 1-7. General penalty; continuing violations.
vehicular parking space; designating any street intersection or other
place where the turning movement of any vehicle is prohibited or
regulated; providing for the erection, installation, replacement or
removal of any traffic control sign, signal, marking or device;
designating a truck route through the Town or prohibiting or limiting
any street or part of any street to any class of vehicles; imposing any
lawful fine or other penalty for the violation of any provision of state
law or ordinance of the Town relating to the regulation of traffic.
B. The Land Development and Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Portsmouth, and any amendments thereto.
C. The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Portsmouth, and any amendments
thereto.
D. Ordinance No. 2000-7-10, pertaining to the Police Department Rules
and Regulations, and any amendments thereto.
E. Ordinance No. 87-12-28, pertaining to the Personnel Rules and
Regulations, and any amendments thereto.
A. Whenever in the Code adopted by this ordinance, or in any other
ordinance or resolution of the Town Council, or in any rule, regulation,
notice or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the Town under
authority vested in him or her, any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful
or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided
therefor, the violation of any such provision of such Code or any other
ordinance or resolution of the Town Council or such rule, regulation,
notice or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding an amount of
$500 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days in some jail or house of
correction and/or shall require restitution in cases involving property
damage or personal injury in an amount up to $2,500 and/or shall
require voluntary community restitution for a Town agency for not more
than 10 days for any one offense, unless other penalties therefor, or
penalties within other limits, are specifically prescribed by statute, to
be prosecuted by some officer appointed for that purpose and to be
recovered to the use of the Town, or of the person or persons, and in the
proportions that the Council in its ordinances and regulations
designates.
B. Except where otherwise provided, every day any violation of such Code
or any other ordinance or resolution of the Town Council or such rule,
regulation, notice or order shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 1-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 1-8
C:8
§ 1-8. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance and
the Code hereby adopted are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section of this ordinance or the Code hereby adopted shall
be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment
or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this ordinance or the Code hereby adopted.
§ 1-9. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Town Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)3
C. Nomenclature. Throughout Chapter 288, references to the "health
officer" and the "director of public health" are changed to "Building
Official."
3. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-9B, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: [Amended (added, deleted) 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-03-11]. Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file
in the Town offices.
§ 1-8 CHARTER § 1-9
C:9
Chapter 10
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 40. Personnel — See Ch. 45.
§ 1-9 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 1-9
C:10
ARTICLE I
Board of Recreation
[Adopted 4-1-1957 by Ord. No. 85 (Ch. 17 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 10-1. Composition.
The Town Council as constituted at any given time shall be the Board of
Recreation, and the Town Council acting in the capacity of the Board of
Recreation may request the Town School Committee to designate one of its
members to serve with the Board of Recreation as a member ex officio.
§ 10-2. Authority of Board.
The Board of Recreation is vested with the authority to establish, construct,
equip, control and maintain public playgrounds, athletic fields, swimming
pools, bathing places and other community recreation centers and to
conduct and promote recreation, play, sport and physical training for which
admission or other fees may be charged.
§ 10-3. Power to implement authority.
To give effect to the authority vested in the Board of Recreation, the Board
of Recreation may conduct its activities on land and in buildings, adapted
or adaptable for such purposes, owned by the Town, with the consent of the
committee or board in control of such property, or on land or in buildings
that may hereafter be acquired for such purposes by gift, purchase or lease,
and may also, in its discretion, take charge of and use any place or places
which any person may offer the use of for purposes herein enumerated. The
Board of Recreation may employ a Superintendent of Recreation, teachers
and other officers and may fix their compensation. The Board of Recreation
may authorize the use of such property as may be under its control for any
other municipal purpose or by any person, society or other organizations for
such other public, recreational, social or educational purposes as the Board
of Recreation may deem proper.
§ 10-1 CHARTER § 10-3
C:11

ARTICLE II
Planning Board
[Adopted 6-5-1972 (§§ 2-6 to 2-9 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 10-4. Establishment.
In accordance with the provisions of Title 45, Chapter 22, of the General
Laws of Rhode Island, 1956, as amended, there shall be established a
Planning Board for the Town.
§ 10-5. Composition; qualifications; terms; appointment. [Amended
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03-11]
The Planning Board shall consist of seven members, each a resident of
the Town and a qualified elector, and each to hold office for the term
of four years, provided that the original appointments shall be made for
terms of one, two, three and four years, respectively, and provided that the
appointments for the year next following the original appointments shall be
for like terms of one, two, three and four years, respectively. All terms shall
commence on May 1 of the year of appointment. The members of the Board
shall be appointed by the Town Council in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
§ 10-6. Vacancies; officers; compensation.
Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled by the Town Council, and such
appointment shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term. All members
shall serve until their respective successors shall have been designated.
After the annual appointments of the Town Council have been made, the
Board shall organize by electing a Chairman, Vice Chairman and a
Secretary. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
§ 10-7. Meetings; quorum; procedural rules.
Regular meetings of the Board shall be held at least once a month for 10
months of the year on such days as the Board may determine, and special
meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman or on the written request
of three members. Four members shall constitute a quorum, but no action
shall be taken by the Board without the concurring vote of four members.
The Board may adopt rules for the transaction of business.
§ 10-8. Duties.
A. Studies. When requested by the Town Council, the Planning Board shall
make careful studies and, when necessary, prepare plans for the
resources and needs of the Town, with reference to its physical growth
and development as affecting the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the people, economy and efficiency of community life. Such
studies and plans may include, among other things, the following:
§ 10-4 CHARTER § 10-8
C:13
(1) The utilization of land for residential, business, industrial, public,
institutional or other purposes;
(2) The location and character of transportation routes, including
waterways, railroads, highways, streets, sidewalks, bridges,
terminals, piers or wharves, heliports or other facilities;
(3) The location and character of public buildings and facilities,
including offices, fire or police stations, schools, parks, recreation
areas, beaches and other public places and structures;
(4) The coordinated development of public service and utility systems
such as water supply, drainage, sewerage, streetlighting, power or
fuel transmission, fire control, school and recreation;
(5) Conditions of deteriorating or blighted areas, including plans for
the redevelopment, rehabilitation and prevention of slum districts;
(6) The prevention and abatement of stream, bay or harbor pollution;
(7) The conservation and utilization of natural resources, including
soil, groundwater or surface water, the shoreline, minerals, plant
and animal life and topographical features;
(8) Historic sites or buildings;
(9) Survival from possible natural or man-made disasters; and
(10) The economic and sociological characteristics of the Town.
B. Master Plan. The Board, when requested by the Town Council, shall
prepare and adopt a Master Plan for the development and improvement
of the Town. Such plan shall, among other things, show the proposed
location and arrangement of the uses of the land, transportation routes,
public buildings and facilities, public and utility systems, deteriorating
or blighted neighborhoods planned for redevelopment, rehabilitation or
other improvement, natural resources and historic sites to be
preserved, and disaster survival features. No portion of the Master Plan
or amendment thereto shall be adopted by the Board without a public
hearing.
C. Capital budget and improvement program. When directed by the Town
Council, the Board shall collaborate with the Town Financial Officer in
the annual preparation and recommendation to the Budget Committee
of a capital budget for the following year and a comprehensive six-year
capital improvement program.
D. Platting and subdivisions. When directed by the Town Council, the
Board shall control the platting or other subdivision of land in
accordance with the applicable statute.
E. Annual reports. The Board shall report annually to the Town Council not
less than 30 days prior to the annual adoption of the Town's budget,
§ 10-8 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 10-8
C:14
§ 10-9. Powers.
§ 10-10. Submission of proposals and legislation for
recommendation.
summarizing the work of the preceding year and recommending plans
for the future development of the Town. All plans and reports of the
Board shall be first submitted to the Town Council, and thereafter the
Board shall have authority to publish and distribute copies of plans and
reports to promote public interest in and understanding of the work of
the Board.4
F. Other duties assigned by Council. The Board shall undertake such other
projects and work as may be assigned by the Town Council in
connection with the physical growth and development of the Town.
A. Cooperation of other officials, agencies, etc. When authorized by the
Town Council, the Planning Board shall have authority to call upon
other departments, boards, committees or commissions of the Town
and agencies of the state and federal governments for assistance in
performance of its designated functions and shall cooperate with such
other departments and with state and federal agencies on community,
regional and state planning and development. All Town officials and
agencies shall, upon request, furnish the Board such available
information as it may require for its work.
B. Technical assistance. The Board may employ such technical assistance
as it may deem necessary within the funds appropriated by the Town at
the adoption of the Town's budget and may enter into agreements with
state, federal or regional agencies; the Board may incur any expense
necessary therefor, but it shall not for any purpose contract for or incur
any expense greater than the amount appropriated or available
therefor.5
C. The Board shall adopt, modify and amend regulations and rules
governing land development and subdivision projects within the Town
of Portsmouth. [Added 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 95-1-3B]
D. The Board shall control land development and subdivision projects
pursuant to such regulations and rules. [Added 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
95-1-3B]
A. Any proposal for the construction of the public improvement or for the
acquisition of land for public use which requires approval at the
adoption of the Town's budget and any such proposal which may be
effected by a department, board, committee or commission of the Town
shall be first submitted to the Planning Board for its recommendation.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 10-8 CHARTER § 10-10
C:15
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the proposal
from reaching the floor at the adoption of the Town's budget or from
being effected, if approval at the adoption of the Town's budget is
not required, in the absence of a recommendation of the Board after
30 days from the date of submission or subsequent to a negative
recommendation of the Board.6
B. All proposed ordinances and resolutions of the Town Council which
concern the existing and proposed location and arrangement of the
uses of the land, transportation routes, public buildings and facilities,
public utility systems, deteriorating or blighted neighborhoods planned
for redevelopment, rehabilitation or other improvement, natural
resources and historic sites to be preserved, and disaster survival
features shall be submitted to the Board for its recommendation.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict or prevent the
Town Council from acting on any ordinance or resolution contrary to or
in the absence of a recommendation of the Board.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 10-10 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 10-10
C:16
ARTICLE III
Juvenile Hearing Board
[Adopted 8-3-1998 by Ord. No. 98-8-3]
§ 10-11. Establishment; name.
§ 10-12. Membership; appointment; terms.
§ 10-13. Referrals.
A. Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 45-2, a Juvenile Hearing Board shall be
established in the Town of Portsmouth for the purpose of hearing all
cases referred to it by the Juvenile Division of the Portsmouth Police
Department or the Chief of Police of the Town of Portsmouth, or his
designee, with respect to persons under the age of 18 who are charged
with violating the criminal laws of the State of Rhode Island or the Town
of Portsmouth.
B. Said Board shall be called the "Portsmouth Juvenile Hearing Board."
A. The membership of the Portsmouth Juvenile Hearing Board (the Board)
shall consist of five members who shall be qualified electors of the Town
of Portsmouth. In addition, there may be two additional auxiliary
members who shall/may serve as active members at the request of the
Chairperson of the Board in the event any regular member or members
are unable to serve at any hearing or proceeding.
B. The members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Town Council
of the Town of Portsmouth.
C. The term of appointment shall be for three years, except that the initial
appointments may be for a term of less than three years in order to
stagger the appointments.
D. Appointed members of the Board shall be eligible to be reappointed
and, upon expiration of their terms, shall continue to serve until
another be appointed in their place or until reappointed.
A. Persons who are under the age of 18 years may be referred to the
Board, which shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the Rhode Island
Family Court, if the alleged act would support a finding of waywardness
or delinquency in the Family Court, including but not limited to
violation of compulsory school attendance laws or if such act
constitutes an offense which, if committed by an adult, would be a
misdemeanor; provided, however, that no referral shall be made in the
case of any person:
(1) Who shall have been twice previously referred to the Board; or
(2) Who shall have been once previously referred to the Board and
refused or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or to have made
the restitution recommended; or
§ 10-11 CHARTER § 10-13
C:17
§ 10-14. Authority to hear cases; sanctions.
§ 10-15. Quorum; rules and regulations; procedures.
(3) Who shall, at the time of the commission of the offense, be within
the custody and control of the Rhode Island Family Court, with the
exception of guardianship proceedings.
B. The Juvenile Division of the Police Department, the Chief of Police or his
designee may order referral to the Board of any other juvenile offender
where, in the opinion of the Juvenile Division or the Chief of Police or
his designee, such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile
concerned or the community at large.
C. No referral to the Board shall be made until such person, together with
his/her legal guardian or legal representative, shall have, in writing,
waived such person's right to an initial hearing in the Family Court with
respect to the offense charged, has admitted to the offense and has
agreed to abide by the decision of the Board.
A. The Board shall be authorized to hear all cases referred to it by the
Juvenile Division of the Portsmouth Police Department, the Chief of
Police of the Portsmouth Police Department or his designee and to
impose and order sanctions other than incarceration. Sanctions may
include but are not limited to:
(1) Fines up to a maximum of $100 for each offense charged;
(2) Community service;
(3) Restitution for any injuries or property damage, where appropriate,
resulting from the commission of the offense;
(4) Imposition of a reasonable curfew;
(5) Denial, suspension or revocation of driving privileges for a period
of up to two years;
(6) Appropriate counseling.
B. In any such proceedings, the Board shall, prior to the imposition of any
sanctions, request the juvenile offender and his/her parents, legal
guardians and legal representative to agree to the sanctions imposed,
the amount of restitution ordered and the manner of making same. In
ordering restitution, the Board shall consider the juvenile offender's
ability to pay and the amount of actual damages caused as a result of
the commission of the offenses.
A. A majority of the Board's members shall constitute a quorum, and a
majority of the members present shall be required to take any action.
Any juvenile offender may be represented by counsel and may present
evidence on his own behalf.
§ 10-13 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 10-15
C:18
B. The Board shall have power from time to time to adopt and publish any
and all rules and regulations necessary to carry out its functions under
the provisions of this article.
C. The Board shall give notice of the date, time and place of its meetings to
the Juvenile Division of the Portsmouth Police Department, the Chief of
Police, or his designee, the juvenile offender and his/her parents, legal
guardians or legal representative not less than seven days prior to the
date of the hearing.
D. Board proceedings shall be closed to the public, and the provisions of
R.I.G.L. § 8-10-23.1 and other applicable laws shall not apply to such
proceedings. All records of proceedings, including records concerning
the arrest, apprehension or detention of any juvenile offender, shall be
withheld from public inspection, but such records shall be available to
the parent, legal guardian or legal representative of the juvenile for
inspection. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03-11]
§ 10-15 CHARTER § 10-15
C:19

ARTICLE IV
Zoning Board of Review
[Adopted 7-1-1994 as part of the Zoning Ordinance7]
§ 10-16. Establishment; organization; expenses.
A. Appointment of members; alternates.
(1) Members of the Zoning Board of Review shall be appointed by
majority vote of the Town Council.
(2) In case any vacancy occurs in said Board for any case or cause, the
Town Council shall appoint a member to said Board to fill said
vacancy for the remainder of the term of the member who has
vacated his office.
(3) The Zoning Board of Review shall consist of five members, each to
hold office for the term of five years; provided, however, that the
original appointments shall be made for terms of one, two, three,
four, and five years, respectively. The Zoning Board of Review shall
also include two alternates to be designated as the first and second
alternate members, their terms to be set by ordinance, but not to
exceed five years.
(4) Members of zoning boards of review serving on the effective date of
adoption of a zoning ordinance under the Zoning Chapter shall be
exempt from provisions of this section respecting terms of
originally appointed members until the expiration of their current
terms.
B. Alternates. Alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in
hearings. The first and second alternates shall be designated by the
Chairperson on a case-by-case basis. The first alternate shall vote if a
member of the board is unable to serve at a hearing and the second
shall vote if two members of the Board are unable to serve at a hearing.
In the absence of the first alternate member, the second alternate
member shall serve in the position of the first alternate.
C. Removal of a member. Members of the Zoning Board of Review may be
removed from the Board for due cause by majority vote of the Town
Council.
D. Organization of the Board. The Zoning Board of Review shall annually
elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson and a Secretary. The
Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Vice Chairperson, shall
preside over all meetings of the Board.
E. Expenses.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 10-16 CHARTER § 10-16
C:21
§ 10-17. Procedures.
§ 10-18. Petition for variance or special use permit.
Any petition for a variance or a special use permit to the Zoning Board of
Review of the said Town shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed by the
Town of Portsmouth ordinance pertaining to fees.8
(1) Individual members of the Board may be reimbursed for expenses
incurred in the performance of official duties with approval of the
Chair.
(2) The Zoning Board of Review may engage legal, technical, or
clerical assistance to aid in the discharge of its duties.
(3) The Town may provide for remuneration to members of the Zoning
Board of Review.
A. The Zoning Board of Review shall adopt and maintain written rules of
procedure, which shall be available to any applicant or the general
public at the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Said rules of
procedure shall include, at a minimum, a mailing address to which
appeals and correspondence to the Zoning Board of Review shall be
sent and an office where records and decisions shall be filed.
(1) In case of conflict between such rules of procedure and this article,
the provisions of this article shall apply.
B. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Vice Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by the
issuance of subpoenas.
C. No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the Board
unless he or she has attended all hearings concerning that matter.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Fees, Arts. III and V.
§ 10-16 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 10-18
C:22
Chapter 12
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 12-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 45-2-62, there is established a Municipal Court in the
Town of Portsmouth which shall assume jurisdiction of the subject matters
set forth in § 12-7 hereof on the date the Municipal Court Judge is appointed
by the Town Council.
§ 12-2. Appointment, term, and qualifications of Judge.
§ 12-3. Witnesses; attendance; subpoenas.
The Court shall have the power to issue writs or summonses for witnesses,
and compel their attendance, and to punish for contempt by fine or
imprisonment. The Court may also issue writs of habeas corpus ad
testificandum, upon continuance of any complaint or proceeding before it,
may take recognizance to the state, with surety or sureties in such sum
as the Court shall deem proper, with the condition to appear before the
Court and make further answer to such complaint or proceeding, and in the
meantime to keep the peace, and, in want thereof, may commit the same
to the state adult correctional institutions until such recognizance shall be
given or the parties lawfully discharged therefrom.
§ 12-4. Municipal Court Clerk; appointment and duties.
A. The Court shall be composed of one Judge appointed by the Town
Council. The Judge shall serve until his or her successor shall be duly
appointed.
B. The initial appointment, if made, shall terminate on December 31,
2014. Each subsequent appointment, if made, shall be for a term of two
years commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31 of the
even-numbered years. A Judge shall hold office until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified.
C. The Judge shall be a lawyer admitted to practice law in this state by the
Rhode Island Supreme Court, shall be in good standing, and shall have
not less than five years' experience in the active practice of law.
A. The Town Council shall appoint a Clerk of the Court who shall serve at
the pleasure of the Council.
B. The Clerk of the Court shall keep a regular docket of all cases disposed
of; shall record the judgments, orders, and sentences of the Court; and
shall furnish certified copies thereof when required, for which copies
the Clerk shall charge the same fees as are by law allowed to Clerks of
the Superior Court. The Clerk shall keep the office open to the public
§ 10-18 CHARTER § 12-4
C:23
§ 12-5. Seal; oaths.
§ 12-6. Sessions; time; place.
The Municipal Court shall be considered to be in session at all times and at
such place or places in the Town as the Court, or Judge holding same, shall
appoint.
§ 12-7. Jurisdiction.
during such hours as the Court shall determine and shall also be
responsible for the administration of the Court.
C. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Police Department or the
Town administration from providing the secretarial and administrative
assistance necessary for the Court to perform its duties and
responsibilities.
D. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Town Clerk from also
becoming the Municipal Court Clerk.
A. The Municipal Court shall have a seal, which shall contain such words
and device as the Town Council shall adopt and approve.
B. The Judge and the Municipal Court Clerk shall have the power to
administer oaths and affirmations.
A. The Town Council hereby confers on the Municipal Court original
jurisdiction to hear and determine causes involving violation of:
(1) The Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance;
(2) Any other Town ordinance;
(3) Minimum housing ordinances, including any violation of R.I.G.L.
Title 45, Chapter 24.3, the State Housing, Maintenance, and
Occupancy Code;
B. Provided, however, that:
(1) Any defendant found guilty of any offense, excluding violations of
minimum housing ordinances or R.I.G.L. Chapter 45-24.3,9 may,
within seven days of such conviction, file an appeal from the
conviction to the Superior Court and be entitled in the latter Court
to a trial de novo; and
(2) Any defendant found guilty of any violation of a minimum housing
ordinance, or of R.I.G.L. Chapter 45-24.3, within seven days of such
conviction, file an appeal from the conviction to the First Division of
the District Court and be entitled to a trial de novo in accordance
with R.I.G.L. §§ 8-8-3(a)(4) and 8-8-3.2.
9. Editor's Note: See Title 45, Chapter 24.3, of the Rhode Island General Laws.
§ 12-4 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 12-7
C:24
§ 12-8. Fines; penalties; imprisonment.
The Municipal Court may impose a sentence not to exceed 30 days in jail
and impose a fine not in excess of $1,000 per violation, or both, and shall be
empowered to punish persons for contempt.
§ 12-9. Complaints; warrants; writs.
It shall be lawful for the Judge of the Court to prescribe and vary the form
of all complaints, warrants, writs, or other process as to make the same
consistent with the organization, style, and jurisdiction of the Court, and
such complaints, warrants, writs, and other process shall have the same
effect, validity, and extent, and be served, obeyed, enforced, and returned,
in the same manner and by the same officers, as if issued from the District
Courts; and they may be served by any constables of the Town who are
authorized to serve process in civil or criminal cases.
§ 12-10. Costs.
§ 12-11. Compensation of Municipal Court Judge and Municipal
Court Clerk.
§ 12-12. Acting Judge; Acting Clerk.
C. With respect to violations of municipal ordinances dealing with
minimum housing, or R.I.G.L. Chapter 45-24.3, the Town Council
hereby confers upon the Municipal Court, in furtherance of the
aforementioned jurisdiction, the power to proceed, according to equity:
(1) To restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate, or correct a violation;
(2) To order the repair, vacating, or demolition of any dwelling existing
in violation; or
(3) To otherwise compel compliance with all provisions of ordinances
and statutes.
A. The Municipal Court shall be authorized to assess court costs in the
amount of $50 for each offense charged, and the payment of such costs
shall be a part of the sentence.
B. All payments shall be deposited in the general treasury of the Town.
C. The costs incurred by the Town in securing a police officer's presence,
upon the request of the defendant, shall be charged to the defendant in
the event he or she should fail to appear.
A. The compensation of the Judge of the Municipal Court shall be set by
the Town Council by resolution.
B. The compensation of the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall be set by
the Town Council by resolution.
§ 12-7 CHARTER § 12-12
C:25
Chapter 15
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 15-1. Emergency Management Agency.
A. In cases of sickness, absence, or other disability or ineligibility of the
Municipal Court Judge or Clerk which shall be less than 45 days, the
Town Council may appoint an Acting Judge or an Acting Clerk,
respectively, at the same compensation or at such salary as the Town
Council may determine for the term of such sickness, absence,
disability or ineligibility of the Judge or Clerk. An Acting Municipal
Court Judge or Acting Municipal Court Clerk shall perform all duties of
the Municipal Court Judge or Municipal Court Clerk, respectively.
B. In case of a prolonged sickness, absence, or other disability or
ineligibility of the Municipal Court Judge or the Municipal Court Clerk
that shall be in excess of 14 days, the Town Council may, by resolution,
appoint an Acting Municipal Judge or an Acting Municipal Court Clerk,
respectively, for the term of such sickness, absence, disability or
ineligibility of the Municipal Court Judge or the Municipal Court Clerk,
respectively, at the same compensation or at such salary as the Town
Council may determine. An Acting Municipal Court Judge or Acting
Municipal Court Clerk shall perform all duties of the Municipal Court
Judge or Municipal Court Clerk, respectively, and in the performance of
those duties shall have the same effect as if performed by the Municipal
Court Judge or Municipal Court Clerk, respectively.
C. In case the Municipal Court Judge must recuse due to a conflict in a
specific case, the Portsmouth Probate Court Judge shall sit as the
Municipal Court Judge.
A. In accordance with R.I.G.L. § 30-15-1 et seq., the Portsmouth Town
Council hereby establishes a Town of Portsmouth Emergency
Management Agency, headed by an Emergency Management Director
who shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the Portsmouth
Town Council. The purpose of the Agency is to plan and coordinate the
Town's response to any occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or
severe damage, injury, loss of property, or loss of life, whether caused
by persons or resulting from acts of nature, including but not limited to
fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water
contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage,
epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion,
riot, hostile military or paramilitary action, or an act of bioterrorism or
endangerment of the health, safety and resources of the people of the
Town.
B. The Agency shall have powers and duties within the Town of
Portsmouth similar to those of the statewide disaster agency. The
Agency shall cooperate with and assist the State Emergency
§ 12-12 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 15-1
C:26
§ 15-2. Powers and duties of Council President.
The Town Council President of the Town of Portsmouth has powers and
duties with respect to emergency management within the Town similar
to those of the Governor on the state level, not inconsistent with other
provisions of law.
§ 15-3. Declaration of local disaster emergency.
Chapter 40
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 10.
Personnel — See Ch. 45.
Management Agency and shall perform such services as may be
requested by it. The Agency may act jointly with other local emergency
management agencies.
A. A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the Town Council
President of the Town of Portsmouth. It shall not be continued or
renewed for a period in excess of seven days, except by or with the
consent of the Town Council of the Town of Portsmouth. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local disaster
emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be
filed promptly with the Town Clerk.
B. The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is to activate
the mitigation response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable
local disaster emergency plans and to authorize the furnishing of aid
and assistance thereunder.
§ 15-1 CHARTER § 15-3
C:27

ARTICLE I
Animal Control Officer
[Adopted 1-24-1977 by Ord. No. 115; amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 40-1. Appointment.
The Town Administrator, subject to the approval of the Town Council, is
hereby authorized to appoint an Animal Control Officer.
§ 40-2. Administrative jurisdiction.
Said Animal Control Officer shall, administratively, be assigned to the
jurisdiction of the Police Department.
§ 40-3. Part-time position.
Said position shall be a part-time position until further action is taken by
the Town Council.
§ 40-4. Compensation.
During the period in which said position is a part-time position, said Animal
Control Officer will be entitled to receive $0.50 for each license issued by
him/her.
§ 40-1 CHARTER § 40-4
C:29

ARTICLE II
Travel Reimbursement
[Adopted 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 93-2-8B]
§ 40-5. Adoption of policy.
Under the provisions of the Town Charter and pursuant to the Personnel
Rules and Regulations and/or union contracts, whichever is applicable, the
Town Council herein adopts the following policy.
§ 40-6. Use of Town vehicles required; exceptions.
Employees are required to use Town vehicles for business-related
transportation. If a Town vehicle is unavailable, the department head may
authorize the use of personal vehicles, subject to the following:
A. The Town of Portsmouth assumes no property/casualty liability for the
use of personal vehicles. Any damages and/or repairs are the sole
responsibility of the employee.
B. Employees who are required to use their personal vehicles for Town
business-related travel will be reimbursed for the actual miles driven at
the standard mileage rate established by the Portsmouth Town Council.
C. Business-related travel expenses such as parking fees and bridge tolls
will be reimbursed (actual cost) in addition to the standard mileage
rate. Receipts may be required.
D. Documentation of actual mileage, description of destination, date and
purpose of travel will be submitted to the department head in proper
format for approval.
E. Preapproval by a department head is required for travel via commercial
vehicle (airlines, railway, etc.) for business-related meetings, seminars
and conferences.
F. Reimbursement will be made in accordance with Town Council agenda
deadlines and Finance Office requirements.
§ 40-5 CHARTER § 40-6
C:31
Chapter 45
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 10.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 40.
§ 40-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 40-6
C:32
ARTICLE I
Personnel Policy
[Adopted 8-13-1974 by Ord. No. 108]
§ 45-1. Title; declaration of policy.
§ 45-2. Applicability; exemptions.
A. This article shall be known as the "Personnel Ordinance."
B. It is hereby declared personnel policy of the Town that:
(1) Employment in the Town government shall be based on merit and
fitness, free of personal and political considerations.
(2) Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall
be established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy
in the operation of Town government.
(3) Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be
classified and compensated on a uniform basis.
(4) Appointments, promotions and other actions requiring the
application of the merit principle shall be based on systematic tests
and evaluations.
(5) High morale shall be maintained by fair administration of this
article and by every consideration of the rights and interests of the
public and the Town.
(6) Tenure of employees covered by this article shall be subject to good
behavior, the satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the
performance of work, and the availability of funds.
A. All offices and positions of the Town are divided into the classified
service and the exempt service.
B. There shall be exempted from the classified service of the Town:
(1) All officials elected by the voters of the Town, and all persons
appointed to fill vacancies in such elective positions.
(2) The Town Administrator, heads of departments and offices and
agencies appointed by the Town Administrator with the approval of
the Town Council, and those who are appointed by the Town
Council.
(3) Employees of the School Department.
(4) Persons temporarily appointed, designated or by contract to make
or conduct a special inquiry, investigation or examination or to
perform a special service where such appointment or designation is
certified by the Personnel Board to be for employment which,
§ 45-1 CHARTER § 45-2
C:33
§ 45-3. Administration.
because of its expert nature or character, could not or should not
be performed by persons in the classified service.
(5) Such temporary seasonal workers paid on an hourly basis as the
Personnel Board may determine.
(6) Persons who, in times of public emergency, may be appointed
special employees.
(7) All members of boards, commissions and committees.
C. The classified service shall include all other positions in the Town
service that are not specifically placed in the exempt service by this
article.
D. When this article becomes effective, all persons then holding positions
included in the classified service:
(1) Shall have permanent status if they have held their present
positions for at least six months immediately preceding the
effective date of this article; or
(2) Shall serve a probationary period of six months before acquiring
permanent status if they have held their positions for less than six
months immediately preceding the effective date of this article.
E. The class in which each employee shall have status shall be determined
in the manner provided in § 45-5A.
F. The following sections of this article apply only to the classified service
unless otherwise specifically provided.
A. The personnel program established by this article shall be administered
by the Town Administrator or his designee. The Administrator shall:
(1) Attend all meetings of the Personnel Board.
(2) Administer all the provisions of this article and of the personnel
rules.
(3) Prepare and recommend to the Personnel Board revisions and
amendments to the personnel rules.
B. The Town Council, upon recommendation of the Town Administrator,
may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance
of such technical services as may be desired in the establishment and
operations of the personnel program.
C. The Town Council shall serve as the Personnel Board.
§ 45-2 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 45-4
C:34
§ 45-4. Rules.
The Town Administrator shall draft such rules as may be necessary to carry
out the provisions of this article. These rules shall be submitted for adoption
by resolution of the Town Council. The rules shall have the force and effect
of law. Amendments to the rules shall be made in accordance with the above
procedure.
§ 45-5. Job classifications.
§ 45-6. Compensation.
A. The Town Administrator shall make or have made an analysis of the
duties and responsibilities of all positions in the classified service, and
he shall recommend a job classification plan to the Personnel Board.
Each position in the classified service shall be assigned to a job class on
the basis of the kind and level of its duties and responsibilities, to the
end that all positions in the same class shall be sufficiently alike to
permit the use of a single descriptive title, the same qualification
requirements, the same test of competence, and the same pay scale. A
job class may contain one position or more than one position.
(1) Within 60 days after submission of the classification plan, the
Personnel Board shall approve a classification plan, and the Town
Administrator shall thereafter allocate each position to its
appropriate class.
(2) The class to which each position is initially allocated following
adoption of this article shall be the class in which the employee
shall have status conferred on him by § 45-2D.
B. The initial classification plan shall be revised from time to time as
changing conditions require, upon recommendation of the Town
Administrator and with the approval of the Personnel Board. Such
revisions may consist of the addition, abolishment, consolidation,
division or amendment of existing classes.
A. The Town Administrator in consultation with the Finance Director shall
prepare a pay plan and rules for its administration. The rate or range
for each class shall be such as to reflect the differences in duties and
responsibilities and shall be related to compensation for comparable
positions in other places of public and private employment.
B. The Town Administrator shall submit the pay plan and the rules for its
administration to the Personnel Board. The Board may adopt the plan
and the rules, with or without amendment. All amendments shall apply
uniformly to all positions within the same class.
C. After the pay plan and the rules for its administration have been
adopted by the Personnel Board, the Town Administrator shall assign
each job class to one of the pay ranges provided in the pay plan.
§ 45-4 CHARTER § 45-6
C:35
§ 45-7. Appointments and promotions.
§ 45-8. Eligible lists.
D. The pay plan may be amended from time to time as circumstances
require, either through adjustment of rates or by reassignment of job
classes to different pay ranges.
A. Original appointment to vacancies occurring after this article becomes
effective shall be based on merit as determined by competitive
examination.
B. Examinations shall be in such form as will fairly test the abilities and
aptitudes of the candidates for the duties to be performed.
C. Candidates who qualify for employment shall be placed on an eligible
list for the appropriate job class in the rank order of the grades they
obtained on the examination.
D. Vacancies in positions above the entrance level shall be filled by
promotion whenever in the judgment of the Town Administrator it is in
the best interests of the Town to do so, and promotions shall be on a
competitive basis, except where the Town Administrator finds that the
number of persons qualified for promotion is insufficient to justify
competition. Promotions shall give appropriate consideration to the
applicant's qualifications, record of performance, and seniority.
(1) An advancement in rank or grade or an increase in salary beyond
the limits defined in the rules for the administration of the pay plan
shall constitute a promotion.
E. Vacancies may be filled by temporary appointment. Such appointments
shall have a maximum duration of six months and may not continue
beyond one pay period after the establishment of an appropriate
eligible list.
A. Eligible lists, in the order of their priority, shall be reemployment lists,
promotional eligible lists and original appointment eligible lists.
(1) Reemployment lists shall contain the names of permanent
employees laid off in good standing for lack of funds or work.
(2) Promotional eligible lists and original appointment eligible lists
shall be created as provided in § 45-7.
(3) Probationary employees laid off for lack of work or lack of funds
and probationary employees who resign and whose resignations
are withdrawn within one year, with the approval of the appointing
authority and the Town Administrator, may have their names
restored to the eligible list from which their appointment was
originally made.
§ 45-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 45-8
C:36
§ 45-9. Probation.
§ 45-10. Hours of work; leaves of absence.
Rules shall be adopted prescribing hours of work and the conditions and
length of time for which leaves of absence with pay and leaves of absence
without pay may be granted. These personnel rules shall cover, among
others, vacations, sick leaves, and leaves for military service.
§ 45-11. Separation from employment.
B. When an appointment is to be made to a vacancy, a list shall be
prepared consisting of the names of the five persons who achieved the
highest scores on the competitive examination and who expressed a
willingness to work. When more than one vacancy is to be filled, the
number of names on the list shall be equal to the number of vacancies
plus four. [Amended 4-6-1993 by Ord. No. 93-4-6B]
C. Policies and procedures for administering eligible lists shall be
provided in the personnel rules covering the duration, cancellation,
replacement, and consolidation of such lists and the removal or
suspension of the names of eligibles therefrom.
A. New employees and those receiving a promotion shall be subject to a
period of probation which shall range in duration from six months to
one year, depending on the department. No probationary period may be
extended beyond 12 months. For newly hired police officers, the
probationary period commences from the date the officer is sworn in as
a Portsmouth police officer. For all others, the probationary period
commences with the date of hire. [Amended 10-29-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10-29B]
B. The work and conduct of probationary employees shall be subject to
close scrutiny and evaluation, and if found to be below standards
satisfactory to the department head, the department head shall consult
with the Town Administrator and Personnel Director in order to reach a
decision of whether to remove or demote the probationer. If a
unanimous decision is not reached, then the case shall be referred to
the Personnel Board.
C. An employee shall be retained beyond the end of the probationary
period and granted permanent status only if the Town Administrator
affirms that the services of the employee have been found to be
satisfactory and recommends that the employee be given permanent
status.
A. The tenure of every employee shall be conditioned on good behavior
and the satisfactory performance of duties. Any employee may be
temporarily separated by layoff or suspension or permanently
separated by resignation or dismissal.
§ 45-8 CHARTER § 45-11
C:37
B. Whenever there is lack of work or lack of funds requiring reduction in
the number of employees in a department or division of the Town
government, the required reduction shall be made in such job classes as
the department head may designate. Within each affected job class, all
temporary employees shall be laid off before probationary employees,
and all probationary employees shall be laid off before any permanent
employees.
C. When, in the judgement of the department head, an employee's work
performance or conduct justifies suspension, the employee may be
suspended without pay. Whenever such action occurs, it shall be the
sole responsibility of the department head to immediately apprise the
Town Administrator of the incident and, within 24 hours thereafter,
submit an all-inclusive written report. The Town Administrator, after
reviewing the facts, may uphold, lessen, or reverse the suspension. A
suspended employee may not request a hearing before the Personnel
Board unless the suspension is for more than four working days, or
unless the employee has already received a previous suspension within
the year immediately prior thereto.10
D. A permanent employee may be dismissed or demoted whenever, in the
judgment of the appointing authority, the employee's work or
misconduct so warrants. When the appointing authority decides to take
such action, he shall file with the employee and the Town Administrator
a written notification containing a statement of the substantial reasons
for the action. The employee shall be notified not later than the effective
date of the action. The notice shall inform the employee that he shall be
allowed 10 days from the effective date of the action to file a reply with
the appointing authority and the Personnel Board and to request a
hearing before the Personnel Board.
E. If the employee files a reply and requests a hearing within the
prescribed period, the Personnel Board shall schedule a hearing. At the
discretion of the employee, the hearing may be private or open to the
public.
F. In conducting a hearing, the proceedings shall be informal, and it shall
be assumed that the action complained of was taken in good faith
unless proved otherwise.
G. If the Board finds the action of the appointing authority was unjustified,
improper or that the appointing authority failed to follow the proper
procedure outlined in Subsection D, the employee shall be reinstated to
his former position without loss of pay.
H. An employee may resign by filing his reasons with the appointing
authority.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 45-11 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 45-12
C:38
§ 45-12. Records.
The Town Administrator's office shall maintain adequate records of the
proceedings of the Personnel Board and of his own official acts on the
employment record of every employee.
§ 45-13. Investigations and hearings.
During the course of any investigation or hearing, the Personnel Board or
the Town Administrator may request any employee of the Town to attend
and give witness.
§ 45-14. Prohibited activities.
§ 45-15. Severability.
Should any part of this article be declared illegal, the Personnel Board
declares that it would have adopted all the other provisions.
Notwithstanding such illegality of a part, all remaining parts shall remain in
effect.
A. Employees in the classified service shall be selected without regard to
political considerations, may not be required to contribute to any
political purpose, and may not engage in improper political activity. The
personnel rules shall define the scope of improper political activity.
B. There shall be no discrimination against any person seeking
employment or employed in the classified service because of any
considerations of political or religious affiliation or belief, race, sex,
marital status, national origin or handicap. [Amended 12-3-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-12-3A]
C. There shall be no denial of the right of municipal employees to associate
together and to join any lawful organizations of their own choosing for
the purpose of collective bargaining.
§ 45-12 CHARTER § 45-15
C:39

ARTICLE II
Harassment in the Workplace
[Adopted 10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 90-10-15]
§ 45-16. Adoption of policy; disciplinary action.
§ 45-17. Investigation procedure.
A. The Portsmouth Town Council has adopted the following policy
pertaining to complaints of harassment in the workplace.
B. Any employee found guilty of harassment will be subject to one or more
of the following disciplinary actions:
(1) Immediate termination;
(2) Criminal prosecution;
(3) Suspension without pay;
(4) Written reprimand placed in the employee's personnel file.
A. Immediate action:
(1) Open file.
(2) Notify Council and Personnel Director.
(3) Emphasize seriousness of matter and need for action.
(4) Refuse resignation (if applicable) without explanation.
(5) Notify complainant of investigation and his/her right to contact the
Human Rights Commission in Providence.
B. Investigation:
(1) Interview supervisors and foreman.
(2) Interview other employees (nonsupervisors). (Police detective will
conduct interviews.)
(3) Interview complainant.
(4) Full report to Town Council and Personnel Director.
C. Disciplinary action:
(1) Review investigation report and take remedial action:
(a) Termination of employment.
(b) Criminal prosecution.
(c) Suspension without pay.
§ 45-16 CHARTER § 45-17
C:41
(d) Reprimand.
(e) Letter in personnel file.
D. Remedial action:
(1) Relief to complainant as warranted.
(2) Grant paid administrative leave during review.
(3) Offer professional counseling.
(4) Appropriate remedial action to dissipate any harassment.
(5) Future policy to ensure violations do not reoccur.
(6) Training procedures for current and future employees.
E. Notice:
(1) Notify complainant of actions taken, to be taken, and any remedies
without conditions.
§ 45-17 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 45-17
C:42
ARTICLE III
Firefighter Clothing Maintenance Allowance
[Adopted 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4-8]
§ 45-18. Probationary firefighters.
On the date of hire, a probationary firefighter shall be paid an amount equal
to 1/2 of the clothing maintenance allowance (CMA) paid to firefighters
pursuant to the provisions of the collective bargaining agreement then
in effect between the Town of Portsmouth and Local 1949 of the Rhode
Island State Association of Firefighters. Upon the successful completion of
the probationary period, the probationary firefighter will receive a second
payment of CMA, prorated from the date of elevation to permanent status to
the end of the fiscal year. Example: (assuming a CMA of $625) A firefighter
hired on September 17 would receive a payment of $312.50, representing 1/
2 of the CMA. On March 17 (the expiration of the firefighter's probationary
status), the firefighter would receive a payment of $180.18, representing
the prorated CMA for three months and 14 days, the balance of the fiscal
year.
§ 45-18 CHARTER § 45-18
C:43

ARTICLE IV
Buy-Back Privileges for Part-Time Services
[Adopted 9-23-1991 by Ord. No. 91-9-23]
§ 45-19. Credit for part-time service.
An employee covered by the Municipal Retirement Plan, with 10 years'
vested service, who shall have rendered part-time service on a full-time
basis in conjunction with the established workweek of the respective
department, immediately prior to permanent full-time employment, with
the exception of a justified break in service, shall be given credit for such
part-time service, not to exceed four years, provided the employee pays
to the retirement system a lump sum equal to the full actuarial value of
such credit, as previously calculated and determined by the Retirement
Board. For purposes of this policy, persons who "have rendered part-time
service on a full-time basis in conjunction with the established workweek of
the respective department" shall not include those persons who rendered
only temporary, seasonal or on-call services, regardless of whether or not
they were available to render such services on a full-time basis. Eligible
employees must make written request to the Retirement Board.
§ 45-19 CHARTER § 45-19
C:45

ARTICLE V
Sexual Harassment Policy
[Adopted 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10-28]
§ 45-20. Prohibited activities.
Sexual harassment of any employee of this Town will not be tolerated.
Sexual harassment includes unsolicited and unwelcome11 contact that has
sexual overtones. Such activity is grounds for disciplinary action.
§ 45-21. Types of sexual harassment.
Sexual harassment includes the following:
§ 45-22. Reporting procedure.
If you encounter any such abuse from your supervisors, fellow employees,
Town contractors or their agents or any member of the public, you should
contact your supervisor, the Personnel Director, the Town Administrator
and/or your union's business agent.
§ 45-23. Declaration of policy.
The Town of Portsmouth wants all of its employees to know that they can
work in security and dignity, and that they are not required to endure
insulting, degrading or exploitative treatment.
A. Abusing the dignity of an employee through insulting or degrading
sexual remarks or conduct. This includes comments of a sexual nature,
sexual jokes, or sexually explicit statements not legitimately related to
your job;
B. Threats, demands, or suggestions that an employee's work status is
contingent upon the employee's toleration of or acquiescence to sexual
advances; or
C. Any form of retaliation against any employee for complaining about the
behaviors described above.
11.Note: Courts have indicated that provocative speech or dress by the person complaining
about sexual harassment has a bearing on the question of whether the "harassment" was
welcome or unwelcome.
§ 45-20 CHARTER § 45-23
C:47
Chapter 50
PURCHASING
§ 50-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Purchasing Ordinance."
§ 50-2. Legislative authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Section
45-55-9, Rhode Island General Laws, 1956, 1988 Reenactment, as amended
(R.I.G.L. § 45-55-9), and the Town's Home Rule Charter, Section 910.
§ 50-3. Exemptions.
Contracts for professional, architectural, consulting or engineering services
are expressly exempted from the terms of this chapter and shall follow
the qualification-based selection process in accordance with R.I.G.L.
§ 45-55-8.1. The procurement of the service of an attorney, physician or
dentist by the Town is also expressly exempted from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 45-55-14.
§ 50-4. Purchasing authority.
The Town Council shall have the following final powers and discretions with
respect to all purchases:
§ 50-5. Applicability; purchasing agent.
A. To purchase or contract for all supplies, materials and equipment
required by any office, department or agency.
B. To establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies,
materials and equipment required by the Town.
C. To be responsible for the inspection of deliveries of supplies, materials
and equipment and to determine their quality, quantity and
conformance with specifications and to have the authority, where
personal inspection is not feasible, to delegate said responsibility.
D. To transfer to or between offices, departments or agencies surplus,
obsolete or unused supplies, materials and equipment and to sell any
Town property.
E. To be responsible for the storage and distribution of all supplies,
materials and equipment used by any office, department or agency and
to have charge of any general storerooms and warehouses of the Town.
F. To delegate any or all of the above to the Town Administrator upon
majority vote.
§ 45-23 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 50-5
C:48
§ 50-6. Small purchases.
A. Procurements, not to exceed an aggregate amount of $10,000 for
construction and $5,000 for all other purchases, shall be made in
accordance with this chapter. These amounts shall be increased or
decreased annually hereafter at the same rate as the Boston Regional
Consumer Price Index. Procurement requirements shall not be
artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under R.I.G.L.
§ 45-55-9. For purposes of this chapter, the terms "procurement" and
"construction" shall be defined as in R.I.G.L. § 45-55-4. Purchases in
excess of the above-specified amounts shall be made in accordance with
state law and § 50-7 of this chapter.
B. In accordance with R.I.G.L. § 45-55-3, the Town Council hereby
appoints the Finance Director as purchasing agent. The Finance
Director is responsible for ensuring that the Town's procurement
actions comply with state law.
A. The Town Administrator or department head, acting on behalf of the
Town Council, may approve the purchase of any previously budgeted
item or items otherwise reasonably necessary or incidental to the dayto-
day functioning of Town offices and departments without prior
approval of the Town Council, providing that such purchase shall be in a
sum less than $5,000 ($10,000 for construction).
B. In the case of purchases of less than $1,000, such purchases may be
made without the necessity of seeking competitive bids. Where
practicable, however, solicitation of competitive quotations is
encouraged.
C. In the case of purchases costing $1,000 or more, but less than $2,500,
three telephonic or written quotations shall be necessary and
documented, but advertising and approval by the Town Council shall
not be necessary. If three quotes cannot be obtained, it shall be so
stated in writing.
D. In the case of purchases costing $2,500 or more, but less than $5,000
($10,000 for construction), three written quotations shall be necessary,
but advertising and approval by the Town Council shall not be
necessary. If three written quotes cannot be obtained, it shall be so
stated in writing. The five-thousand-dollar and ten-thousand-dollar
figures shall be adjusted annually at the same rate as the Boston
Regional Consumer Price Index.
E. The requirement for three telephonic or written quotes may be waived
if the goods or services have already been competitively bid on a local,
regional, state or national level by a governmental organization, and
the Town is permitted to use the contract price established by the other
governmental entity.
§ 50-5 CHARTER § 50-6
C:49
§ 50-7. Large purchases; bidding requirements.
§ 50-8. Special rules and regulations.
The Finance Director may make any and all such special rules and
regulations affecting any specific bid purchase from time to time as
necessary and relevant under the circumstances concerning any such
purchase; provided, however, that all responsive bidders are furnished
notice of such special regulations and an opportunity to inspect the same
prior to the submission of a bid.
F. Such small purchases shall be deemed ratified as if expressly
authorized by the Town Council at the time the Town Administrator or
department head first approves the purchase.
G. The Finance Director is responsible for ensuring that procurement
using grant funds is in accordance with the terms of the grant. The
Finance Director is also responsible for ensuring that purchases made
with general revenue, special revenue and grant funds are made
lawfully. Such funds may not be used to purchase political materials or
services. Such funds may not be used to procure goods or services
which would benefit Town employees or elected officials.
H. Department heads will retain bid documentation for a minimum of three
years after bid award.
A. Each purchase which is not a small purchase as set forth in § 50-6 shall
be subject to the method of source selection set forth in R.I.G.L.
§ 45-55-2. The Finance Director is responsible for ensuring that the
Town complies with state law for large procurement actions.
(1) Competitive sealed bidding will be the most common method of
source selection. Specifications can be prepared that permit award
on the basis of either the lowest qualified bid price or the lowest
qualified evaluated bid price. The invitation for bids shall state
whether award shall be made on the basis of the lowest bid price or
the lowest evaluated or responsive bid price. If the latter basis is
used, the objective measurable criteria to be utilized shall be stated
in the invitation for bids. The invitation to bid shall be advertised,
and other provisions of R.I.G.L. § 45-55-5 shall be followed.
(2) Upon receiving the report of the Finance Director for large
procurement actions, the Town Council, by majority vote, shall
award the purchase to the lowest qualified bid or the lowest
evaluated or responsive bid as required by R.I.G.L. § 45-55-5.
B. The requirement for competitive sealed bidding shall be considered met
if the goods or services have already been competitively bid on a local,
regional, state or national level by a governmental organization, and
the Town is permitted to use the contract price established by the other
governmental entity.
§ 50-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 50-9
C:50
§ 50-9. Sole source procurement.
A contract may be awarded for a supply, service or construction item
without competition when the Finance Director (or the department head, in
the case of small purchasing) determines, in writing, that there is only one
source for the required supply, service or construction item as permitted by
R.I.G.L. § 45-55-8.
§ 50-10. Emergency procurement.
The President of the Town Council, Town Administrator or department head
may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements when
there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety under emergency
conditions, as defined by the State Emergency Management Agency, or
where the procurement will be in the best interest of the Town, provided
that emergency procurements shall be made with as much competition as is
practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis
for the emergency and for the selection of a particular contractor shall be
included in the contract file.
§ 50-11. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to purchases by the School
Department, since a specific provision in the Town Charter pertains.
§ 50-12. Vendor eligibility. [Added 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02-23]
No contract, purchase or procurement of a supply, service or construction
item may be issued to a vendor which has unpaid past due amounts owed
to the Town for any tax, fee, fine or other financial obligation, unless the
vendor has a valid, approved and current payment agreement in effect
which addresses all amounts due and owing to the Town.
Chapter 65
UNRESTRICTED GENERAL FUND BALANCE
§ 65-1. Maintenance at certain level required.
The unrestricted general fund balance of the Town of Portsmouth will be
maintained at a level sufficient to provide for the required resources to:
A. Maintain creditworthiness with bond rating agencies;
B. Ensure short-term cash availability when revenue is unavailable or
unanticipated expenditures occur;
C. Minimize interest expense for operating budget needs (short termborrowing)
and capital projects;
D. Provide for investment income;
§ 50-9 CHARTER § 65-1
C:51
§ 65-2. Exclusions.
The unrestricted general fund balance does not include the nonspendable
fund balance or restricted fund balance. Specifically excluded are
inventories, long-term receivables, principal of trust funds and external
constraints by grantors, creditors, laws of other governments or
constitutional provisions or enabling legislation.
§ 65-3. Minimum balance.
The Town will maintain a minimum unrestricted general fund balance of 8%
of the current period's budgeted expenditures.
§ 65-4. Use of balance in excess of minimum.
An unrestricted general fund balance in excess of the minimum
recommended level may be utilized for the following purposes:
§ 65-5. Maximum balance.
To avoid a balance in excess of the level deemed sufficient for prudent
fiscal management, the Town will maintain a maximum unrestricted general
fund balance of 16% of the current period's budgeted expenditures. Excess
amounts will be available for appropriation by the Town Council in a
subsequent fiscal year to fund capital, operating or debt service
expenditures as determined by the Town Council during the budget process
for that subsequent fiscal year.
§ 65-6. Adjustment of revenues.
If the unrestricted general fund balance falls outside of the above minimum
or maximum parameters, the Town Council will adjust budgeted revenues to
be either greater or lesser than budgeted expenditures in subsequent fiscal
years to bring the unrestricted general fund balance into compliance with
this policy.
E. Provide for stable tax rates; and
F. Enhance planning for contingencies and long-term planning.
A. Stabilizing tax rates or fluctuations in cash flow requirements;
B. Meeting future capital needs;
C. Counterbalancing difficult economic periods; and
D. Accommodating emergency situations.
§ 65-1 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 65-7
C:52
§ 65-7. Appropriations.
The Town Council shall not appropriate any moneys out of the fund balance
unless notice of the proposal to do so, reasonably detailed as to purpose and
extent, appears in the call for the meeting.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 75
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
§ 75-1. Findings; intent.
§ 75-2. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, as used in this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings and be defined as provided
herein:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes any liquid which either, by itself or by
mixture with any other liquid or liquids, is or may become fit for human
A. The Town Council of the Town of Portsmouth has the authority and
responsibility to regulate conduct and legislate on matters of local
concern affecting the public health, safety and welfare;
B. Business establishments which serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises are subject to regulation by the Town
Council due to the effects of consumption of alcoholic beverages.
Conduct at or within those establishments merits appropriate
regulation to prevent risks to public health, to preserve public safety
and to minimize criminal activities;
C. Establishments which promote adult, sexually oriented entertainment
of certain types, including but not limited to nudity and sexual
performances, have been known to have direct and secondary impacts
on the surrounding community which negatively affect the public
health, safety and welfare;
D. It is not the intent of this chapter to inhibit the free speech and
expression of any art or speech, nor to suppress any activities protected
by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States or
Article I, Section 21, of the Constitution of the State of Rhode Island
and Providence Plantations, nor is it the intent to condone or legitimize
any obscene, illicit or illegal acts, materials or activities;
E. The intent of this chapter is to promote sanitary conditions, prevent
opportunities for criminal activity, preserve property values, prevent
the spread of disease and promote the public health, safety, morals and
welfare.
§ 65-7 CHARTER § 75-2
C:53
consumption as a drink and which contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by
weight, meaning and intending to include distilled spirits, wine or fortified
wine, beer, and malt beverages.
EMPLOYEE — Includes any person providing services of any kind on a
licensed premises for wages, gratuities, other remuneration, or
compensation of any kind or under any contract of employment, oral or
written, express or implied, with any person and meaning and intending to
include but not be limited to guides, ushers, escorts, waiters, waitresses,
servers, hosts, hostesses, bartenders and the like.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who performs or presents entertainment at
or upon any licensed premises for a fee, tip, gratuity, compensation or other
remuneration, either as an employee, contractor or invited guest of the
business establishment.
LICENSED PREMISES — Includes any premises upon which alcoholic
beverages are sold or served for consumption on the premises pursuant to a
license or permit issued by the Town of Portsmouth, or otherwise, and shall
include premises which allow for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
the premises on a "bring your own" basis.
OPERATOR — Includes the owner, license holder, manager, person in
charge or any person operating a licensed premises.
PATRON — Includes any person who is a guest, member, customer or invitee
on or in the licensed premises.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, corporation, partnership,
association or any other legally recognized entity.
§ 75-3. Prohibited conduct.
A. No operator shall, on a licensed premises, suffer or permit:
(1) Any female employee or entertainer to expose to public view the
female breast uncovered or bare at or below the areola area or to
exhibit the female breast covered with a transparent or
semitransparent material which exposes to public view the breast
at or below the areola area.
(2) Any person to expose to public view the bare or uncovered
buttocks, anus, anal cleavage, anal cleft, genitals or pubic hair of
any person or to exhibit the buttocks, anus, anal cleavage, anal
cleft, genitals or pubic hair of any person covered with a
transparent or semitransparent material which exposes to public
view the buttocks, anus, anal cleavage, anal cleft, genitals or pubic
hair of any persons.
(3) Any person to perform, engage or participate in acts which
constitute or simulate the following:
§ 75-2 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 75-3
C:54
(a) Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited
by law;
(b) The touching, fondling or caressing of the breast, buttocks,
anus or genitals;
(c) Exhibitions commonly referred to as "wet T-shirt contests,"
"hot legs contests" and male and female striptease acts.
(4) Any person to utilize artificial devices or inanimate objects to
perform, simulate, or depict any of the acts prohibited in
Subsection A(3)(a), (b) and (c) hereof.
(5) Any person to show, display or exhibit on any licensed premises any
film, video, still picture, electronic reproduction or image of any act
or conduct prohibited by Subsection A(3)(a), (b) and (c) hereof.
B. No person, including a patron, while present on a licensed premises,
shall:
(1) Expose to public view his or her bare or uncovered buttocks, anus,
anal cleavage, anal cleft, genitals or pubic hair or exhibit his or her
buttocks, anus, anal cleavage, anal cleft, genitals or pubic hair
covered with a transparent or semitransparent material which
exposes to public view his or her buttocks, anus, anal cleavage,
anal cleft, genitals or pubic hair.
(2) Perform, engage or participate in acts which constitute or simulate
the following:
(a) Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited
by law;
(b) The touching, fondling or caressing of the breast, buttocks,
anus or genitals;
(c) Exhibitions commonly referred to as "wet T-shirt contests,"
"hot legs contests" and male and female striptease acts.
(3) Utilize artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform, simulate,
or depict any of the acts prohibited in Subsection B(2)(a), (b) and
(c) hereof.
(4) Show, display or exhibit any film, video, still picture, electronic
reproduction or image of any act or conduct prohibited by
Subsection B(2)(a), (b) and (c) hereof.
C. No female employee or entertainer shall expose to public view her
breast uncovered or bare at or below the areola area or exhibit her
breast covered with a transparent or semitransparent material which
exposes to public view the breast at or below the areola area.
§ 75-3 CHARTER § 75-4
C:55
§ 75-4. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 83
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 257.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions
of this chapter or to perform or commit any act prohibited by this
chapter. The commission of any prohibited act or refusal to comply with
any requirement of this chapter is hereby declared to be a violation.
Each such act or event shall be and constitute a separate violation or
offense.
B. Any person, entertainer, patron or operator who violates any provision
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to
exceed $100 and/or imprisonment not to exceed one year.
C. The violation of any provision of this chapter by the operator of any
licensed premises shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall
constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of any and all
alcoholic beverage licenses or other licenses issued to the premises or
operator.
§ 75-4 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 75-4
C:56
ARTICLE I
Burglary and Robbery Alarms
[Adopted 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12-10]
§ 83-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Burglary and Robbery Alarm Ordinance."
§ 83-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the emergency services of the Town
from misuse.
§ 83-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any bell, horn or other audible device which is not
transmitted to the Police or Fire Department.
CENTRAL STATION — An office or telephone answering service to which
remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, having
trained operators in attendance at all times.12
FALSE ALARM — The reception of an alarm signal in the communications
center of the police station, eliciting a response by emergency personnel
when a situation requiring a response by such emergency personnel does
not in fact exist, but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent
conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably
subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user.13
TIE LINE — An automatic ring-down telephone line between any central
station or telephone answering service and the communications center of
the Police Department.
§ 83-4. Automatic dialing device; intermediary services.
Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the device
interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to a central station
protective system or licensed answering service.14
12.Editor's Note: The original definition of "direct line," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
13.Editor's Note: The original definition of "special trunk line," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II).
14.Editor's Note: Original § 5, Direct connections to Police Department, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 83-1 CHARTER § 83-5
C:57
§ 83-5. Inspection of alarm devices and businesses.
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the Police Chief
or his designated representative shall have the authority, at reasonable
times and upon reasonable oral notice, to enter any premises in the Town
in or upon which alarm systems or intermediary services subject to this
article are located, to inspect the installation and/or operation of such alarm
systems or alarm businesses on official police business.
§ 83-6. Alarm user permits.
A. Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user's permit for each system
from the Police Chief's office 90 days after the effective date of this
article or prior to use of an alarm system. This subsection excludes
systems to signal persons within the premises or alarms on motor
vehicles, unless connected with an alarm system at a premises. If a
system employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or
beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, it shall be
subject to this article.
B. The alarm user applying for the permit shall use a permit application
form prepared by the Police Department and approved by the Town
Solicitor. Each permit shall bear the signature of the Chief of Police or
his designated representative and shall be for a period of one year. All
permits shall expire on December 31 or each and every year. The permit
shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall
be available for inspection by the Chief of Police or his designated
representative.
C. Alarm user permit fee:
(1) Tie line: $20.15
(2) An alarm which is a government/political unit shall be subject to
this article, but a permit shall be issued without payment of a fee
and shall not be subject to revocation, payment of additional fees or
the imposition of any penalty provided herein.
(3) Audible alarm: $10.
D. An alarm user required by law to install, maintain, and operate an alarm
system shall be subject to this article, provided:
(1) A permit shall be designated a special alarm user's permit.
(2) It shall not be subject to revocation because of false alarms, but the
holder of the permit shall pay $25 with submission of the report.16
15.Editor's Note: Original § 7(c)(1), which established a fee for a direct line, which
immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II).
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 83-5 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 83-6
C:58
§ 83-7. False alarms.
E. Any alarm system user who operates an alarm system without first
obtaining a permit as required by this section or who, after having a
permit revoked or suspended and after exhausting his rights to hearing
and appeal, fails to disconnect his alarm system shall be in violation of
this article.
A. More than four false alarms in a calendar year from any alarm system
for which an alarm user permit has been obtained may constitute
grounds for revocation of such permit, subject to the provisions of this
section.
B. After the Department has recorded four false alarms in a year, it shall
notify the permit holder in writing of such fact and require that the
permit holder report to the Chief of Police, within 15 days, his effort to
eliminate false alarms. If the permit holder fails to submit a report
within 15 days or of reasonable extension for good cause, the Police
Chief may revoke the user's permit, and, under such circumstances, the
user shall not be entitled to a hearing or appeal under this section.
C. If the alarm user submits an unsatisfactory report, or has one or more
false alarms during the same calendar year after submitting a
satisfactory report, the Police Chief may issue written notice by firstclass
mail of his intent to revoke or suspend the alarm user's permit.
D. Upon receipt of a notice of intent to revoke or suspend, the permit
holder may, within 10 days, submit a written request for a hearing
before the Police Chief and the Town Administrator. The Chief of Police
shall notify the holder of the time and place of hearing by mail 10 days
prior to the date.
E. Any person whose permit has been revoked or suspended shall have the
right, within 10 days of having received notice, to appeal to the Town
Council. He shall not be required to discontinue the alarm system until
a final decision is made on his appeal.
F. An alarm system user whose permit has been revoked may apply for a
new permit. The Chief of Police may impose reasonable restrictions and
conditions upon issuing a new permit to an alarm user with respect to
the particular system for which the permit was revoked.
G. The fine for false alarms over three per year is $10 for each false
alarm.17
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 83-6 CHARTER § 83-8
C:59
§ 83-8. Liability of Town limited.
The Town shall not be liable for any defects in operation of automatic
protection devices and signal line systems or for any failure or neglect to
respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a source.
§ 83-9. Transfer of license prohibited.
No permit issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable.
§ 83-10. Violations and penalties.
Failure of any person to comply with the requirements of written notice of a
violation of any provision hereof within three days of receipt of such notice,
exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, shall constitute an offense
punishable by a fine not to exceed $100, and each succeeding day after the
three days allowed for compliance shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 83-8 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 83-10
C:60
ARTICLE II
False Fire and Carbon Monoxide Alarms
[Adopted 5-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-05-09A]
§ 83-11. Findings.
The Portsmouth Town Council finds and declares that false fire and carbon
monoxide alarms consume the time and resources of the Portsmouth Fire
Department to an unwarranted degree and constitute a danger to the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 83-12. Purpose; applicability.
§ 83-13. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings stated
in this section, unless explicitly noted otherwise:
AUTOMATIC DIALER — A device which is interconnected to telephone lines
and is programmed to dial the fire station and transmit a prerecorded
message that a fire alarm system or carbon monoxide detector has been
activated.
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR — A device that detects the presence
of carbon monoxide and sounds an alarm when a predetermined level is
reached.
CENTRAL RECEIVING STATION — A supervised station that monitors fire
alarm systems and carbon monoxide detectors and reports them to the Fire
Department if activated.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of a fire alarm system or carbon monoxide
detector caused by the mechanical failure, malfunction, improper
installation, insufficient or improper maintenance, or the negligence of the
owner or lessee or the employees, agents or representatives of such owner
or lessee.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any equipment or assembly of equipment
designed to detect and signal a fire in or upon the premises on which it is
located or designed to detect and signal a trouble condition of the system
itself.
A. The purpose of this article is to limit the amount of false fire and carbon
monoxide alarms, as described herein, and encourage the proper care,
installation, and maintenance of these alarm systems.
B. This article shall apply to all fire and carbon monoxide alarm systems,
commercial, industrial or residential, that are connected to the
Portsmouth Fire Department by either radio transmitter, automatic
dialer, or central receiving station and those that are simply local
alarms by design. [Amended 10-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10-15A]
§ 83-11 CHARTER § 83-13
C:61
OWNER — The record owner of the realty upon which the fire alarm system
or carbon monoxide detector is located shall be deemed to be the owner.
OWNER'S REPRESENTATIVE — Any person, firm, corporation or entity
empowered or designated by the owner to act on the owner's behalf in
regards to the fire alarm system and carbon monoxide detector, including,
in the appropriate cases, but not limited to tenants, rental agents, property
managers, etc.
RADIO TRANSMITTER — A device used to send a radio signal or signals to
the fire station in the event the fire alarm system has been activated.
§ 83-14. Radio transmitter alarms. [Amended 10-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-10-15 A]
Every owner of a radio transmitter fire alarm shall pay to the Town of
Portsmouth, on or before July 1 of each year, an annual fee of $200 for each
such transmitter. All funds collected from the imposition of this fee shall
be deposited in a special, restricted account to be used, in part, for the
maintenance of the Fire Department radio transmitters and maintenance
and/or replacement of radio box receivers. The Portsmouth Fire Department
will replace radio box transmitter backup batteries as needed; provided,
however, that it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the transmitter
to provide all repair parts and labor, other than the backup batteries.
Nothing herein shall be construed to relieve the owner of his/her obligation
to maintain the entire fire alarm system and have said system, including
the radio transmitter, inspected by a reliable inspector in accordance with
Rhode Island law.
§ 83-15. Investigation of alarms.
For the purpose of investigating the source and/or cause of any alarm or
trouble indications received by the Fire Department, the Fire Chief, or his
designee, shall have the authority to enter onto any premises from which
the alarm or trouble indication was received and determine the source and/
or cause of the alarm or trouble indication. It is the responsibility of the
building owner or his or her representative to provide immediate access to
the Fire Department for the purpose of such investigation.
§ 83-16. Key lock boxes.
Any building required by the Rhode Island State Fire Alarm Code to have
a fire alarm system installed shall be provided with a key lock box. Such
boxes shall be of the design acceptable to the Fire Department and keyed to
the specifications required by the Fire Department. This Department highly
recommends that residential buildings, not covered under the Rhode Island
Fire Alarm Code, that have a fire alarm and/or carbon monoxide system that
automatically transmits the alarm to either the Fire Department or a central
monitoring station be provided with a key lock box.
§ 83-13 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 83-17
C:62
§ 83-17. Liability of Town limited.
The Town of Portsmouth shall not be liable for any damages to any building
or property resulting from the Fire Department personnel's attempt to
investigate an alarm or trouble indication as required by § 83-15 hereof.
The Town shall not be responsible for any damage or malfunction to alarm
components that the Fire Department must remove or alter in any attempt
to restore the alarm to a working condition after an alarm. The Fire
Department will make all reasonable efforts to notify the building owner
or his or her representative of any action taken on the premises by the
Fire Department. Building owners and/or their representatives shall
immediately notify a qualified alarm technician to restore the alarm to fully
operable condition.
§ 83-18. Limitation on number of false alarms.
It shall be a violation of this article for any owner or owner's representative
to allow any fire alarm system or carbon monoxide detector to suffer more
than three false alarms within any twelve-month period. The Fire Chief
shall notify the owner, or his or her representative, in writing, after the
occurrence of three false alarms within any twelve-month period that any
further false alarms within said twelve-month period shall constitute a
violation of this article and will be subject to penalty.
§ 83-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $100 per violation. Each false alarm in excess of three in
any twelve-month period shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 83-17 CHARTER § 83-19
C:63
Chapter 89
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 83-19 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 83-19
C:64
ARTICLE I
Consumption and/or Possession in Public Places
[Adopted 7-19-1976 by Ord. No. 114]
§ 89-1. Consumption in parks and on beaches. [Amended 11-6-1995
by Ord. No. 95-11-6A]
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage, or
to have in his or her possession any open container thereof, in any public
park or beach, excluding municipal campgrounds, at any time, except at
functions duly authorized by the Town Council of the Town of Portsmouth.
§ 89-2. Consumption on public streets or sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage, or to
have in his or her possession any open container thereof, upon any public
street or sidewalk at any time.18
§ 89-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-6-1995 by Ord. No.
95-11-6A]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be fined
not exceeding $100 for the use of the Town or imprisoned for a term not
exceeding 30 days.
18.Editor's Note: Original § 3, pertaining to littering in parks and public places, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 89-1 CHARTER § 89-3
C:65
Chapter 95
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 75. Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 89.
§ 89-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 89-3
C:66
ARTICLE I
Coin-Operated Amusements
[Adopted 5-24-1982 by Ord. No. 82-1]
§ 95-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have these meanings:
AMUSEMENT GAME — Any mechanical, electric or electronic device used
or designed to be operated for entertainment or as a game by the insertion
of a piece of money, coin, token or other article or by paying money to have
it activated. This definition does not include:
OWNER — A record owner, contract purchaser, lessee, assignee, bailee,
receiver or trustee.
PERSON — One or more individuals, a corporation, partnership,
association, trust or firm and any trustee, receiver or assignee.
TOWN — The Town of Portsmouth.
§ 95-2. License required.
No person shall maintain or operate an amusement game in Town unless
said person first obtains a license under this article.
§ 95-3. Application for license.
A. A jukebox.
B. Rides.
C. Bowling alleys.
Any device maintained within a residence for the use of the occupants
thereof and their guests.
D.
E. Any device the possession or use of which is prohibited by law.
A. An application for an amusement game license shall be made to the
Town Council on forms which shall include the following information:
(1) If an individual, the name, address, date of birth, social security
number, place of birth, and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) If a firm, corporation, partnership, or association, the names, dates
of birth, social security numbers, telephone numbers, and places of
birth of the principals, officers or partners and the names and
addresses of the stockholders of closely held corporations.
(3) The name, address, and social security number of any person, firm,
corporation, partnership, or association having any financial
interest in such amusement games.
§ 95-1 CHARTER § 95-3
C:67
§ 95-4. Approval of application; issuance of license.
§ 95-5. Operation and use restrictions.
(4) A description of the location where such amusement games are to
be located, including the square footage of the proposed operating
area.
(5) Prior convictions of any crime or misdemeanor of the applicant (if
an individual) or of the principals, partners, officers and
stockholders of the applicant (if a firm, corporation, partnership, or
association).
B. Upon receipt of an application for an amusement game license, the
Town Clerk shall refer it to:
(1) The Building Official to determine whether the premises in which
the applicant intends to locate amusement games complies with all
applicable building and zoning laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations. For that purpose, the Building Official and employees
of his department shall have the right to enter upon and inspect the
premises during normal business hours.
(2) The Chief of Police, who shall investigate the amusement games
sought to be licensed, the proposed location, and the applicant.
A. Upon completion of the application, the Town Clerk shall forward it,
with the recommendations of the Building Official and Chief of Police, to
the Town Council for its review and action.
B. In approving a license, the Town Council may establish conditions and
safeguards to promote and protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the Town and its inhabitants.
C. Upon approval by the Town Council, the Town Clerk shall issue a license
upon payment of the license fee established in § 95-6. The license shall
state:
(1) The maximum number of amusement games permitted in the
proposed location.
(2) Any other conditions or restrictions imposed by the Town Council.
A. The licensee shall comply with all provisions of law, ordinances, rules or
regulations relating to the conduct of business and the use and
maintenance of the premises where such amusement games are
located.
B. The licensee shall cause the amusement game license to be posted at all
times in a conspicuous place in such premises.
§ 95-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 95-5
C:68
§ 95-6. Fees.
§ 95-7. Inspection of premises.
Any premises in the Town containing amusement games, when open for
transaction of business, shall be subject to inspection by any police officer.
§ 95-8. Expiration of license; renewal.
Amusement game licenses shall expire annually from the date of passage of
this article. Applications for renewal of said licenses shall be submitted at
least 30 days prior to expiration of said licenses.
§ 95-9. Revocation or suspension of license.
The Town Council may revoke or suspend an amusement game license for
cause after notice to the licensee and a public hearing.
C. The licensee shall maintain good order on the premises at all times. The
lack of good order on the premises shall include but shall not be limited
to the following:
(1) Fighting and rowdy behavior.
(2) Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in premises that
are not licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages.
(3) Gambling.
(4) Permitting the use of marijuana or any controlled substance,
possession of which is prohibited by Rhode Island law.
D. The licensee shall not permit an amusement game to be played or
operated during school hours or after 10:00 p.m. by a person under the
age of 18, unless accompanied by a parent or other guardian over the
age of 21.
E. The licensee shall provide a sufficient number of responsible
supervisory personnel to assure the safe and orderly operation of the
premises at all times.
F. The licensee shall not allow amusement games therein to be played on
any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
G. The licensee shall not allow more amusement games than the number
permitted in the license to be located in such premises at any time.
A. The annual fee for an amusement game license shall be $15 for each
machine authorized hereunder.
B. The fees fixed herein may be modified from time to time by ordinance of
the Town Council.
§ 95-5 CHARTER § 95-10
C:69
§ 95-10. Violations and penalties.
In the event the licensee and/or owner and/or operator of the premises
containing amusement games shall knowingly permit any person under the
age of 18 years, unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian over the age
of 21 years, to play or operate an amusement game during school hours or
after 10:00 p.m., such licensee and/or owner and/or operator shall be guilty
of an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 or imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, or both.
§ 95-10 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 95-10
C:70
ARTICLE II
Entertainment Licenses
[Adopted 8-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-8-27A]
§ 95-11. License required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall, publicly or
for pay or profit or other pecuniary advantage to himself, exhibit, promote,
conduct, give, hold or take part in horse shows, wrestling, boxing or
sparring matches or exhibitions, or any roller-skating in any rink or hall,
dances, balls or other shows or performances, at which attendance by the
general public or any group or organization or a combination thereof shall
exceed 500 people, without first obtaining a license for same (herewith
"entertainment license") from the Town Council of the Town of Portsmouth.
§ 95-12. Application form and deadline.
Application for an entertainment license shall be made in a form prescribed
by the Town Council and provided by the Town Clerk and shall be submitted
to the Town Clerk not less than 30 days prior to the date of the event for
which the license is sought.
§ 95-13. Application information.19
The application shall contain the following information: name and address
of proposed licensee; location of event; name and address of the owner of
land upon which the event is to be held; nature or type of entertainment
to be licensed; whether food or beverages are to be sold or given away
during said event and, if so, whether the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages (as defined in R.I.G.L. § 3-1-1 et seq.) is contemplated; whether
fireworks are contemplated; the dates upon which the licensed event is to
take place; the hours said event is to take place; whether or not the event
will provide amplified sound (human voice, music or otherwise); the number
of tickets or passes printed for each day of said event; the expected number
of participants and/or attendees; and the primary age group of expected
attendees. The application shall also contain the name, home address and
date of birth of the proposed licensee or a responsible officer, partner or
principal of the partnership, firm, corporation or other entity seeking the
license.
§ 95-14. Public safety investigation.
A. Upon receipt of any such application, the Town Clerk shall forthwith
forward a copy of same to the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments
and the Building Inspector, all of whom shall investigate each such
application and report back to the Council their findings thereon.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 95-11 CHARTER § 95-14
C:71
§ 95-15. Grant or denial of license.
§ 95-16. Fees.
The fee for any entertainment license set forth herein shall be $100.
§ 95-17. Limitations on license.
The grant of an entertainment license shall allow for those specific activities
and types of entertainment as applied for and no other.
§ 95-18. Violations and penalties.
B. Upon submission of an application for an entertainment license, the
proposed licensee or the owner of the land joining in the application
shall be deemed to have consented to an inspection of the site of the
event by public safety officers of the Town of Portsmouth at reasonable
times upon notice by said public safety officers. Failure or refusal to
allow or provide for such inspection shall be just cause for denial of said
license application.
A. The Town Council, sitting as a Board of License Commissioners, having
due regard for the public health, safety and welfare, may deny, grant or
grant subject to reasonable conditions or restrictions any such license
application.
B. In granting any said license, the Town Council may set the hours of
operation of any event, fix the maximum attendance, mandate the
provision of adequate sanitary facilities and order the hiring of such
security, medical, fire prevention and other such personnel as it shall
deem necessary to safeguard the public, said personnel to be paid by
the licensee. In the event that the licensee, after grant of said license,
shall fail or refuse to retain adequate security, medical or fire
prevention personnel, the Town Council may appoint said personnel,
and the cost of same shall be charged to the licensee, or the license may
be revoked.
C. The Town Council may also impose such other conditions and
restrictions upon the grant of the license as it deems reasonably
necessary in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of
attendees and the general public.
A. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who shall
violate the licensing requirements described herein by not obtaining a
license shall be fined $500 or be imprisoned not exceeding one year.
B. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who shall
violate the licensing requirements herein by failing to comply with the
conditions imposed on the grant of such license shall be fined not more
than $250 and/or imprisoned for not more than six months.
§ 95-14 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 95-18
C:72
Chapter 101
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal Control Officer — See Ch. 40, Art. I. Noise — See Ch. 257.
§ 95-18 CHARTER § 95-18
C:73

ARTICLE I
General Animal Regulations
[Adopted 11-14-1983 by Ord. No. 83-7]
§ 101-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person employed by the Town to
enforce this article and any police officer of the Town.
AT LARGE — A dog or other animal off the property of its owner or keeper
and not under the control of a competent person.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Includes any animal not typically kept as a pet. It
specifically includes, but is not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, venomous
snakes, nondomesticated snakes, monkeys, chimpanzees and venomous
insects.[Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03-11]
EXPOSED TO RABIES — A dog or other animal that has been bitten by, or
been exposed to, any animal known to have been infected with rabies.
KENNEL — Any place used for the commercial business of breeding,
buying, selling or boarding of dogs.
LEASHED — A dog or other animal which has a cord or chain attached to its
collar or harness and held by the owner or competent person leading said
animal, who shall have the animal under control. A leash shall not exceed
seven feet in length.[Added 12-10-1984 by Ord. No. 84-11; amended
4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04-13; amended 10-22-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-10-22]
OWNER — Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or other animal
mentioned in this article.
POUND — Any premises designated by action of the Town for the purpose
of impounding and caring for animals under the provisions of this article.
RESTRAINT — A dog or other animal leashed and in the control of a
competent person and obedient to that person's commands on or within a
vehicle being driven or parked on the street or within the property limits of
its owner or keeper.[Amended 12-10-1984 by Ord. No. 84-11]
§ 101-2. Authority of Animal Control Officer.
A. In the discharge of the duties imposed by this article, the Animal
Control Officer or any police officer of this Town shall have the
authority, at all reasonable times, to enter upon any premises to
examine a dog or other animal which is allegedly in violation of a
provision of this article. Such officer shall have the further authority to
take possession of any such dog or other animal and remove it from
such premises.
§ 101-1 CHARTER § 101-2
C:75
§ 101-3. Interference with enforcement.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the Animal Control Officer
of this Town in the performance of his duties under this article or seek to
release any animal from custody of the Animal Control Officer or any police
officer, except as otherwise specifically provided.
§ 101-4. Complaints.
All complaints under the provisions of this article shall be made to the
Animal Control Officer and may be made orally; provided, however, that,
within 48 hours, such complaint shall be reduced to writing on forms
provided by the Animal Control Officer and shall be signed by the
complainant showing his name, address and telephone number, if any.
§ 101-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be punished as
provided by this article or the General Laws of Rhode Island.
§ 101-6. Nuisances by animals.
§ 101-7. Dogs prohibited in certain locations.
Dogs, with the exception of dogs acting in the assistance of a blind or
crippled person, shall not be allowed on the premises of any store or public
eating place in the Town of Portsmouth and shall not be allowed on any
Town-operated beach. Any owner shall not allow his dog, with the exception
of dogs acting in the assistance of a blind or crippled person, to be upon the
B. The authority to enter upon a premises granted by Subsection A shall
not include the right to enter any residence on such premises.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any animal to
trespass on private or public property so as to damage or destroy any
property or thing of value, and the same is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. Whenever it shall be affirmed in writing by one or more
persons having separate residences or regularly employed in the
neighborhood that any animal is a habitual nuisance by reason of
trespassing, howling, barking or other noise, or by damaging property,
being vicious or, by its actions, potentially vicious, or in any other
manner causing undue annoyance, the Animal Control Officer, if he
finds such nuisance to exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or
keeper of such animal that said nuisance must be abated at once.
B. The keeping or harboring of any dog or other animal or fowl, whether
licensed or not, which habitually howls, yelps, barks or causes noises,
which habitual howling, yelping, barking or causing noises is affirmed
by persons in the neighborhood as provided in Subsection A of this
section, is unlawful and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and
each day shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 101-2 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 101-7
C:76
premises of any store, public eating place or Town-operated beach in the
Town of Portsmouth.
§ 101-8. Licensing of dogs. [Amended 2-20-1996 by Ord. No.
96-2-20C]
Every dog over the age of four months living within the Town limits shall be
licensed as of May 1 of each year.
§ 101-9. Number of dogs permitted at same residence.
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the Town of Portsmouth to keep more
than three licensed dogs at a single-family residence, except as provided
by the Animal Control Officer. This provision shall not apply to licensed
kennels.
§ 101-10. Unlawful deposit of dead animals.
No person shall throw, place or put, or cause to be thrown, placed or put,
the body or remains of any dead animal into any of the ponds, streams or
waters within the Town limits or shall leave any such body or remains of
any such animal to decay on any surface of the ground insufficiently buried
therein.
§ 101-11. Wild animals.
No wild animal may be kept within the Town limits, except under such
conditions as shall be affixed by the Animal Control Officer; provided,
however, that wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses,
zoos, and educational institutions in accordance with such regulations as
shall be established by the Animal Control Officer or any police officer of
this Town.
§ 101-12. Restraint of dogs required. [Amended 9-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-09-14]
The owner or keeper of any dog shall keep such dog under restraint at all
times and shall not permit such dog to run or be at large within the Town
of Portsmouth, except when such dog is within the designated enclosed
boundary of the Portsmouth Dog Park.
§ 101-13. Dogs running at large; violations and penalties.
[Amended 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-09-14]
No person, being the owner or keeper of a dog or having the charge or
custody of a dog, shall allow such dog to run loose off its owner's or keeper's
property within the Town of Portsmouth, except when such dog is within the
designated enclosed boundary of the Portsmouth Dog Park, unless such dog
is properly leashed and said leash is controlled by the owner or keeper of
such dog. Any dog found not properly leashed and off its owner's or keeper's
property running loose shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer,
§ 101-7 CHARTER § 101-13
C:77
and such dog shall be held at the area pound until said owner or keeper is
located. Any owner or keeper of a dog that allows such dog to be at large
within the Town of Portsmouth shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$20 for the first offense, not exceeding $30 for the second offense, and not
exceeding $50 for the third and any subsequent offense within a year.
§ 101-14. Impoundment of dogs.
§ 101-15. Redemption of impounded dogs.
§ 101-16. Confinement of dangerous or vicious animals and females
in heat.
A. Any dog or dogs found not under restraint may be taken up by the
Animal Control Officer, in lieu of issuance of a violation notice, and
impounded in a shelter designated as the Town pound and there
confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than five days and
thereafter be disposed of in a humane manner or placed up for adoption
at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer if not claimed by their
owner.
B. Immediately upon impounding a dog or dogs, the Animal Control
Officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owners of such dog
so impounded and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they
may regain custody of such dogs.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, any person who
immediately notifies the Animal Control Officer that their dog has
escaped from restraint and requests assistance in bringing the dog
under control or restraint shall not be punished or liable for a fine,
charge or fee pursuant to this article for failure to properly restrain a
dog.
A. The owner shall be entitled to regain possession of any impounded dog
upon payment of impoundment fees as provided in § 101-14 of this
article.
B. Any dog impounded under the provisions of this article and not
reclaimed by its owner within five days may be:
(1) Humanely destroyed by the Animal Control Officer; or
(2) Placed in the custody of some other person deemed to be
responsible and a suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the
provisions set forth by this article.
A. The owner or keeper of a dog shall confine, within a building or secure
enclosure, every fierce, dangerous or vicious dog or other animal and
shall not take such dog or other animal out of such building or secure
enclosure unless such dog or other animal is securely muzzled or other
device for insuring the safety of the public is used.
§ 101-13 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 101-16
C:78
§ 101-17. Biting dogs or other animals.
§ 101-18. Registration of dangerous dogs; insurance requirements.
[Added 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 84-12-17A]
Any person having ownership, custody or control of any American Pit Bull
dog, Pit Bull Terrier dog, Staffordshire Terrier or any person who has paid
any fine imposed by or suffered conviction for a violation of § 101-17A, B
or C of this article shall, prior to receiving a license for any of said dogs,
register said dog on a form provided by the Town Clerk, to include the
owner's name and address, the address where said dog is harbored, the age,
color, sex and other distinguishable physical characteristics of said dog; and
no license shall issue until and unless the registration form is complete and
until and unless said person has presented to the issuing officer sufficient
satisfactory proof of public liability insurance in an amount no less than
$25,000 covering any and all potential personal injuries or property damage
which may be inflicted upon any other person or other person's property by
said dog.
B. Every female dog, cat or other animal, when in heat, shall be kept
confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinarian hospital
or boarding kennel, in such a manner that such animal cannot come in
contact with another animal, except for the purpose of intentional
breeding.
A. Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the
Animal Control Officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at
the direction of the Animal Control Officer for a period of no less than
14 days and shall not be released from such quarantine except by
written permission from the Animal Control Officer. At the discretion of
the Animal Control Officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of
the owner or at the pound or, at the owner's option and expense, in a
veterinarian hospital of their choice. In cases of stray animals, or of
animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the
Town-designated pound.
B. The owner, upon demand by the Animal Control Officer, shall forthwith
surrender any animal which has bitten a human or which is suspected
as having been exposed to rabies for supervised quarantine, the
expense of which shall be borne by the owner. Such animal may be
reclaimed by the owner if it is determined to be free of rabies, upon
payment of the same fees levied upon such animal for the time it is
interned at the pound.
C. Any owner or keeper of a dog or other animal that shall bite or
otherwise inflict any injury on any person or persons shall be subject to
a fine of no less than $100. This fine will only be levied after an
investigation into the incident is conducted by the Animal Control
Officer and the owner or keeper of said dog or other animal is deemed
to be negligent in their actions or in violation of § 101-12 of this article.
§ 101-16 CHARTER § 101-19
C:79
§ 101-19. Rabies control.
When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or when
rabies is suspected in such an animal by a licensed veterinarian, and
the animal dies while under observation, the Animal Control Officer shall
immediately send the head of such animal to the State Health Department
for pathological examination and shall notify the proper health officials, or
officers, of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis.
§ 101-20. Schedule of fines.
Fines shall be as follows:
§ 101-21. Limits on fines and fees.
All fines and fees set by the foregoing provisions of this article shall be
subject to the limits set by state statute, so that the amounts authorized
by this article shall be the lower of the amounts set forth herein or as
provided by state statute, as said statutes may be from time to time enacted
or amended.
§ 101-22. Impounding unvaccinated animals. [Added 2-20-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-2-20C]
Any dog or cat over four months old found within the Town without evidence
that such animal has been vaccinated or inoculated as required by law
shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer or other authorized
person for a period not exceeding 15 days, during which time such animal
may be returned to its owner only upon proof of ownership, licensing and
vaccination and payment by the owner of fees incurred by the Town for
A. Nuisance dog or other animal not abated after requested to do so: $15.
B. Unlicensed dog (R.I.G.L. § 4-13-4): $10.
C. Dogs running at large:
(1) First offense: $20.
(2) Second offense: $30.
(3) Third offense: $50.
D. Vicious or dangerous dog or other animal not confined: $20.
E. Female dog or other animal in heat not confined: $20.
F. Unauthorized wild animals: $15.
G. Dogs in stores, eating places, or on Town beaches: $15.
H. Biting dog or other animal: $100.
I. Number of dogs permitted at residence: $25.
§ 101-19 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 101-22
C:80
impoundment, vaccination and any other service reasonably required and
provided during the period of impoundment. Any person or organization
providing impoundment services for the Town is hereby authorized to
collect such fees on behalf of the Town.
§ 101-23. Capture and release of wild or unowned cats. [Added
2-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2-20C]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to capture and then release in the
Town any wild or unowned cat, whether or not said animal shall have
been vaccinated as provided by law.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be fined not
more than $500, to be recovered to the use of the Town.
§ 101-22 CHARTER § 101-23
C:81

ARTICLE II
Dog Licensing
[Adopted 11-4-1985 by Ord. No. 85-11-4]
§ 101-24. License fees. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-03-11]
Every owner or keeper of a dog shall cause such dog to be licensed in the
office of the Town Clerk and shall pay to the Town Clerk for said license
the sum of $5. In addition, such owner or keeper shall pay to the Town an
additional fee of $2 for each license, said fee to be used exclusively by the
Town for enforcement of laws pertaining to animals, and $1 for low-cost
spay/neuter programs for cats.
§ 101-25. Annual renewal of license; late fee. [Added 2-25-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-2-25B; amended 2-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-02-09]
Such license shall be annually renewed on or before the 30th day of April
each year by proper application and payment of the requisite fees. A late
fee in the sum of $20 shall be assessed against each renewal application
received after April 30 of any year.
§ 101-24 CHARTER § 101-25
C:83

ARTICLE III
Dangerous Animals
[Adopted 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12-14]
§ 101-26. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
The sale, housing, ownership or possession of any dangerous animal, as
defined in § 101-27 of this article, within the Town of Portsmouth, Rhode
Island, is hereby prohibited, and any person or persons selling, housing,
owning or possessing such an animal shall be in violation of this article and
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each and every animal and
incident.
§ 101-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Includes any animal not typically kept as a pet. It
specifically includes, but is not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, venomous
snakes, nondomesticated snakes, monkeys, chimpanzees and venomous
insects.
§ 101-26 CHARTER § 101-27
C:85

ARTICLE IV
Feeding of Nondomesticated Animals
[Adopted 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02-11B]
§ 101-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health and safety of residents
in the Town of Portsmouth with respect to dangers associated with coyotes
and other nondomesticated animals by minimizing opportunities for such
animals to obtain food from sources controlled or controllable by humans.
§ 101-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTRACTANT — Any substance which could reasonably be expected to
attract or does attract coyotes or other nondomesticated animals, including
but not limited to garbage, food products, pet food, carcasses, feed, and
grain.
FEEDING — The leaving of food of any kind where it is accessible to coyotes
or other nondomesticated animals.
FOOD — All substances consumed by humans or animals for nourishment
except grass and other vegetation, growing crops, and food that is canned
or stored in sealed or closable containers.
§ 101-30. Prohibited acts.
§ 101-31. Exceptions.
A. No person shall knowingly feed or in any manner provide an attractant
to coyotes or other nondomesticated animals, provided that domestic
pets are not attractants, and feeding pets outdoors does not create an
attractant if the pet eats all the food immediately or the remaining food
is removed as soon as the pet stops eating or the pet is fed in a secure
cage or other enclosure.
B. No person shall knowingly leave, store, or maintain any food or
attractant in a manner, area, or location accessible to coyotes or other
nondomesticated animals.
A. Food for birds or squirrels that is in a feeder located within 100 feet of a
residence and elevated to be inaccessible to coyotes.
B. Outdoor feeding of farm animals, provided:
(1) Animal food, when not being fed to animals, is stored in a building
or a closed container;
(2) Excessive amounts of food, based on the animals' eating history,
are not provided to the animals;
§ 101-28 CHARTER § 101-31
C:87
§ 101-32. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(3) Injured, old, feeble, or prey-sized animals are not left out
unattended; and
(4) All other reasonable efforts are made to reduce attractants to
coyotes and other nondomesticated animals.
A. This article shall be enforced by the police and/or animal control
officers of the Town of Portsmouth.
B. A written notification may be issued by an officer requiring and
directing the person in violation to remove the food or other attractant
within two days of notification.
C. A person receiving a written notification under Subsection B of this
section shall remove the food or other attractant as directed within two
days of notification.
D. Violations of this article are punishable by a civil penalty of not more
than $50 for each day of violation.
§ 101-31 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 101-32
C:88
ARTICLE V
Portsmouth Dog Park
[Adopted 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-09-14]
§ 101-33. Dog park rules; violations and penalties.
The following rules shall be posted at, and followed by, all dog owners,
keepers, guardians and other users of the Portsmouth Dog Park:
A. Only dogs that are currently vaccinated for rabies and licensed in the
town in which they reside are allowed to enter the park.
B. No dog under six months old, or that has received its first rabies shot
within the past 30 days, may enter the park.
C. All dogs must be spayed/neutered and free from disease and internal
parasites.
D. All dogs must be removed from the park by their owner, keeper or
guardian at the first sign of aggression.
E. All dogs must be leashed while entering and exiting the park.
F. No more than three dogs may be brought into the park by any one
owner, keeper or guardian at any time.
G. Dogs must be under the control of the owner, keeper or guardian at all
times.
H. The use of pinch, choke or electronic collars within the park is
prohibited.
I. No dog that has been legally declared vicious is allowed in the park.
J. No food is allowed in the park.
K. The park is open from dawn to dusk and closed during maintenance.
L. All dog bites must be promptly reported to the Portsmouth Police
(683-0300) or Animal Control (643-0136).
M. Owners, keepers and guardians of dogs are required to clean up after
their dogs and properly dispose of all waste, and to repair any damage
caused by their dogs.
N. The use of alcohol and/or tobacco is prohibited.
O. No children under the age of 16 may enter the park unless under adult
supervision.
P. The park is for recreational use only and no attendant is on duty. All
users of the park do so at their own risk. All owners, keepers and
guardians of dogs and other users of the park agree to release and hold
the Town of Portsmouth and its various departments, employees,
§ 101-33 CHARTER § 101-33
C:89
volunteers and agents harmless from any and all liability, claims, and/or
damages for personal injury, property damage, or injury to their pet(s).
Q. The Portsmouth Police Department and Animal Control reserve the
right to ban any owner, keeper, guardian, dog or other user from the
park for violation of these rules.
R. Violation of any of these rules is punishable by a fine of $100 for a first
violation, $200 for a second violation, and $300 for a third or any
subsequent violation.
§ 101-33 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 101-33
C:90
Chapter 118
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 339.
§ 118-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all buildings, new and existing, located within
the limits of the Town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island.
§ 118-2. Assignment of numbers.
All building numbers shall be assigned by the Chief of the Portsmouth Fire
Department or his/her designee. All new construction shall be assigned
numbers as the construction occurs. The Fire Department shall keep
records of all numbers so assigned.
§ 118-3. Display of numbers required.
Within 30 days of notification of the proper assigned number of an existing
building, and prior to the occupying of a new building, the owner of that
building shall be required to display on the building numbers in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 118-4. Numbering system.
Buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the following system:
§ 118-5. Type and size of numbers.
All numbers shall be of the numerical type. Alphabetical type will not
be acceptable. The numerals shall be at least three inches in height and
uniform in height and width. They shall be placed on a contrasting
background.
A. One number shall be allowed for each 10 linear feet of street or
highway frontage.
B. Numbering shall commence at the beginning of each street. The
beginning of each street shall be determined by its approach from the
center of Town or by the Fire Chief or his/her designee, except for East
Main Road, which shall be numbered from south to north, and West
Main Road, which shall be numbered from north to south.
C. Odd numbers shall be assigned on the right side of the streets traveling
down the street from the beginning, and even numbers assigned to the
left side.
§ 101-33 CHARTER § 118-6
C:91
§ 118-6. Location of numbers.
Numbers shall be located on the street side of the building, between five
and eight feet from ground level, and shall be clearly visible from the street.
If the street side of the building is not visible from the street, the building
number shall be displayed on a post at the entrance to the building at
least three feet back from the edge of the street. Numbers on mailboxes or
mailbox posts will be acceptable only if the mailbox is directly in front of
the building on the same side of the street as the building, the number is on
the side of the mailbox visible from the approaching side, and the number
is also on the driveway side of the house and visible from the driveway.
Numbers on mailboxes must also comply with § 118-5 of this chapter.
§ 118-7. Display of other numbers prohibited.
No owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant of any building shall
display any number other than the proper number designated by the Fire
Chief or his/her designee for that building.
§ 118-8. Violations and penalties.
The owner of any building who fails or refuses to comply with the
requirements of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$100, to be recovered to the use of the Town, and each day any violation of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 124
BURNING, OUTDOOR
§ 124-1. Compliance required.
All persons shall comply with the following fire protection and safety
requirements.
§ 124-2. Bonfires and other outdoor fires.
Outdoor burning of yard waste and bonfires shall be permitted only under
the conditions set forth in this chapter. Only clean brush and untreated
wood may be burned.
§ 124-3. Permit required; prohibited acts.
No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire or authorize any such fire
to be kindled or maintained on or in public or private property without
having obtained a permit from the Fire Department. Permits can only
be issued to residential homeowners in accordance with this chapter.
Commercial and industrial operations are not permitted to burn. During
construction or demolition of buildings or structures, no waste materials or
rubbish shall be disposed of by burning on the premises or in the immediate
vicinity.
§ 118-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 124-4
C:92
§ 124-4. Inspections.
No holder of a bonfire permit shall ignite the fire before it has been
inspected by the Chief of the Fire Department or his designee, and no
additional material shall be added to the fire subsequent to said inspection.
§ 124-5. Owner to sign permit.
All permits shall be signed by the owner of the land on which the fire is
located. The Chief of the Fire Department or his designee may require proof
of ownership.
§ 124-6. Location restricted.
No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire or authorize any such fire
to be kindled or maintained on any private land, unless the location is not
less than 50 feet from any structure and adequate provision is made to
prevent fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure.
§ 124-7. Contained burning allowed without permit.
Burning is allowed when the fire is contained in a waste burner with a
properly screened top or an outdoor fireplace and located safely on private
property no less than 25 feet from any structure, fence or property line.
All such burning shall be permitted before 10:00 a.m. and after 5:00 p.m.,
unless the Chief or Deputy Chief of the Fire Department prohibits such
burning for reasons hereafter set forth in § 124-9.
§ 124-8. Attendance of open fires.
Any open fire shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such
fire is extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected to a
water supply or other extinguishing equipment readily available for use.
§ 124-9. Fires prohibited by Chief.
The Chief of the Fire Department, or his designee, may prohibit any or all
bonfires and outdoor fires, whether in the open air or in Fire-Departmentapproved
waste burners or outdoor fireplaces, when atmospheric conditions
or local circumstances make such fires hazardous, or the smoke or fumes
from such fires are a nuisance to adjoining or surrounding property or
persons.
§ 124-10. Extinguishing by Fire Department.
The Chief of the Fire Department, or his designee, may extinguish or
cause to be extinguished any or all bonfires and outdoor fires, whether
in the open air or in Fire-Department-approved rubbish or waste burners
or outdoor fireplaces, when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances
make such fires hazardous or the smoke or fumes from such fires a nuisance
to adjoining or surrounding property or persons.
§ 124-4 CHARTER § 124-11
C:93
§ 124-11. Permission to kindle on land of others required.
No person shall kindle a fire upon the land of another without written
permission of the owner. The Chief of the Fire Department, or his designee,
may require proof of ownership and agency.
§ 124-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
as outlined below:
Chapter 148
DESIGN GUIDELINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garages and gasoline stations — See Ch. 206.
Land development and subdivision — See Ch.
236.
Stone wall preservation — See Ch. 333.
Zoning — See Ch. 405.
A. First offense: a fine of $100 or 10 days in jail, or both.
B. Any offense thereafter: up to a fine of $500 or 10 days in jail, or both.
§ 124-11 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 124-12
C:94
I
General Design Guidelines
It should be the goal and responsibility of each project developer to present
for review a complete and well-conceived set of documents that highlight
and make visible the compatible character and architectural craftsmanship
that will make their project worthy of praise and a good neighbor when
built.
1. The words "acceptable," "appropriate," "attractive," "compatible,"
complementary" and other such words where judgment is inferred,
refer to the majority opinion of the Design Review Board exclusively.
2. Where the word "Board" is used, it shall mean the Design Review
Board unless otherwise indicated.
3. To provide guidance to building and property owners in the renovation
and development of their parcels, the term "historic" refers to
buildings or plantings that pre-date 1940. A list of buildings
considered historical by the R.I. Historical Preservation Commission
is available at the Town Planner's office. Prospective builders and
developers should consider their value in maintaining the character
and context of the community.
CHARTER § 124-12
C:95

II
Site Design Guidelines
By responding to the larger contexts of neighborhood, topography, natural
features, circulation, existing structures, view corridors, water elements,
skylines, and open spaces, the possibilities inherent in the site become
visible. The act of creating "place" begins with affirming what is already
good and special about a site and introducing nothing onto the site that
destroys that quality.
A. General site.
B. Transitional areas.
1. The site plan, building design and landscaping of new development
should achieve high quality and appearance that will enhance, and be
compatible with, the character of the surrounding area.
2. Significant site features such as natural ground forms, large rock
outcroppings, vegetation, water and significant view corridors should
be identified and incorporated into new development.
3. The design of outdoor spaces should recognize and incorporate views,
climate, solar angles, and the nature of outdoor activities that could
occur in conjunction with the project.
4. Where identified as appropriate, new and existing development should
include public plazas, courtyards, landscaping and similar amenities or
public assembly areas that are accessible and visible from the street.
Such amenities should be provided in scale appropriate to the size and
location of the project.
5. Phased projects should be designed to the greatest degree possible so
that each phase, in and of itself, is complete in functional, visual, traffic,
parking, drainage and landscape aspects.
1. Site planning and design of projects proposed adjacent to dissimilar
land uses should carefully address any potential undesirable impacts on
existing uses.
2. Project sites that are impacted by excess noise from the surrounding
area or that would create an excessive noise impact on adjacent
properties should use both site planning and architectural solutions to
minimize impacts.
3. Where adjacent uses are determined to be incompatible, it is strongly
recommended that a significant buffer zone be established which
includes well-designed, large-scale, densely planted landscape
elements, which diminish the impact on the neighborhood. Commercial
developments should be screened from residential zones. (See also
Article IX in the Zoning Ordinance.20)
A CHARTER C
C:97
C. Grading.
D. Drainage/stormwater management.
Drainage issues are primarily reviewed by the Planning Board according to
principles laid out in the Subdivision Regulations, which primarily regulate
this subject.21 The following are additional guidelines:
E. Pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
Reference is made to the Zoning Ordinance, Articles III, VII, and IX, which
primarily regulate this subject.22 The following are additional guidelines:
1. Abrupt or unnatural appearing grading [changes of grade of over fifty
percent (50%) from top to bottom] is strongly discouraged. Grading on
new project sites should blend, as possible, with the contours of
adjacent properties.
2. The height and length of retaining walls should be minimized and
should be screened with appropriate landscaping. Retaining walls
should incorporate design elements of other architectural or natural
features of the project.
3. Wood retaining walls and smooth faced concrete retaining walls are
generally discouraged regardless of height.
4. Terracing should be considered as an alternative to the use of tall or
prominent retaining walls, particularly in highly visible areas on
hillsides.
5. Grading under a drip line of protected trees is strongly discouraged, in
order to prevent soil compaction and significant root damage.
1. Drainage from rooftops or other impermeable surfaces should not be
conveyed into planter areas that are surrounded by hard surfaces
without a drain inlet.
2. Drainage should not be conveyed within the drip line of any tree on the
site that will be retained.
3. Drainage from landscape areas should be properly conveyed and
contained and should not drain freely across sidewalks, landscape and
building faces.
1. Circulation patterns should be as obvious and simple as possible. All
likely pedestrian routes should be considered in the design phase to
eliminate "short cuts" which may damage the landscape areas.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
C PORTSMOUTH CODE E
C:98
2. Every effort should be made to provide pedestrian routes and bike
paths to adjacent neighborhoods.
3. Circulation systems should be designed to avoid conflicts between
vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic. Pedestrian circulation should
take precedence over vehicular circulation, especially near buildings.
4. Redundant circulation that unnecessarily reduces the amount of site
available for landscaped areas should be minimized.
5. New driveways and parking facilities should be sited either
immediately opposite street intersections or well away from them. The
number of driveways should be minimized, but should always meet the
requirements of emergency service vehicles.
6. The number and width of curb cuts must be minimized, consistent with
the Traffic Sensitive District regulations in the Zoning Ordinance.23 A
wider curb cut may be appropriate on a higher speed street.
7. Where pedestrian circulation crosses vehicular routes, a change in
grade, materials, textures or colors is encouraged to emphasize the
conflict point and improve its visibility and safety.
8. Circulation routes should focus upon main entries and exits and also
identify secondary access points.
9. All elements of the site design must accommodate access requirements
of emergency vehicles and delivery vehicles. The Fire Department
stipulates space requirements between buildings and other immovable
objects.
10. Service functions should be integrated into the circulation pattern in a
manner that minimizes conflicts with vehicles and pedestrians.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning, Art. III, Sec. G, Traffic Sensitive Overlay District.
E CHARTER E
C:99

III
Landscape Design Guidelines
Landscaping and plantings serve to screen, define, and highlight framing
views and giving form to space. Landscaping is an integral part of any
development.
A. General.
B. Landscape design standards.
1. Well-designed landscaped areas should be maximized and balanced
throughout the site.
2. Native trees and shrub plantings should be grouped together to create
strong accent points within the site. Trees having greater than
eighteen-inch (18") caliper are considered important. It is strongly
recommended that they be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
3. Dense landscaping and/or architectural treatments should be provided
to screen unattractive views and features such as storage areas, trash
enclosures, transformers, generators and other similar elements.
4. Electrical transformers, which are installed as part of a new project,
should be located to the rear of the site, or underground. Existing
transformers, located at the front of the site, should be screened by
substantial dense landscaping and/or architectural barrier.
5. The incorporation of defined outdoor spaces into the buildings and site
designs of all new developments is encouraged. Outdoor spaces that
are encouraged include terraces, courtyards, patios, covered walkways,
passages, gardens, and trellised areas.
1. All plant materials should be sized so that landscaping has a full and
finished appearance at the time of planting and a mature appearance
within two (2) years of planting.
2. Unless unusual circumstances prevail, all parking lot trees should be a
minimum of two-inch (2") caliper. Street trees or perimeter trees should
be minimum two-inch to three-inch (2"-3") caliper. In other areas
proposed trees should meet the following standards.
3. Evergreen trees six-foot (6') minimum height.
4. In cases where existing highly protected trees over eighteen-inch (18")
caliper are removed for new development, substantial replacement
trees and additional landscaping material in new locations is strongly
encouraged.
5. No irrigated landscape area should be placed under protected trees.
A CHARTER B
C:101
C. Perimeter trees.
Perimeter trees are planted along roadways or between parcels. (The
recommended Perimeter Tree List is included as Appendix II.24)
6. All proposed shrubs, except seasonal annuals, or ground covers
planting should be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") mature height.
Shrubs and ground cover plants should be spaced close enough
together to ensure an attractive and mature planting effect.
7. For screening in car parking areas, a minimum of thirty-six-inch (36")
mature height is recommended. For other screening purposes a
minimum of seventy-two-inch (72") height is recommended and should
include various evergreen material.
8. Landscaping connections linking open spaces/woodlands and meadows
should be made wherever possible.
9. Bike paths and pedestrian pathways linking neighborhoods and
business areas are encouraged and should be subtly landscaped with
native plant materials that require minimal care.
10. Native plant species should be chosen for all landscaping projects in
Portsmouth, because they grow well in the climate and soil conditions
of the area without requiring excessive irrigation.
1. Trees may be recommended in the public right-of-way for all
development within non-residential districts. The Recommended Tree
List (Appendix II) designates recommended tree species for each street.
New trees should be planted consistent with the plan and the perimeter
tree standards and guidelines.
2. In commercial areas, perimeter trees are recommended in addition to
any proposed on-site landscaping to provide the shading, visual
enhancement and continuity for the streetscape.
3. Perimeter trees should normally be planted at forty-foot (40') intervals.
4. Any existing perimeter tree that constitutes a specimen, historic or
protected, may be substituted for a recommended perimeter tree.
5. Perimeter tree placement should include consideration for vehicle line
of sight, entrance and exit curb cuts, street light and traffic control
devices, and other site specific conditions as part of design review
process.
6. Plant materials and perimeter trees should be installed consistent with
planting standards which specify soil depth, irrigation requirements,
tree grates, staking and other planting details.
24.Editor's Note: Appendix II is included as an attachment to this chapter.)
B PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:102
D. Landscape construction recommendations.
7. Where significant vistas or view corridors are present or desired, the
number and placement of the perimeter trees and landscaping
recommendations may be amended.
1. Landscaping plans should show all obstructions such as street lights,
meters, backflow devices, utility covers, transformers, and similar
objects which may affect plant placement and installation limitations.
2. When constructing new landscape planting areas on surfaces which
were previously covered by pavement or structures, all existing asphalt,
base rock or other deleterious material should be removed to the depth
of the native soil and clean soil should be used to backfill the planting
area.
3. All exposed dirt areas should be covered with bark mulch or other weed
control measures included as part of final landscape installation.
C CHARTER D
C:103

IV
Off-Street Parking Design
Reference is made to Articles III and IX of the Zoning Ordinance, which
primarily regulate this subject.25 The following are additional guidelines.
A. Parking lot access.
B. Parking lot site design.
C. Parking lot landscaping.
1. Curb cuts must be minimized, per the requirements of Article III of the
Zoning Ordinance, Traffic Sensitive Districts.26
2. Wherever possible, adjacent parking lots must be connected or, in the
case of a vacant commercial lot, a connection provided so that traffic
may move between them, reducing traffic on the arterial roadways.
1. The visual impact and presence of vehicles should be minimized by
generally siting parking areas to the rear or side of the property rather
than along street frontages, providing underground parking or parking
garages, and/or screening parking areas from views exterior to the site.
Parking areas may be appropriate in the front of the site in certain retail
areas, such as strip centers and shallow lots, provided appropriate
landscaping and setbacks are incorporated into the parking design.
2. Driveway entrances should provide ten feet (10') clear behind sidewalk
or curb prior to starting the first parking space.
3. Where possible, the last parking stall in an aisle should contain an end
island area to provide adequate turning and maneuvering room.
4. When parking must be adjacent to a street or public thoroughfare, the
use of berms and landscaping should be implemented to minimize the
visibility of cars and headlights from off the site.
1. Parking lots should be designed with adequate landscape areas
to avoid the appearance of a "sea of asphalt." A minimum
landscape area of seventy-two inches (72") to the back of the perimeter
curb stop should be provided where landscape separation is needed.
Landscaping areas in which trees will be planted may need a ninety-sixinch
(96") minimum clearance.
2. Placement of landscape materials and signs should permit adequate
sight distance for motorists and pedestrians entering and exiting a site.
(See Article IX of the Zoning Ordinance under "Vision Clearance."27)
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning, Art. III, Sec. G, Traffic Sensitive Overlay District.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning, Art. IX, Sec. C.
A CHARTER C
C:105
3. Landscape materials should not interfere with circulation patterns.
Minimum distance of visibility should be three (3) feet times the
numeric posted speed limit in miles/hour on the affected road.
4. Landscaping should be provided adjacent to and within parking areas
to screen vehicles from view and to minimize the expansive appearance
of parking areas.
5. Shrubs and trees should be selected and installed at optimal locations
to avoid damage from vehicles.
C PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:106
V
Fencing and Screening Design
A. Design standards.
1. Existing stone walls should be preserved wherever possible. Where
existing stone walls must be moved, they should be replicated as nearby
as possible within the site.
2. New stone walls should be built to be compatible in material, method
and style with historic walls adjacent to or nearby the site.
3. All fencing should be designed as an integrated part of the site, rather
than as a separate fence. For instance, planter walls, and continuation
of architectural walls are preferable to freestanding fences.
4. Chain link fencing is highly discouraged. Where used, chain link should
be green vinyl clad and have vegetative creeping cover within twelve
(12) months of installation. Chain link along major thoroughfares is very
strongly discouraged.
5. Use of special fencing design or materials should be discussed in the
design narrative submitted as part of the Design Review Application.
6. All new sound walls, masonry walls or fences fifty feet (50') in length or
longer, and four feet (4') in height or taller should be designed to
minimize visual monotony through changes in plane, height, material or
material texture or significant landscape massing where appropriate.
7. Utility lines should be under-grounded within the Town Center area,
along identified scenic corridors, at gateways and at other prominent
locations.
8. Electrical transformers and similar utility structures should be
underground or placed in the rear of the site. If not feasible due to
preexisting site conditions, such as a high water table, the facility
should be enclosed within the building or adequately screened from the
view of any public right-of-way. Screening with solid materials, such as
berming or enclosures, is preferable to reliance solely on planting.
9. The design of fencing, sound walls, carports, trash enclosures, and
similar site elements should be compatible with the architecture of the
main buildings and should use similar materials.
10. Rooftop mechanical and electrical equipment, microwave antennae, or
building elements to screen such equipment should be designed as an
integral part of the building architecture. It is strongly preferred that
screens conceal equipment from view for a three-hundred-foot (300')
radius from the building at ground level.
11. All exterior trash and storage areas, service yards, loading docks and
ramps, wood service poles, electric and gas meters, fire sprinkler
valves, irrigation backflow prevention devices, transformers, etc.,
A CHARTER A
C:107
B. Trash enclosures.
should be screened from view in a manner that is compatible with
the building and site design. Screening should be well designed and
materials should be substantial and durable. Generally, all such
elements should be located to the rear of the site and/or away from
a major street, and screened to a height necessary to conceal the
equipment from view for a radius of fifty feet (50').
1. Trash enclosures should be constructed of sturdy, durable, opaque
materials (with receptacles screened from view) that are designed to be
compatible with the project architecture.
2. Trash enclosures should include adequate, accessible and convenient
areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Dimensions of the
recycling area should accommodate receptacles to meet the recycling
needs of the project. To determine the appropriate dimensions needed
for dumpsters and waste wheelers, contact the solid waste and
recycling management representatives.
3. Areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials should be adjacent
to the solid waste collection areas.
A PORTSMOUTH CODE B
C:108
VI
Exterior Lighting Design
1. Historically appropriate lighting should be used for the renovation of
all historic projects. For new construction, exterior lighting should be
architecturally integrated with the building style, material and colors.
2. In the absence of appropriate historic lighting models, concealed,
vandal resistant up-lighting should be employed for lighting
monuments or noteworthy buildings.
3. Excessive illumination of the signage, building or site should be
avoided. Roof lighting, down-lighting washing the building walls, and
illuminated awnings are all strongly discouraged.
4. Exterior lighting of the building and site should be designed so that
light is not directed off the site and the light source is shielded from
direct offsite viewing.
5. Fixture mounting height should be appropriate for the project and the
setting. Use of low, bollard-type fixtures are encouraged as pedestrian
area lighting. The mounting height of fixtures in smaller parking
lots or service areas should not exceed sixteen feet (16'), with lower
mounting heights encouraged, particularly where adjacent to
residential areas or other sensitive land uses.
6. Raised light pole bases should be attractively designed and well
detailed to be compatible with the overall project. The use of
"sonotube" type concrete pole bases is discouraged.
7. Exterior lighting sources that provide full-spectrum white light (metal
halide lamps or approved equal) are strongly encouraged.
8. Full cutoff lighting is strongly encouraged.
CHARTER B
C:109

VII
Architectural Guidelines
Architectural guidelines help ensure that commercial development is in
keeping with the high quality, traditional New England rural characteristics
of Portsmouth, as well as in keeping with the characteristics of the area in
which a proposed development is located. For example, architecture typical
of the southwestern states is not appropriate in Portsmouth. Industrial
style buildings are incompatible with commercial developments, especially
where they are adjacent to residential neighborhoods. (Please see also the
introductory statement: "Why Design Guidelines Are Needed."28)
A. General architectural guidelines.
1. New architectural design should be compatible with the character of
the neighboring area. Design compatibility includes complementary
building style, form, size, color and materials.
2. Building architecture should be designed to provide an attractive
appearance. Prefabricated buildings are highly discouraged. Franchise
or corporate style architecture and/or highly contrasting color schemes
are strongly discouraged. If used, such buildings should be
substantially modified and embellished to create a project that meets
the community standards. All architectural details should be related to
an overall architectural design approach.
3. Historic structures of merit should be preserved and maintained. If the
development requires relocation of an historic building, every effort
should be made to preserve the building.
4. Diversity of architectural design is encouraged. Highly stylized
buildings that are characteristic of a particular historic period other
than their own are discouraged, unless a building or site is historically
important to the district or necessary for architectural harmony.
5. Loud or gaudy colors, sharply contrasting colors and highly reflective
materials are not compatible with the character of Portsmouth and
should be avoided.
6. Efforts to coordinate the actual and apparent height of adjacent
structures that are architecturally compatible with Portsmouth are
encouraged, particularly where buildings are located close to one
another. Aligning the height of a wall, cornice or parapet line to that of
an adjacent building is encouraged. Similar design linkages can be
achieved to adjust apparent height by placing window lines, belt
courses, and other horizontal elements in a pattern that reflects the
same elements on such adjacent structures.
28.Editor's Note: The introductory statement is included as Attachment 1 to this chapter.
A CHARTER A
C:111
B. Storefronts, facade and fenestration.
7. Multiple buildings on the same site should be designed to create a
cohesive visual relationship. Out buildings should be designed to
complement the primary building on the site in style and material
expression.
8. Building siting should take best advantage of solar orientation, climatic
and other environmental conditions, should encourage safety and
privacy of adjacent outdoor spaces, and should reduce the impact of
noise upon (or from) the project.
9. Buildings that are stylized in an attempt to use the building itself as
advertising are very strongly discouraged. This is particularly true
where the proposed architecture is the result of a "corporate" or
franchise style.
10. The visibility of roof-top equipment should be minimized by grouping all
plumbing vents, ducts and roof-top mechanical equipment away, and
screening from public view for a three-hundred-foot (300') radius from
the building from ground level.
1. Building facades should be compatible in scale, mass, and form with
adjacent structures and the pattern of the surrounding area (assuming
the adjacent structures are generally in compliance with these design
guidelines).
2. Exterior building design and detail on all elevations should be
coordinated with regard to color, types of materials, number of
materials, architectural form, and detailing to achieve harmony and
continuity of design. No more than three (3) paint colors should be
employed, excluding signage and awnings.
3. Rear and side facades, if visible from public streets or neighboring
properties, should be carefully designed with similar detailing and
materials and should be compatible with the principal facades of the
building. All elevations of the building will be evaluated in Design
Review process.
4. Long unbroken or unadorned wall planes are discouraged. Massing of a
building should not extend beyond fifty feet (50') to seventy-five feet
(75') without the facade being relieved with changes of wall plane that
provide strong shadow or visual interest.
5. Exterior materials should be durable and of high quality. Highly
reflective materials are discouraged. Non-durable materials such as
thin layer synthetic stucco or EIFS products should not be used within
ninety-six inches (96") of ground level unless specially reinforced or
located away from pedestrian accessible areas.
6. Metal storefronts are very strongly discouraged, unless completely
screened from view from the street, using landscaping, fencing or other
A PORTSMOUTH CODE B
C:112
materials that effectively hide the building from the street. Metal sides
visible from the street should be similarly screened.
7. Pedestrian level storefronts should employ non-reflective glass or light
gray tinted glass to enhance the visibility of the displayed merchandise
from the outside.
8. Good design suggests that window and door openings on the front
facade occupy a total of no less than ten percent (10%) and no more
than sixty percent (60%) of the gross square footage of that facade. The
size and placement of windows should be commensurate with adjacent
historical models where they exist.
9. Shutters are encouraged.
10. True divided light windows are encouraged.
11. No new building or remodeling of any existing building should have
mill-finish (non-colored) aluminum metal windows or door frames
visible from the street unless specifically requested by the applicant
and recommended by the Design Review Board. Aluminum windows
should typically have a Kynar or similar finish to match the proposed
trim color of the building.
12. For renovation projects, it is desirable that the historic storefront be
repaired. Where the historic storefront is beyond repair, the new
storefront should emulate in design, scale and material the old
storefront as much as possible or practical.
13. Code required elements, such as parapet walls and screen walls should
be treated as an integral part of the architecture and these elements
should not visually weaken the design.
14. All vents, gutters, downspouts, flashing, electrical conduits, etc., should
be painted to match the color of the adjacent surface, unless being used
expressly as a trim or accent element.
15. Soffits and other architectural elements visible to the public but not
detailed on the plans should be finished in a material compatible with
other exterior materials.
16. Material or color changes generally should occur at a change of plane.
Material or color changes at the outside corners of structures that give
the impression of "thinness" and artificiality of the material are
discouraged. Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in
material should be avoided.
17. Approved address numbers (by the Fire Department) should be
provided so that they are legible to the public from the street fronting
the property. Commercial address signs in the downtown areas should
be illuminated in a manner commensurate with lighting conditions.
B CHARTER C
C:113
C. Building materials.
The following building materials may be used and combined to create a
consistent, attractive, interesting and long-lasting building design:
D. Roof lines and materials.
E. Building equipment and services.
1. Brick. Painted brick is not recommended, as it tends to chip easily.
2. Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, fieldstone, granite,
limestone and marble are recommended materials. Terra Cotta and/or
cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted
stone is strongly discouraged.
3. Split-face Block/Concrete Masonry Unit (CMU) on side and rear
elevations.
4. Natural wood and/or cement-based artificial wood siding.
5. Glass.
6. Painted concrete block.
7. Non-decorative cinder block should be limited to walls not visible from
a public street.
1. Sloped roofs are highly preferred. Gabled and hipped roofs should
have a slope of greater than 4/12 (18°) but less than 14/12 (49°).
2. Gambrel roofs are also appropriate.
3. Mansard roofs are acceptable provided that the vertical rise is
appropriate for the building size. A widow's walk or parapet element
enhances such roofs.
4. Standing seam, cooper roofing, cedar and asphalt shingles are
preferred. Roofing materials that imitate another material are generally
discouraged. Metal roofs that face the street are discouraged, unless
architecturally blended with the facade.
5. Flat roofs are strongly discouraged. Where used, they should have a
parapet wall at the facade and [with cornice elements larger than three
percent (3%), but less than ten percent (10%) of the total building
height looks best].
1. Access for service vehicles, trash collection and storage areas should be
located on interior service drives or alleys where they exist or are
planned. When no such access exists, the access should be provided on
the street with the least traffic volume, with sensitivity to adjacent
residential areas.
C PORTSMOUTH CODE E
C:114
F. Guidelines for auto dealerships, auto repair, construction and
other establishments having significant outdoor equipment or
inventory.
2. When feasible in larger commercial developments, service and loading
areas should be separated from main circulation and parking areas and
away from public streets. Loading and unloading activities may not
interfere with circulation on public streets.
3. Building equipment should be located, designed, and/or screened to
minimize visual impact on public streets, large surface parking fields,
and neighboring properties.
4. Trash containers and outdoor storage areas should be screened from
public streets, pedestrian areas, and neighboring properties. The
screen for the trash containers should be designed to be compatible
with the architectural character of the development. It should be
constructed of durable materials similar to those of the building and
should have solid (opaque) walls and doors.
5. Utility meters should be located in screened areas, or away from public
view.
(SECTIONS F, G, H, AND I BELOW ARE GUIDELINES FOR
SPECIFIC TYPES OF USES. THEY ARE IN ADDITION TO, NOT
A REPLACEMENT FOR, THE OTHER SECTIONS OF THESE
GUIDELINES.)
1. Special attention should be directed toward the site landscaping which
is visible from the street. Trees to provide both shade and visual relief
should be located within the site as well as on the site perimeter. The
vehicle display or storage parking areas may remain relatively open, if
balanced by substantial landscaping and tree planting on other visually
prominent areas of the site.
2. Landscaping, special paving treatments, setbacks, and building
orientation should be used to provide an attractive appearance from the
front property line.
3. The service area and service bays should be screened or sited so they
are not visible from the street.
4. Vehicles under repair should be kept either inside a structure or in an
area that is screened from the street.
5. Service areas should provide adequate queuing space that does not
impede vehicle circulation through the site or result in vehicles
stacking into the street.
6. Perimeter fencing, security fencing, or gateways should be constructed
of attractive materials that are compatible with the design and
E CHARTER F
C:115
G. Restaurant guidelines.
H. Service station guidelines.
materials used throughout the project. Razor wire or electric fencing is
not allowed and chain link fencing is strongly discouraged.
7. Night lighting and security lighting should be sensitively designed to
ensure that no off-site glare is directed to neighboring parcels and that
the overall intensity of the site lighting is not excessive. The use of
excessive nighttime security lighting is discouraged. Other security
measures should be considered instead.
1. A new free-standing restaurant building should be sited and designed to
be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood. If
the restaurant will occupy a pad within a shopping center, the building
should be designed to be consistent with the overall "theme." (See I,
Shopping Center Guidelines.)
2. Drive-through elements are generally discouraged. Where drivethrough
elements are required, they should be architecturally
integrated into the building, rather than appearing to be "stuck-on"
to the building. Drive through elements should not be located on the
street side and should be heavily screened from view. (See also Article
IX of the Zoning Ordinance.29)
3. The site design should accommodate logical and safe vehicle and
pedestrian circulation patterns through the site. Circulation should
allow for adequate length of queuing lines for drive through elements
which do not interfere with the on-site parking for patrons entering the
restaurant, nor result in traffic queuing into the street.
4. Free-standing restaurant buildings should be designed and detailed
consistently on all sides, including the rear and side elevations.
5. Outdoor seating areas, play equipment, and perimeter fencing should
be integrated with the main building architecture so it is compatible
and attractive.
6. Trash enclosures and other service spaces should be constructed of
materials and finishes which are consistent with the main restaurant
building.
7. Remodeling of existing structures for restaurant uses requires a review
of the entire site and circulation plan to ensure that the project is
updated to current design review standards of Portsmouth. This may
include recommendations to improve and/or expand the existing
landscaping, fencing, parking area or other site design issues.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
F PORTSMOUTH CODE H
C:116
1. Site development standards include: Maximizing landscaping along the
street frontage; width of curb cuts limited to that necessary for safe
access (including service vehicles); minimize size of canopy cover;
canopy cover should contain no signage; at least two (2) vehicle
stacking spaces behind the pumps closest to the entrance driveway.
(See also Zoning Ordinance Article IX.30)
2. The site design for projects located at street corners should provide
some structural or strong design element to anchor the corner. This can
be accomplished using a built element or with strong landscaping
features.
3. The on-site circulation pattern should include adequate driving space to
maneuver vehicles around cars parked at the pumps, with special
attention to the circulation of vehicles not involved in the purchase of
fuel.
4. The amount of unrelieved pavement or asphalt area on the site should
be limited through the use of landscaping, contrasting colors and
banding or pathways of alternate paver material.
5. Separate structures (canopy, carwash, cashiers booth, etc.) on the site
should have consistent architectural detail and design elements to
provide a cohesive project site.
6. Tall [over thirteen feet (13')] tank vents should be completely screened
or incorporated into the building architecture.
7. A car wash that is incorporated into the project should be well
integrated into the design. The car wash opening should be sited so that
it is not directly visible as the primary view from the street into the
project site.
8. All signs should have consistent character and design details (such as
trellis, brick, river stone, etc.) that reflect the design of the project. The
"amount of price" sign square footage required as the state regulated
minimum size does not count towards the signage calculation. For signs
larger than this minimum, the incremental square footage difference is
counted as part of the total allowable signage for the station.
9. Signs on the sides or top of pump-area canopies are strongly
discouraged.
10. Illumination should be concentrated on specific signage. Canopies
should not be illuminated. Light fixtures should be recessed into the
canopy and no glare should be visible from the fixture. Yard lights
should be oriented downward.
11. Dumpsters and service areas should have wall materials and building
styles that match those used for the station buildings.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
H CHARTER H
C:117
I. Shopping center guidelines.
12. The rooftop mechanical equipment screen should cover all rooftop
equipment, including any satellite or other telecommunication
equipment.
1. A unified architectural design should be incorporated into each
commercial center. The architectural design of freestanding pad
buildings should be consistent with the design of the remainder of the
shopping center. Where centers are to be updated, pad buildings should
be remodeled in conjunction with an upgrade of the entire shopping
center.
2. It is preferable that a significant portion of the total building area
should be located at or near the street perimeter in the Town Center
area, preferably on a corner location. Such siting, together with
substantial landscape treatment reinforces and strengthens the
streetscape and helps to screen off-street parking areas.
3. The appearance of a "sea of asphalt" parking lot in front of the center
should be avoided. Both perimeter and interior parking lot trees should
be provided for shade and visual relief in the parking area while
maintaining view corridors to the storefront areas. Liner buildings
along the street are strongly encouraged.
4. Shopping center sign programs should be established and enforced for
remodeling of the centers. Monument signs listing all tenant names
(tenant identification signs) should be avoided.
5. Remodeling or comprehensive upgrades for centers should address all
existing structures and not the only the new tenant space alone.
6. Truck delivery and circulation routes should be separated from
customer circulation. Delivery and service activities should access the
site from the least traveled street adjacent to the property.
7. All rooftop mechanical equipment, antennas, etc., should be screened
from view. Rooftop lighting is strongly discouraged.
8. Textured or colored paving materials are encouraged to identify
pedestrian circulation areas, especially within the parking lot.
9. Outdoor gathering areas and public eating areas are encouraged.
H PORTSMOUTH CODE I
C:118
VIII
Signage Design Guidelines
Reference is made to Zoning Ordinance Article IX, which primarily
regulates this subject, particularly for size, number and placement.31 The
following are additional guidelines. See also guidelines for specific types of
uses and developments.
A. Sign overview.
B. Sign types.
1. Quantity. See Zoning Ordinance, Article IX.
2. Size. See Zoning Ordinance, Article IX.
3. Height. See Zoning Ordinance, Article IX.
4. Design. All signs should be architecturally integrated with their
surroundings in terms of size, shape, color, texture, and lighting so that
they are complementary to the overall design of the building and are
not in visual competition with other signs in the area.
5. Compatibility. All signs should complement their surroundings
without competing with each other, should convey their message
clearly and legibly, should be vandal-proof and weather-resistant, and,
if illuminated, should not be overly bright for their surroundings. New
signs proposed for existing buildings should provide a compatible
appearance with the building signage of other tenants. With multiple
signs on a single building, an attempt should be made to bring in a
unifying element (such as size), even where no sign program exists.
6. Mounting. Signs that are replaced on masonry or stucco exteriors can
result in unattractive "patched" areas. These potential maintenance
problems should be addressed during the design phase of the project.
Signs on masonry surfaces should typically be anchored into the mortar
joints.
7. Businesses should not be "over-signed." Sign ordinance limitations will
be strictly enforced.
1. Individual type. Signs composed of individual letters are encouraged.
Back-lit (halo-lit, or reverse pan channel) letters are generally desirable
for logos and wider individual letters. Individual metal letters are often
the best choice for office identification signs.
2. Cabinet signs. Internally illuminated or non-illuminated cabinet signs
are generally not appropriate and are strongly discouraged. Signs that
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning, Art. IX, Sec. B.
A CHARTER B
C:119
C. Sign design and materials.
incorporate a mixture of media, such as a cabinet sign with a rim of
neon, are highly discouraged.
Freestanding signs on poles which have a top-heavy appearance are
discouraged; twin posts help reduce the top-heavy appearance.
3. Roof signs. The use of roof signs should be avoided, both for
appearance and structural integrity of the roof. Alternate locations
where the sign can be hung parallel to the storefront or facade should
be considered.
4. Monument signs. Freestanding monument signs are generally
discouraged, as they are oversized and emblematic of strip malls
nationwide. The freestanding sign should be a low height wherever site
conditions allow for visibility. Monument sign materials should reflect
the character of the use and the building the sign identifies.
5. Landscaping. Landscaping should be designed around the base of
freestanding and monument signs to integrate the sign with the ground
plane and screen out any low-level floodlights. Irrigation should be
designed so it does not damage the sign.
6. Skyline signs. Skyline signs placed on the upper portions of buildings
should be constructed of individual halo-lit letters if illumination is
desired.
7. Driveway directional signs. These should only be used for projects
where circulation is complex and traffic must proceed through the site
along a specific path for service. Where the layout of the parking lot and
driveways is obvious and clearly apparent to the driver entering from
the street, directional signage is not needed and is strongly
discouraged in order to prevent visual clutter.
8. Standards. Where traffic control signage is used it should conform to
the standards found in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD) and other such applicable codes.
1. Background. Dark colored backgrounds on signs are generally
encouraged. Stark white or extremely bright background colors such as
bright red, orange or yellow are strongly discouraged. Where the
design of the sign results in a large field of illuminated background, the
use of white or off-white as a background color should be avoided.
2. Raceways. Visible raceways and transformers for individual letters are
strongly discouraged. Sign installation details should indicate where
the transformer and other mechanical equipment will be located.
3. Supports. Exposed supports or guy wires to stabilize signs are strongly
discouraged.
B PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:120
D. Sign message/copy.
E. Sign lighting.
F. Sign programs.
4. Cabinet signs. For cabinet signs, the use of opaque backgrounds that
only allow illumination of the cutout letter or graphic area is
encouraged. This can be accomplished with a metal routed sign face
using Plexiglas behind (the preferred method) or with a vinyl-coated
Plexiglas. When designing a cabinet sign, an ample border around
letters should be maintained. Standard proportions should be 1/4
borders, letters and 1/4 borders.
5. Channel letters. When using reverse pan channel letters, avoid small
printing, as it does not read well at night. The color of the trim caps
should match the color of the letter face or the cabinet return.
6. Foam letters. The use of plastic foam letters is recommended only if
used eight feet zero inches (8'-0") or higher above ground level. Each
letter should be properly capped with Plexiglas. In addition, each letter
should be studded and glued to the wall to provide a more secure sign
connection.
7. Flat sheet signs. Flat sheet signs (such as plywood) are generally
discouraged. When employed, they should have a trimmed edge or
frame to improve the finished appearance of the sign.
1. Fit. Signage should be designed to fit properly into the sign location. In
some cases, the corporate identification and/or logo should be split into
two (2) or more lines to fit attractively into the space.
2. Font size. Small letters on the sign face, or used as part of the sign, do
not read well and are discouraged. Words on signs to be read from the
street should be legible from at least one hundred feet (100') away.
1. Illumination. Shining light on individual letter signs is discouraged for
both skyline signs and signs placed high on building walls. Business
signs in residential zones may not be directly illuminated. Indirect
lighting is encouraged.
2. Off-site glare. Arrange any external spot or flood lighting so that the
light source is screened from direct view by passers-by, and so that the
light is directed against the sign and does not shine into adjacent
property or blind motorists and pedestrians. Where individual letter
signs face nearby residential areas, a low level of brightness can be
maintained by using halo-lit letters.
3. Halo-lighting. Halo-lit or back-lit letters are highly encouraged for
both office and retail use. Such signs convey a subtle and attractive
appearance and are very legible under moderate ambient lighting
conditions. Face illumination letters may be appropriate for retail use.
C CHARTER F
C:121
1. Sign programs. New construction design should anticipate signage
and, where necessary, a sign program. New building design should
provide logical sign areas and dimension, allowing flexibility for new
users, as the building is re-tenanted over time. Designs that provide for
convenient and attractive replacement of signs are encouraged.
2. Complementarity. Sign programs should be designed to complement
the style, color and materials of the building. The best sign programs
are integrated so that they become a natural part of the building
facade.
3. Design. Sign programs that provide attractive combinations of type
styles and colors are encouraged. Within the sign program, the
background color, type style and print color of the sign should be
consistent. However, the use of a logo that provides identification for
the business can be used to bring distinction to the business within the
framework established by the sign program.
F PORTSMOUTH CODE F
C:122
Chapter 155
EARTH REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development and subdivision
regulations — See Ch. 236.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
320.
§ 155-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The person charged by the Town with the
issuance of building permits.
EARTH REMOVAL — The extraction or removal of any sand, gravel, loam,
topsoil, clay or shale from deposits on any tract of land, excluding
extracting, removing, digging, mining or quarrying limestone, limerock or
granite, and excluding operations of a sand and gravel plant in operation
on and the immediately surrounding 20 acres of industrial zoned land upon
which the sand and gravel plant is located, and excluding also earth removal
involved in the process of grading land:
RESIDENTIAL USE — Any zone in which no use, save dwellings, including
multifamily dwellings, is permitted without first obtaining a variance,
exception or special exception from the Zoning Board of Review.
ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW — The Zoning Board of Review established by
the Town.
§ 155-2. Residential use area regulations.
Upon any land located within a residential use area as herein defined or
within 50 feet of such residential district:
For the construction of a building for which a building permit has been
issued;
A.
B. For the construction of a roadway; or
For a subdivision in accordance with a plat, plan or plans approved by
the Planning Board of the Town.
C.
A. Time when removal prohibited. Earth removal operations shall not be
conducted during the period from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or Saturday, nor shall such
operations be conducted on any Sunday or legal holiday. Earth removal
operations during the within prohibited times or days may be
authorized by special exception issued by the Building Inspector.
F CHARTER § 155-2
C:123
§ 155-3. Regulations for areas other than residential.
Within any district or area other than a residential use district:
§ 155-4. License required; fee.
Earth removal shall not be conducted without a license for such removal
having first been issued by the Building Inspector and the payment of a
license fee of $25.
§ 155-5. License application.
As a condition precedent to the issuance of a license, an application for
such license shall be made to the Building Inspector. Such application shall
contain:
B. Setbacks. No earth removal shall be conducted within a distance of the
greater of 25 feet of the boundary of any tract of land adjacent to
residential use property or within 50 feet of any dwelling.
C. Fencing. The boundary of any tract of land upon which earth removal is
being conducted adjacent to developed residential property shall be
fenced. Such fencing shall be five feet in height and of such
construction as to effectively control access to the area in which such
earth removal is being conducted.
D. Dust control. Calcium chloride or oil shall be applied to all non-hardsurfaced
roads used for vehicular ingress or egress to any tract of land
upon which earth removal is conducted and to the regularly traveled
roads within any such tract of land. Such applications shall be made at
intervals and in amounts sufficient to prevent observable dust from
rising from the road surface.
E. Drainage. Upon any tract of land upon which earth removal is being
conducted, adequate drainage shall be provided to prevent the
permanent collection and stagnation of surface or underground waters
and the flooding or erosion of surrounding property.
A. Dust control. Calcium chloride or oil shall be applied to all non-hardsurfaced
roads used for vehicular ingress or egress to any tract of land
upon which earth removal is conducted and to the regularly traveled
roads within any such tract of land.
B. Drainage. When earth removal operations cease, all slopes on any tract
of land upon which earth removal has been conducted shall remain at
the natural angle of repose, so that stagnant water will not permanently
collect and such tract will not be subject to erosion by wind or water.
A. A plan prepared by a registered engineer setting forth the existing
contours of the portion of the tract of land upon which earth removal is
to be conducted and, based upon classifications of preliminary samples
of the material to be removed, the final contours of such portion of the
§ 155-2 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 155-5
C:124
§ 155-6. Issuance of license.
Upon the submission of a license application which meets the requirements
of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall consider such application and,
upon his approval thereof and the payment of a fee of $25, shall issue a
license for earth removal on the portion of the tract of land specified in
such approved application. Such approval by the Building Inspector shall
be based upon his finding that the application as presented is in proper
order and that adherence to the required plan contained therein will, upon
completion of earth removal operations on such portion of the tract of land,
provide the following:
§ 155-7. License revocation.
The Zoning Board of Review, upon petition or on its own motion, may revoke
any license issued under this chapter for violation of any of the provisions
hereof. Prior to any action of the Zoning Board of Review, it shall hold a
hearing thereon and give the licensee seven days' notice of such hearing.
§ 155-8. Revision of approved plans.
A licensee under this chapter may apply for the revision of the plan
contained in an approved application. Such application for revision shall
be limited in scope to the area of land covered in the previously approved
application, shall meet the requirements of an original plan as specified in
this chapter, shall contain a statement indicating the applicant's reason for
tract of land upon completion of earth removal operations and the
type of ground cover to be planted or applied upon completion of
earth removal operations to effectively control wind and water erosion,
provided that, if suitable fertile ground cover existed at the beginning
of earth removal, then such plan shall show that enough of such ground
cover is to be held in reserve and reapplied for a minimum thickness of
three inches.
B. The opinion by a registered engineer that, upon completion of earth
removal operations, all slopes on such portion of the tract as set forth in
said plan shall remain at the natural angle of repose.
C. The time, not to exceed three years, within which earth removal shall
cease and such plan is complied with.
D. A bond not to exceed $100 for each acre of such portion of the tract of
land to insure compliance with the plan as filed.
A. That all slopes shall remain at the natural angle of repose.
B. That such portion of such tract will not permanently collect stagnant
water.
C. Ground cover of a type and thickness sufficient to effectively control
wind and water erosion shall be provided.
§ 155-5 CHARTER § 155-8
C:125
seeking a revision, and shall specify the time within which earth removal
shall cease and the revised plan be complied with. Such time shall not
exceed the then-expired portion of the time specified therefor in the original
approved application. Such revised plan may be approved by the Building
Inspector upon his finding that such plan meets the requirements of § 155-6
for the approval of an original application and that the revision is not sought
to alleviate a hardship created by the licensee's failure to conduct earth
removal operations in such a way as to reasonably anticipate the needs of,
and provide for the implementation of, the plan contained in the original
application.
§ 155-9. Notice of license issuance or approval of revised plan.
Notice of the issuance of a license or the approval of a revised plan under
an issued license shall be given by publication of notice to that effect
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, which notice shall be
published within seven days of such issuance or approval.
§ 155-10. Failure to complete plan; costs.
If a licensee under this chapter shall fail to complete the plan contained in
the approved application within the time specified therein, then, in addition
to action against the licensee's bond, the Director of Public Works, after 30
days' written notice to the licensee, is authorized to undertake and complete
the plan. In the event of such undertaking by the Director of Public Works,
the owner of the land specified in such application shall reimburse the Town
for its necessary expenses in connection therewith, and such expenses shall
constitute a lien upon the entire tract of land of which any portion has been
specified in an approved application.
§ 155-11. Restraining orders.
Suit may be brought in the Superior Court in the name of the Town to
restrict any violations of, or compel compliance with, the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 155-12. Hardship exceptions.
Upon special application and after a showing that the literal enforcement of
this chapter will work a hardship, the Zoning Board of Review may grant an
exception to any terms of this chapter upon a finding that such exception
will not result in a substantial depreciation of surrounding property.
§ 155-13. Appeals.
Appeals from the decisions of the Building Inspector to the Zoning Board of
Review shall be taken within 20 days after publication of the notice of such
decision as provided in § 155-9 hereof. Such appeals shall be taken in the
same manner as other appeals to the Zoning Board, and the procedure as
to notice and hearings shall be the same insofar as consistent herewith.
§ 155-8 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 155-14
C:126
§ 155-14. Applicability; effect on existing projects.
Chapter 170
FEES
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to earth removal being
conducted on October 29, 1973, until 60 days thereafter, except that
application for a license may be made and license issued as provided by
this chapter during such sixty-day period following the effective date
hereof, provided that the plan required in such application need not set
forth existing contours for that portion of the tract of land on which
earth removal has been completed on the effective date hereof.
B. Real property acquired or leased for the purpose of earth removal and
held for such purpose on October 29, 1973, shall be considered in use
for earth removal, whether or not extraction has then actually
commenced. To qualify under this subsection, the following conditions
shall be considered as conclusive evidence that such real property was
acquired or leased and held for the purpose of later mineral extraction:
(1) Such real property was acquired or leased prior to July 1, 1973;
(2) Such real property was acquired or leased by an individual,
corporate or otherwise, engaged at the time of acquisition in the
business of mineral extraction;
(3) Such real property, or the substantial portion of such property, has
not been permanently developed for any residential, commercial
(other than farm or agricultural) or industrial purpose;
(4) Such real property contains mineral deposits of a demonstrable
economic value; and
(5) On or before December 31, 1973, the owner or lessee of such tract
of land shall file in the office of the Town Clerk a statement setting
forth his intention to engage in earth removal on such tract of land
and describing such tract.
C. The provisions of Subsection B of this section shall not apply to any
tract of land for which the statement of intention provided for in
Subsection B(5) of this section is not filed as provided therein, and any
such tract of land shall not be considered as acquired, leased or held for
the purpose of earth removal.
§ 155-14 CHARTER § 155-14
C:127

ARTICLE I
Recording Fees
[Adopted 5-11-1981 by Ord. No. 81-3; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 170-1. Fees established.
Recording fees shall be in accordance with R.I.G.L. §§ 34-13-7 and 34-13-9.
§ 170-1 CHARTER § 170-1
C:129

ARTICLE II
Setting of Fees
[Adopted 6-9-1986 by Ord. No. 86-6-9]
§ 170-2. Fees set by Council.
Except in cases where fees are set by state law, the Town and its various
departments and agencies shall charge such fees which the Town Council
may, from time to time, set.
§ 170-3. Annual review.
Fees will be reviewed on an annual basis.
§ 170-2 CHARTER § 170-3
C:131

ARTICLE III
Board of Review Fees
[Adopted 6-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-6-23; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 170-4. Fees established.
The following fee schedule is adopted for the Board of Review: for singlefamily
resident and duplex: $25; for all other: $225, which includes three
hearings and a fee of $100 for every additional hearing, all payable in
advance.
§ 170-4 CHARTER § 170-4
C:133

ARTICLE IV
Itinerant Vendor License Fee
[Adopted 1-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-1-27B; amended in its entirety
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 170-5. Fees established.
Itinerant vendor license fees shall be in accordance with R.I.G.L. §§ 5-15-1
to 5-15-16.
§ 170-5 CHARTER § 170-5
C:135

ARTICLE V
Board of Review Professional Services
[Adopted 4-11-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4-11]
§ 170-6. Findings.
Increasing growth in the Town of Portsmouth necessitates that the Board
of Review has available to it the independent advice of knowledgeable
professionals to aid it in applying the zoning regulations toward the goal
of lessening congestion in the street; securing safety from fire, panic and
other dangers; promoting the public health and general welfare; providing
adequate light and air; preventing overcrowding of land; avoiding undue
concentration of population; and facilitating the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements; and in carrying out all other responsibilities imposed upon it
by law.
§ 170-7. Fees established.
In order to provide the necessary funds to meet the expenses of retaining
the services of such professionals, in addition to the filing fees imposed by
the Town of Portsmouth, the following fees shall also be imposed:
§ 170-8. Payment of fees.
Said fees shall be payable prior to the convening of the first hearing of the
local Board to consider such applications.
A. For each application for approval of an apartment, condominium,
cluster or townhouse complex in excess of two proposed units, a fee of
$100 per unit proposed.
B. For each application for a hotel, motel or inn, a fee of $150 per rental
unit proposed.
C. For each application for a nursing home, hospital, infirmary or
convalescent home, a fee of $100 per care bed; provided, however, that
if a nursing home or convalescent home shall include independent and/
or congregate care living units, there shall be an additional fee of $100
per unit proposed.
D. For each retail, consumer service, commercial or industrial complex for
which a special exception is required, pursuant to the provisions of the
Town Zoning Ordinance,32 a fee of $100 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor space.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 170-6 CHARTER § 170-8
C:137

ARTICLE VI
License Fees
[Adopted 10-23-1989 by Ord. No. 89-10-23A]
§ 170-9. Fees established.
Pursuant to an ordinance of the Town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island,
pertaining to fees, adopted June 9, 1986,33 by the Portsmouth Town Council:
Victualling license $50
Sunday sales license $50
Peddlers license $50 (each vehicle)
Amusement games license:
Application fee $50
Per game $75
33.Editor's Note: See Article II, Setting of Fees, of this chapter.
§ 170-9 CHARTER § 170-9
C:139

ARTICLE VII
Commercial Noncompacted Disposal Fees
[Adopted 8-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-8-27B]
§ 170-10. Fees established.
A. Trucks. [Amended 9-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-9-8]
(1) Trucks of 14 cubic yards or less.
Truck Description
Approximate Size
(cubic yards) Rate/Load
Small pickup 2 $6
Regular pickup 3 $13
Regular pickup with
sides
5 $21
Small dump truck 6 $25
Small dump truck with
sides
8 $34
Large dump truck
without sides
10 $42
Other trucks 14 $59
(2) For trucks in excess of 14 cubic yards, the cost shall be $4 per cubic
yard.
(3) These prices will not go into effect until November 1, 1991.
B. High-density material.
(1) Trucks with high-density material will pay a disposal fee at the rate
of two times the posted rate.
(2) "High-density material" is defined as asphalt roof shingles and/or
similar high-density waste as defined by the Town.
§ 170-10 CHARTER § 170-10
C:141

ARTICLE VIII
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Fees
[Adopted 6-27-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6-27; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 170-11. Fees established.
All site plan reviews done by the Building Official's office have a charge
attached of $50, with the exception of one-lot subdivisions, and there shall
be a surcharge if the site plan needs to be referred to the Rhode Island
Conservation District, and the fees shall be payable at the time of referral.
§ 170-11 CHARTER § 170-11
C:143

ARTICLE IX
Mooring Fees
[Adopted 4-10-1995 by Ord. No. 95-4-10B; amended in its entirety
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 170-12. Fees established.34
Mooring fees shall be as follows:
A. Resident mooring: no fees.
B. Nonresident mooring: $9 per foot (20 feet minimum).
C. Commercial mooring: $250 each.
D. Guest mooring: $50 each.
E. Late registration fee: $100.
34.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 215, Harbormaster Ordinance.
§ 170-12 CHARTER § 170-12
C:145

ARTICLE X
Impact Fees
[Adopted 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03-25]
§ 170-13. Impact fees authorized.
This article authorizes the establishment of an impact fee on land
development in Portsmouth for providing new and/or expanded public
facilities and infrastructure, including schools (and related facilities), within
Portsmouth which are necessitated by such new development.
§ 170-14. Findings; declaration of policy; intent.
A. In accordance with R.I.G.L. Title 45, Chapter 45-22.4, the Town Council
finds that an equitable program is needed for the planning and
financing of public facilities to serve new growth and development in
the Town of Portsmouth in order to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of this Town.
B. It is therefore the public policy of the Town and in the public interest to
assess, impose, levy and collect fees, defined herein as "impact fees,"
for certain new development within the Town's jurisdictional limits.
C. It is the intent of the Town Council by enactment of this article to:
(1) Ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new
growth and development;
(2) Ensure that new growth and development does not place an undue
financial burden upon existing taxpayers;
(3) Promote orderly growth and development by establishing uniform
standards to require that those who benefit from new growth and
development pay a proportionate fair share of the cost of new and/
or upgraded public facilities needed to serve that new growth and
development.
D. The Town is required by state statute to provide public educational
opportunities for all Portsmouth school-age pupils and school site
planning for new or expanded schools within the Town in order to
ensure that plans for the construction and opening of public
educational facilities are coordinated in time and place with plans for
residential development and other necessary services.
E. The Town of Portsmouth must expand its educational facilities in order
to maintain current levels of service if new development is to be
accommodated without decreasing current levels of service. This must
be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of current and future citizens.
F. The State of Rhode Island, through the enactment of the Rhode Island
Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation Act (R.I.G.L.
§ 170-13 CHARTER § 170-14
C:147
§ 170-15. Purpose.
§ 170-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words have the meanings stated in this
section:
CAPITAL COSTS OF EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES — Expenditures for the
acquisition of fixed assets or additions to fixed assets and expenditures for
site acquisition, construction, design, site development, necessary off-site
improvements, and capital equipment pertaining to such facilities.
§ 45-22.2-1 et seq.) and the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991 (R.I.G.L.
§ 45-24-27 et seq.), has sought to encourage Portsmouth to enact
innovative development regulations and techniques. Title 45, Chapter
45-22.4, enables the Town Council to adopt impact fee ordinances,
specifically R.I.G.L. § 45-22.4-8 thereof.35
G. The imposition of impact fees is one of the preferred methods of
ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of
capital facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This
must be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety,
and welfare.
H. Development of new housing units will place additional students in the
public schools of Portsmouth, necessitating the acquisition of school
sites, the expansion of existing educational facilities, and the
construction of new educational facilities.
I. The fees established by this article are derived from, based upon, and
do not exceed the costs of providing for such educational facilities
necessitated by new land developments for which the fees are levied.
Such costs are established by the latest available costs.
J. The report entitled "Town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island, Phase II Growth
Management — Needs Assessment for Impact Fee Schedule," dated
October 28, 2002, and amended March 25, 2003, sets forth a
reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the
impact of new development on the need for and costs of additional
school sites and educational facilities in Portsmouth or the school
district.
A. The fees established by this article are consistent with and are intended
to assist in the implementation of the Portsmouth Comprehensive Plan.
B. The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of
land so as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share
of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide public
educational sites and facilities, as mandated by the state.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 170-14 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 170-16
C:148
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM — That component of the Town's
budget or the regional school district's master plan that sets out the need
for public facility capital improvements for educational facilities, the costs
of the improvements, and proposed funding sources. A capital improvement
program must cover at least a five-year period and should be reviewed at
least every five years.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS — Improvements with a useful life of 10 years or
more, which increases or improves the service capacity of a public facility.
DEVELOPER — A person or legal entity undertaking development,
including any one person commencing a subdivision or land development
project which may reasonably be expected to place students in the public
schools, place additional burdens on the Town's educational facilities and
which requires the issuance of a building permit for one or more residential
buildings.
IMPACT FEE — The charge imposed upon new development by the Town
of Portsmouth to fund all or a portion of the public facility's capital
improvements affected by the new development from which it is collected.
INDEPENDENT FEE CALCULATION STUDY — The demographic and/or
educational impact documentation prepared by a fee payer to allow the
determination of the impact fee other than by the method established by
this article.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE — That portion of the cost of system
improvements which reasonably relates to the service demands and needs
of the project.
PUBLIC FACILITIES —
SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS WHICH MAY
REASONABLY BE EXPECTED TO PLACE STUDENTS IN THE PUBLIC
SCHOOLS — Any construction or installation of new residential buildings or
structures that will result in additional students in the public schools.
Roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals,
landscaping, and local components of state and federal highways;
A.
Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment, and disposal
facilities, flood-control facilities, bank and shore projections, and
enhancement improvements;
B.
C. Parks, open space areas, and recreation facilities;
D. Police, emergency medical, rescue, and fire-protection facilities;
Public schools, including those capital projects undertaken by the Town
or regional school district to accommodate existing and future
Portsmouth school-age pupils. Such facilities may be located within
Portsmouth or within any regional area; and
E.
Other public facilities consistent with a community's capital
improvement program.
F.
§ 170-16 CHARTER § 170-17
C:149
§ 170-17. Imposition of fee; payment; disputes.
§ 170-18. Calculation of fee.
A. Any person applying after the effective date of this article for a
residential building permit which includes a new dwelling unit,
conversion of a nonresidential use to residential use, or addition of
bedrooms to an existing housing unit is hereby required to pay a public
facilities impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article.
B. The requirement of funds for provision of school facilities shall be based
upon needs as established by the capital improvement program or
regional master plan for educational facilities and shall be consistent
with the policies stated therein. The Building Official is charged with
the administration of this article. The fee amount shall be based upon
the following: A fee schedule for educational facilities, per residential
dwelling unit, shall be established by the Town Council annually for the
fiscal year.
C. The fee payer is required to pay the fee as established annually by the
Town Council. If a fee payer disputes the impact fee determined as
described herein, then the fee payer may appeal the decision of the
Building Official to the Zoning Board of Review in accordance with
Article 14 of the Zoning Ordinance36 and may submit an independent
fee calculation study for the land development activity for which a
building permit is sought. The student generation and/or educational
impact documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the
independent fee calculation was made.
A. The impact fee for all educational facilities shall be based on the
following formula, as described in "Town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island,
Phase II Growth Management — Needs Assessment for Impact Fee
Schedule," dated October 28, 2002, as amended March 25, 2003, and
shall not exceed 75% of the calculated amount established by the
formula:
(1) The impact fee shall be a sliding scale per number of bedrooms.
The basic per-bedroom fee is calculated by multiplying the
estimated capital cost per student of new or expanded educational
facilities, net of state aid, times the average school enrollment per
bedroom in Portsmouth.
(2) The above calculations shall omit the first bedroom in each unit.
The impact fee imposed on individual buildings shall be the number
of bedrooms, up to four total bedrooms, multiplied by 75% of the
result of this formula.
B. The number of bedrooms applied to the above formula shall be the
number of bedrooms in the septic system design approved by the Rhode
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 170-17 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 170-18
C:150
§ 170-19. Payment of fee.
The fee payer shall be assessed the educational facilities impact fee
required by this article upon application for a building permit to the
Building Official, which shall be collected in full prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
§ 170-20. Capital Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund.
§ 170-21. Use of funds.
Island Department of Environmental Management. The Building
Inspector may revise such number for the purposes of § 170-24E of this
article only.
C. The impact fee shall be recalculated on March 1 of each year, based on
updated figures, as available, and shall take effect on July 1 of each
year.
A. There is hereby established a separate Capital Facilities Impact Fee
Trust Fund to be administered by the Town Treasurer. All funds
collected shall be properly identified and promptly deposited in a
special proprietary fund, which shall be invested in government-insured
or government-backed instruments only, with all interest accruing to
the trust fund and used solely for the purposes specified in this article.
B. Within eight years of the date of collection, impact fees shall be
expended or encumbered for the construction of public facilities capital
improvements of reasonable benefit to the development paying the fees
and that are consistent with the capital improvement program. The
construction, expansion or renovation of new school facilities anywhere
in the Town or in any regional school district shall be deemed to be such
reasonable benefit.
C. Where the expenditure or encumbrance of fees is not feasible within
eight years, the Town may retain impact fees for a longer period of time
if there are compelling reasons for the longer period. In no case shall
impact fees be retained longer than 12 years.
D. Funds withdrawn from this account must be used in accordance with
the provisions of § 170-21 of this article.
A. Funds collected from capital facilities impact fees and deposited in the
Capital Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund by the Town Treasurer are for
the purpose of constructing educational facilities for the Town of
Portsmouth. Such funds shall be spent solely to acquire, construct,
expand, and equip the educational sites and educational capital
facilities necessitated by new development.
B. Funds may be used to make refunds required by § 170-23 of this article.
§ 170-18 CHARTER § 170-22
C:151
§ 170-22. Vested rights.
Pursuant to Section 12 of the Zoning Ordinance,37 any application for a
building permit that has been submitted and has been deemed complete
prior to the adoption of this article shall have vested rights to proceed with
the application and receive a building permit or certificate of occupancy
without requiring the payment of an impact fee.
§ 170-23. Refunds.
§ 170-24. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee. Any claim
of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a
building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
A. Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar
quarter immediately following eight years, or 12 years if § 170-20C of
this article applies, from the date the capital facilities impact fee was
paid shall be refunded to the current owner of record for the assessor's
plat and lot for which the fee was paid. The refund shall include interest
on the original fee amount, equal only to the actual interest that the
Town Treasurer may have accrued through an investment account or
similar interest-bearing account.
B. The Town shall notify the said current owner of record by certified
letter, return receipt requested, that a refund of impact fees are due for
the reasons provided in Subsection A. Said current owner of record may
respond and submit an application for a refund to the Building Official
within one year from the date of receipt of the Town's notice. Failure to
respond within the specified time period shall indicate a waiver for such
refund.
C. If the Town Council were to act to terminate any or all impact fee
requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds shall be
refunded as provided above. Upon the finding that any or all fee
requirements are to be terminated, the Town shall place a notice of
termination and availability of refunds in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Town of Portsmouth at least two times. All funds
available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end
of one year, any remaining funds may be transferred to the general fund
and used for any public purpose. The Town is released from this notice
requirement if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances
within a fund or funds being terminated.
A. Impact fees shall not be imposed for remodeling, rehabilitation, or
other improvements to an existing structure where the use is not
changed.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 170-22 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 170-24
C:152
B. Impact fees shall not be imposed for the construction of accessory
buildings or structures that will not add a dwelling unit.
C. Impact fees shall not be imposed for rebuilding a damaged structure,
including the replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building
or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use.
D. Impact fees shall not be imposed on nonresidential buildings and
structures.
E. Zero- and one-bedroom housing units.
F. One new housing unit on any vacant lot of record in existence as of
December 31, 2002, per the Tax Assessor's certified tax roll of that date
and in a residential zone per the Zoning Ordinance38 in effect as of that
date shall be exempt. Lots that have been subject to administrative
subdivision that enlarged the lot (other than merging two or more lots)
after the effective date of this article shall not be exempt under this
provision.
G. Vested rights. An application to construct a dwelling is not subject to
this article if allowed pursuant to vested rights provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance (Article XV, Section F).39
H. Elderly housing. Dwellings which would contribute to meeting the yearround
housing needs of elderly and disabled citizens through
enforceable restrictions limiting occupancy to households whose
members are 62 years of age or older.
I. Retired adult communities. Planned developments for retired citizens,
with amenities, established through publicly enforceable restrictions
limiting occupancy to residents whose members are 55 years of age or
older.
J. Multifamily dwellings. Multifamily dwellings having zero-bedroom
(studio) or one-bedroom units and which do not exceed a total of 800
square feet of floor area per dwelling unit.
K. Accessory family dwelling unit, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance.40
L. Community residence. Any community residence as defined by R.I.G.L.
§ 45-24-31.
M. Hog Island. Any buildings on Hog Island are exempt from this article.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 170-24 CHARTER § 170-25
C:153
§ 170-25. Conflicting provisions.41
Fees set forth in Chapter 170, Fees, may appear elsewhere in the Town
ordinances. In such cases, the higher fee shall be the fee to be utilized.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 170-25 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 170-25
C:154
ARTICLE XI
Fire Department Plan Review Fees
[Adopted 10-9-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10-09]
§ 170-26. Requests for plan review.
Every request for plan review for one-, two-, or three-family dwellings by
the Portsmouth Fire Department shall be accompanied by a complete set of
building plans, a completed building plan review form, and the appropriate
plan review fee as outlined in § 170-27 of this article.
§ 170-27. Fees established; exemptions.
§ 170-28. Use of fees.
All such fees collected by the Portsmouth Fire Department for plan reviews
in accordance with § 170-27 shall be deposited into a restricted account to
be used to support the operations of the Fire Prevention Office.
A. Plan review fees shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family home: $75.
(2) Two-family home: $125.
(3) Three-family home: $175.
B. Town-owned buildings are exempt from the fee requirements of this
article.
C. The Town Council may waive all or part of the fee requirements of this
article to any nonprofit organization that is in accordance with the
Rhode Island Nonprofit Corporation Act, Chapter 7-6 of the Rhode
Island General Laws.
§ 170-26 CHARTER § 170-28
C:155

ARTICLE XII
Hazardous Materials Response Fees
[Adopted 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11-23]
§ 170-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material that, because of its quality,
concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant
present or potential hazard to human health or safety or to the environment
if released into a workplace or the environment. Hazardous materials
include, but are not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, medical
waste, flammable solids, solid poisons, oxidizing or corrosive materials,
cryogenic materials, compressed gases, any substance that is classified by
the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) as a flammable liquid, a
Class II combustible liquid, or a Class III-A combustible liquid, and any
material which the Fire Chief has a reasonable basis for believing that it
would be injurious to the health and safety of persons or harmful to the
environment if released into a workplace or the environment. Hazardous
materials also include a waste or combination of wastes which, because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
characteristics, may either cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase
in mortality or an increase of serious or potential hazard to human health or
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of,
or otherwise managed.
§ 170-30. Fees established. [Amended 10-15-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-10-15 B]
The Fire Chief is authorized to assess fees whenever the Fire Department
is caused to respond to any location to mitigate the effects of a hazardous
material spill, release, or other incident. Said fees are to be assessed as
follows:
A. Hazmat team response: $750.
B. Other personnel: contract hourly rate, plus 70%. Other personnelrelated
expenses: cost of medical evaluation and/or treatment of
personnel necessitated by exposure to hazardous material.
C. Equipment:
(1) First hour: flat rate of $600 for all apparatus, plus cost of materials.
Each additional hour: hourly rate as follows:
(a) Aerial device: $350.
(b) Ambulance: $300.
(c) Brush truck: $250.
§ 170-29 CHARTER § 170-30
C:157
§ 170-31. Exemptions.
Hazardous materials response fees will not be imposed for spills requiring
a response from the Fire Department that result in only a negligible cost to
the Town; for example, use of motor fuel only to respond and no additional
personnel costs.
§ 170-32. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the imposition of fees under this article may
appeal, in writing, the imposition of such fees to the Town Administrator.
Any person who does not receive a decision on such appeal within 60 days
of filing a written appeal with the Town Administrator or who is aggrieved
by the Town Administrator's decision may appeal to the Town Council.
§ 170-33. Use of fees. [Amended 10-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10-15
B]
All fees collected under this article shall be placed in a restricted account
within the Fire Department and utilized to offset costs associated with
equipment and training within the hazardous materials field.
(d) Command vehicle: $300.
(e) Engine company: $300.
(f) Tanker: $250.
(2) Replacement of any damaged equipment, including firefighter
turnout gear, damaged while at response, and any materials used
to recover and clean up the spill or release.
§ 170-30 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 170-33
C:158
Chapter 177
FIREARMS AND HUNTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 101. Peace and good order — See Ch. 268.
§ 170-33 CHARTER § 170-33
C:159

ARTICLE I
Discharge on Sundays
[Adopted 10-26-1936 by Ord. No. 54 (§ 15-12 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 177-1. Discharge prohibited.
No person shall use or discharge any rifle, pistol, musket, shotgun,
blunderbuss or fowling piece of any description, in the pursuit or hunting of
birds or animals in the Town, on Sunday.
§ 177-1 CHARTER § 177-1
C:161

ARTICLE II
Discharge of Firearms in Common Fence Point Area
[Adopted 11-14-1949 by Ord. No. 68 (§ 15-4 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 177-2. Discharge prohibited.
No person shall use or discharge any rifle, pistol, shotgun or fowling piece
of any description, nor pursue or hunt any bird or animal with the intent to
shoot such animal, etc., in that area of the Town lying north of the tracks of
the N.Y., N.H. and H. Railroad, and commonly known as the "Common Fence
Point Area."
§ 177-2 CHARTER § 177-2
C:163

ARTICLE III
Hunting and Use of Firearms
[Adopted 10-14-1969 by Ord. No. 99 (§§ 15-3, 15-5, 15-6 and 15-11
of the 1976 Code)]
§ 177-3. Hunting restricted. [Amended 12-8-1975; 12-8-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-12-8]
No person shall hunt, take or kill any wild bird or animal at any time within
the Town, provided that nothing herein contained shall prohibit an owner or
a tenant of land from hunting and killing wild birds or animals thereon and
persons who have the consent, in writing, of the owner or tenant, pursuant
to the fish and game laws of the state.
§ 177-4. Discharge near residences. [Added 9-10-1990 by Ord. No.
90-9-10]
§ 177-5. Permit required; fee. [Amended 5-14-1991 by Ord. No.
91-5-14C43]
No person shall hunt, take or kill any wild bird or animal at any time on
the land of another without a written permit from the owner or tenant
of said land countersigned by the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police,
or a Sergeant of the Police Department of the Town of Portsmouth, or by
police authority on Prudence Island, pursuant to the fish and game laws of
the State of Rhode Island. A processing fee of $10 shall be payable upon
issuance of the permit.
§ 177-6. Permit renewal and revocation.
All permits as required by § 177-5 must be renewed annually and may be
revoked for cause by parties issuing same.
A. Notwithstanding the fish and game laws of the State of Rhode Island, no
person, while hunting or pursuing wild birds or wild animals on the
mainland pursuant to this article, shall shoot or discharge any firearm
or other deadly weapon within 500 feet of any occupied dwelling,
house, residence or other building used in connection therewith
without the specific permission of the owner(s) or tenant(s) thereof.
B. In the event the fish and game laws of the State of Rhode Island are
changed to become more restrictive, then they shall take precedence
over this section.42
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 177-3 CHARTER § 177-7
C:165
§ 177-7. Use of certain firearms restricted.
The use of rifles, revolvers or pistols within the Town is prohibited, except
on ranges for rifle or pistol shooting that meet the requirements of the
Police Department.
§ 177-7 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 177-7
C:166
ARTICLE IV
Middletown/Portsmouth Boundary Area
[Adopted 10-10-1978]
§ 177-8. Prohibited hunting area; exclusions.
§ 177-9. Killing of certain animals permitted.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any person owning or
occupying any farm or orchard and any person in his employ, while on his
own premises or the premises of his employer, may kill any animal or bird
A. No person shall use or discharge any rifle, pistol, shotgun or fowling
piece of any description, nor pursue or hunt any bird or animal with the
intent to shoot such animal or bird, in that area of the Town lying within
the following boundaries:
Beginning at a point which said point is the intersection of the westerly
side of East Main Road, so called, and the Middletown/Portsmouth
Town boundary line;
THENCE running in a north-northeasterly direction along the westerly
side of said East Main Road, to the southerly side of Union Street, so
called, for a point for a corner, bounded easterly by the westerly side
of said East Main Road;
THENCE turning and running in a general westerly direction along the
southerly side of said Union Street to the easterly side of Jepson Lane,
so called, for a point for a corner, bounded northerly by the southerly
side of said Union Street;
THENCE turning and running in a general south-southeasterly
direction along the easterly side of said Jepson Lane to the
Middletown/Portsmouth Town boundary line for a point for a corner,
bounded westerly by the easterly side of said Jepson Lane;
THENCE turning and running in an east-southeasterly direction along
the Middletown/Portsmouth Town boundary line to the point or place
of beginning, bounded southerly by the Town of Middletown.44
B. The following described property shall be excluded from the provisions
of Subsection A of this section, and nothing herein contained shall
prohibit the owner or the tenant of the following described excluded
land or persons who have the consent in writing of the owner or tenant
of the following described excluded land from hunting or killing wild
birds or animals thereon pursuant to the fish and game laws of the
state. Excluded land: Portsmouth Tax Assessor's Map 61, Lot 1, as said
map and lot is presently described.
44.Editor's Note: Original Subsection B, pertaining to the intent to prohibit certain activities,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 177-8 CHARTER § 177-9
C:167
which is not otherwise prohibited by any other ordinance, state or federal
law, which shall be found destroying any crops, vegetables, or fruit trees
belonging to such person or his employer; provided, however, that no such
person shall shoot any such animal or bird unless he has obtained from the
Chief of the Portsmouth Police Department a permit so to do, and the Chief
of the Portsmouth Police Department may, upon application, issue to any
responsible owner, or his employees, a permit authorizing such person to
shoot any animal or bird which is not otherwise prohibited by any other
ordinance, state or federal law in accordance with the provisions of this
section. No such permit shall be issued until such time as the Chief of Police
of the Portsmouth Police Department shall determine that actual damage
has been done or will be done to any crops, vegetables or fruit trees by
any such animals or birds. When such a permit is issued, it shall expire 60
calendar days after the date of issuance.
§ 177-9 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 177-9
C:168
ARTICLE V
Pistol, Rifle and Shotgun Ranges
[Adopted 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 89-4-10]
§ 177-10. Location restrictions.
Every pistol or shotgun range shall be a minimum distance of 500 feet
from the nearest residence and 1,000 feet from the nearest residence
behind the backdrop where the bullets or projectiles are aimed. In the
event residences are within said distances, no license shall issue absent
the written consent of the landowner (and tenant, if any) of the residence,
together with evidence of ownership of the land, which will include a
statement from the Tax Assessor's office supplied by the owner of the
land. The above distances shall be increased to 1,000 feet and 2,000 feet,
respectively, for rifle ranges.
§ 177-11. Issuance of license to owners.
Range licenses shall be issued to the owner of the land on which the range
is located.
§ 177-12. Designation of type of range.
A range is to be designated as either a rifle, pistol or shotgun range on the
license and shall be limited to the specific designation.
§ 177-13. Hours and days of operation.
Hours of operation are to be set by the Town Council in the issuance of the
license. There is no shooting on Sundays.
§ 177-14. Fencing.
The area surrounding a range is to be fenced in a six-foot-high (minimum)
chain-link fence to keep out persons who may stray or wander into the area.
The fence openings are to be locked when in use.
§ 177-15. Backdrop.
The backdrop of the pistol or rifle range is to consist of a revetment
structure to enclose sand material to stop and deflect bullets safely.
§ 177-16. Inspection.
The Chief of Police or his representative is to inspect and approve each
range as to compliance with these requirements.
§ 177-10 CHARTER § 177-17
C:169
§ 177-17. Approval by NRA or equivalent association.
Approval is to be given by a representative of the National Rifle Association
or equivalent association which approves ranges and certifies them safe for
insurance purposes.
§ 177-18. Insurance.
Certificates of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 are to be issued by a
Rhode Island licensed insurance company insuring specifically the range on
the premises, to be forwarded to the Town of Portsmouth on request.
§ 177-19. License renewal; fee.
Licenses are to be renewed annually to ascertain the encroaching of any
new residences and for reinspection and certification. The license fee
initially and for each renewal is $50 per year for a private homeowner range
and $100 for any commercial range.
§ 177-20. Notification of abutters.
All abutters are to be personally notified by written notice and by
publication. "Abutters" shall include all landowners within 500 feet of the
range and 1,000 feet behind the range backdrop.
§ 177-21. Range officer required.
Each range license application is to include a range officer or responsible
person. A licensed range will include a range officer, who will be in charge
of the range at all times, said person to have, at minimum, completed a
weapon safety course issued by the State of Rhode Island.
§ 177-17 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 177-21
C:170
Chapter 183
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 124.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 189.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 339.
§ 183-1. Notification of location and installation.
Whenever fire hydrants are to be placed upon or along any accepted street
or thoroughfare or any street or thoroughfare for which Town acceptance
may be sought at any future date, the person installing or causing such
hydrant to be installed shall first notify the Town Council in writing of the
fact and shall set forth the locations, types and mode of installation, and
such notification shall include a plan showing such locations, etc.
§ 183-2. Supervision of installation by Fire Department.
Upon Town Council approval, such locations and installations shall be made
at the direction and under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire
Department at any given time or his duly appointed agent.
§ 183-3. Conformity to standardized equipment of Town.
The location, type and installation of fire hydrants shall be made in
conformity with the standard equipment utilized by the Town.
Chapter 189
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 83.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 183.
Motor vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 250.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 339.
§ 189-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING SIZE — Refers to the building footprint or area of the lot that
the building covers.
§ 177-21 CHARTER § 189-1
C:171
FIRE LANE — A road, path or other passageway developed to allow the
passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane will be a minimum of 20 feet in width,
with the road edge closest to the building at least 10 feet from the building.
Fire lanes shall be constructed of a hard, all-weather surface, adequately
designed to support at least 75,000 pounds and capable of being maintained
in all weather conditions. Grid-type systems and compacted gravel are not
permitted.
§ 189-2. Power to designate fire lanes.
Fire lanes shall be designated by the Chief of the Portsmouth Fire
Department or his/her designee. The owner of any property on which a fire
lane has been so designated shall be required to create the required fire
lane within such time as shall be set in notice to the owner by the Fire Chief
or his/her designee.
§ 189-3. Fire lane requirements.
§ 189-4. Parking and obstructions prohibited.
No parking shall be allowed within the boundaries of any fire lane or
within 20 feet of emergency access points to buildings or sprinkler or
standpipe connections. All fire lanes, emergency access points to buildings,
sprinkler connections and standpipe connections shall be kept clear and
unobstructed at all times.
§ 189-5. Fire hydrants.
All fire hydrants shall be kept clear and visible at all times. No parking
shall be allowed within 10 feet of any fire hydrant. No vegetation, fences, or
other obstructions shall be planted or constructed in front of any hydrant,
extending 10 feet on either side of the hydrant, and within three feet,
extending vertically, of the sides and back of any hydrant. The water
authority having jurisdiction of the hydrant and the Town of Portsmouth
A. All new and existing commercial buildings greater than 5,000 square
feet in size located within the Town of Portsmouth shall be accessible on
at least two sides by the use of fire lanes.
B. All new and existing commercial buildings greater than 10,000 square
feet in size located within the Town of Portsmouth shall be accessible on
at least three sides by the use of fire lanes.
C. All new and existing commercial buildings greater than 20,000 square
feet in size located within the Town of Portsmouth shall be accessible on
all four sides by the use of fire lanes.
D. At least one required fire lane shall lead directly to the emergency
access point of the building as determined by the Chief of the Fire
Department, and at least one fire lane shall lead to the sprinkler or
standpipe connection if the building is so equipped.
§ 189-1 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 189-5
C:172
are authorized to remove any and all obstructions, at the property owner's
expense, that are in violation of this section.
§ 189-6. Posting of fire lanes.
All fire lanes, emergency access points to buildings, and access to sprinkler
and standpipe connections shall be clearly marked and posted with the
words FIRE LANE — NO PARKING — TOW AWAY ZONE. These markings
will consist of painted lines and wording directly on the surface of the fire
lane and shall be clearly distinguishable from other markings. Letters are
to be at least six inches in height and uniform in height and width. Signs
reading FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION — NO PARKING — TOW AWAY
ZONE shall be posted above all Fire Department connections. Letters are to
be at least three inches in height and uniform in height and width.
§ 189-7. Variances.
The Chief of the Fire Department may authorize, upon application, in
specific cases of hardship, variances in the application of the terms of this
chapter. In case of such application, the Chief shall give a written decision
to the applicant. The applicant shall have 10 days from the date of that
decision to appeal the Chief's decision to the Town Council.
§ 189-8. Violations and penalties; removal of vehicles in violation.
Chapter 206
GARAGES AND GASOLINE STATIONS
A. The owner of any building who fails or refuses to comply with the
requirements of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $100, to be recovered to the use of the Town, and each day any
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any motor vehicle or other property which obstructs any fire lane,
emergency access to a building, a sprinkler or standpipe connection, or
any fire hydrant shall be immediately moved or towed away at the
expense of the owner of the vehicle or other property causing the
obstruction. Removal may be made by the owner of the building, the
Chief of the Fire Department or the Portsmouth Police Department.
§ 189-5 CHARTER § 189-8
C:173

ARTICLE I
Permit Requirements
[Adopted 3-1-1956 by Ord. No. 82 (Ch. 9 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 206-1. Permit required.
No person shall construct, erect, maintain or conduct within the Town any
public garage or any gasoline filling station or gasoline tank for selling
gasoline, unless he/she shall first obtain from the Town Council a written
permit for that purpose.
§ 206-2. Application requirements.
Whenever any person wishes to construct, erect, maintain or conduct any
public garage or gasoline filling station or gasoline tank for selling gasoline,
he/she shall file with the Town Clerk a written application setting forth the
business to be conducted, the person who is to conduct such business, the
name of the owner of the premises, the location thereof, a general plan
or description of the building or structure to be erected or used and the
relative location of underground storage facilities.
§ 206-3. Hearing.
The Town Council, at its next meeting, shall continue the matter for hearing
until it has been advertised in conformity with provisions set forth in
§ 206-4. At such hearing, all persons interested in such application may be
heard on the question of granting or denying such application.
§ 206-4. Notice requirements.
The Town Clerk shall give notice of the pendency of the application required
by § 206-2 and of the time and place of the hearing required by § 206-3
by publishing notice thereof in a public newspaper published in the county
once a week for two successive weeks prior to the date of such hearing.
§ 206-5. Compliance with building requirements; time for
commencement of work.45
When the application for a permit to construct, erect, maintain or conduct
a public garage or any gasoline filling station or gasoline tank for selling
gasoline is approved, erection of the necessary buildings shall be conducted
pursuant to all conditions set forth in the State Building Code, R.I.G.L.
§ 23-27.3-100.0 et seq., and the installation of storage facilities as indicated
in plans accompanying the application for such permit and the operation
of such public garage, gasoline station or tank for selling gasoline shall be
commenced within six months from the date of the issuance of such permit.
If such operations are not commenced within the six-month period of time,
the permit shall be void, unless extended by the Town Council.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 206-1 CHARTER § 206-5
C:175

ARTICLE II
Self-Service Stations
[Adopted 2-23-1976 by Ord. No. 113]
§ 206-6. Rules and regulations.
"Self-service stations," as used in this section, are defined as that portion of
property where flammable and combustible liquids used as motor fuel are
stored and subsequently dispensed from fixed equipment into the fuel tanks
of motor vehicles by persons other than service station attendants and shall
include any facilities available for the sale of other retail products, and the
operation of such stations shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. Self-service dispensers: a remote-controlled dispensing device
approved by the authority having jurisdiction. The coin and/or the
operated type are not acceptable.
B. Attendant required. All self-service stations shall have at least one
qualified attendant on duty while the station is open to the public.
During the time that liquids are actually being dispensed, the
attendant's sole function shall be to supervise, observe and control the
dispensing of said liquids. It shall be the responsibility of the attendant
to prevent the dispensing of gasoline into portable containers, unless
the container is constructed of metal or approved plastic, or is approved
by the authority having jurisdiction, has a tight closure with a screwed
or spring cover, and is fitted with a spout or so designed that the
contents can be poured without spilling. It shall also be the
responsibility of the attendant to control sources of ignition and to
immediately handle accidental spills and fire extinguishers, if needed.
The attendant or supervisor on duty shall be capable of performing the
functions and assuming the responsibilities covered in this section.
C. Attendant's control and supervision. At self-service stations, the
attendant shall be required to remain within arm's length of the remotecontrolled
console at all times while the gasoline is being dispensed. A
post-payment operation is advocated to insure the attendant's
compliance with the foregoing provision.
D. Emergency controls.
(1) Power shutoff switch; fire extinguisher system.
(a) A main power shutoff switch or switches shall be installed at a
location not more than 15 feet from the attendant's principal
control location and not more than 100 feet from the
dispensers.
(b) A fixed fire extinguisher system suitable for the
extinguishment of Class B (flammable liquid) fires, acceptable
to the authority having jurisdiction, and covering the entire
gasoline dispensing area shall be installed at each self-service
§ 206-6 CHARTER § 206-6
C:177
station. Said system shall be capable of being activated either
manually or automatically; however, if it is to be activated
manually, the triggering device shall not be more than 15
feet from the attendant's principal control location and not
more than 100 feet from the dispensers. Activating of the
extinguishing system shall automatically cut off power to pump
dispensing devices.
(2) As referred to above, "the entire gasoline dispensing area" is
construed to mean that area encompassing the self-service island.
If, however, an adjacent attended island (normally serviced by a
regular attendant dispensing motor fuel) is in too close proximity to
the self-service island in the opinion of the authority having
jurisdiction, then a fixed fire protection system may be required
there also.
E. Operation instructions. Instructions for the operation of the dispensers
shall be conspicuously posted on either the dispenser or the dispenser
island.
F. Emergency procedures. A list of emergency procedures and
instructions shall be conspicuously posted at the immediate vicinity of
the attendant's principal control location.
G. Clear observation. The dispensing operation shall at all times be in
clear view of the attendant, and the placing or allowing of any obstacle
to come between the dispensing operation and the attendant so as to
obstruct the attendant's view is prohibited.
H. Delivery nozzles. Hose nozzle valves used at self-service islands shall be
approved automatic-closing-type without a latch-open device.
I. Voice communication control. A voice communication system, such as,
but not limited to, an intercom system, so as to allow direct voice
communication at all times between the person dispensing the fuel and
the attendant, shall be required.
J. Warning sign. On each and every dispenser island shall be
conspicuously posted the following words of warning:
Warning . . . It is unlawful to dispense gasoline into any portable
container unless the container is constructed of metal or is approved
by the Fire Department.
No smoking.
Shut off motor while motor fuel is being dispensed.
K. No person under the age of 16 years shall operate a gasoline dispensing
device at a self-service station.
§ 206-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 206-7
C:178
§ 206-7. Enforcement officer.
The Town Administrator of the Town of Portsmouth shall designate the
enforcement officer for this article, and he is hereby authorized and
empowered to execute and sign complaints and to do all other acts
necessary and convenient for its enforcement.
§ 206-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be fined not
more than $100 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
§ 206-7 CHARTER § 206-8
C:179
Chapter 215
HARBORMASTER ORDINANCE
§ 215-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to establish regulations for the use of the
public waters within the jurisdiction of the Town of Portsmouth, Rhode
Island, and to ensure that this limited area available for use is preserved for
present and future generations.
§ 215-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED INSPECTOR — Any person approved as an inspector of tackle
by the Harbormaster.
ASSISTANT HARBORMASTER — Those Portsmouth police officers or
special officers appointed by the Chief of Police to assist the Harbormaster
in the performance of his duties.
BOAT — Includes ships, vessels, or any other type of watercraft.
BOAT OWNER — Any owner of a boat.
COMMERCIAL MOORING — Any mooring installed for the purpose of
leasing or renting said mooring or for use by a business invitee in
connection with the operation of the permit holder's business.
GUEST MOORING — A mooring granted to a Town resident for use by his/
her guests.
HARBORMASTER — The Harbormaster appointed by the Administrator and
approved by the Town Council.
MOORING — The mooring space and ground tackle required to
permanently anchor a boat.
MOORING AREA — Those portions of the Town waters identified on the
Harbormaster's chart for the purpose of mooring boats.
MOORING ASSIGNMENT APPEAL COMMITTEE — Consist of three
persons appointed by the Town Council. The Harbormaster shall be a
nonvoting member of said Committee.
MOORING SPACE — The area of water required to permanently anchor a
boat.
NONRESIDENT — Any individual, business, or corporation which does not
meet the definition of a "resident."
PERSON — Includes individuals, corporations, societies, associations, and
partnerships.
§ 206-8 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 215-2
C:180
PRIVATE MOORING — Any mooring registered to a person and used
exclusively for his own purposes.
PULLEY LINE — A system of pulleys arranged between a depth of five
feet of water (mean low water) or less and the shore for the purpose of
anchoring a dinghy.
REGISTERED MOORING HOLDER — The holder of an approved mooring
space assigned to him/her by the Harbormaster.
RESIDENT — Any person above the age of majority who owns real property
in the Town of Portsmouth or any person who can establish he/she is or will
be a resident of a house or apartment in the Town of Portsmouth for no less
than three months in any one calendar year.
STATE MOORING — Any mooring in the Town waters installed and
maintained by the state.
TOWN WATERS — The public waters within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Portsmouth.
§ 215-3. Mooring spaces.
The Town Council of the Town of Portsmouth may set, by resolution, the
maximum number of moorings allowed within the identified mooring areas.
The Harbormaster shall have full power and authority to direct the
placement of all moorings within the Town waters.
A. No person shall place or cause to be placed a mooring within Town
waters without receiving a mooring permit for the placement thereof by
the Town, issued in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Any such mooring placed without the approval of the Harbormaster
may be removed, and any such expenses incurred shall be charged to
such person placing the mooring. The Harbormaster shall direct the
placement of the mooring tackle. The Harbormaster may order the
removal of any mooring which in his or her discretion constitutes a
hazard to navigation, a danger to the public or a violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
B. The Harbormaster, having due regard to the draft of each vessel and
the facility of navigation, shall designate upon a chart of Town waters
all mooring areas approved as such by the Town Council, and to such
chart the Harbormaster shall affix or append a list or key designating
the name and address of the owner of each vessel and the size and type
thereof and/or remaining vacancies. The Harbormaster shall file such a
chart in the office of the Town Clerk and shall thereafter maintain the
same current and accurate. The Harbormaster shall also maintain a
current and accurate copy of said chart in a place reasonably accessible
to mariners for their convenience in consulting the same during hours
when the Town Clerk's office would not normally be open. The
Harbormaster shall, on or before June 15 or each year, make a complete
and accurate revision of both the original master copy and copy thereof.
All record of mooring permits shall be kept on file for three years after
§ 215-2 CHARTER § 215-3
C:181
expiration thereof, at which time the records may be destroyed and the
permit number, if expired, may be reassigned.
C. If mooring space is available, the Harbormaster shall issue to each boat
owner a license to use a mooring space within a mooring area. Said
license shall be properly keyed to such chart as identified above and
shall expire on the first day of April in each succeeding year after its
issuance. The Harbormaster shall, during the month of February of
each year, cause reregistration forms to be mailed or delivered to all
person's who were registered holders at the end of the prior year, at the
address then listed on their last registration or reregistration
application. It shall be the burden of the registered holder to notify the
Harbormaster of any change of address. It shall be the duty of the
Harbormaster to ensure that such mooring space is maintained at the
spot designated by the Harbormaster upon the chart and in said license
and not elsewhere. The Harbormaster may remove the mooring or
vessel, or both, at his discretion and may charge the expense of so
doing to the person so placing the mooring or maintaining anchorage in
a location other than as designated by the Harbormaster.
D. All renewal applications for private mooring spaces must be
accompanied by a true copy of the current subject boat registration.
Such applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. All
applications shall be accompanied by a list of all persons or vessels,
with a description of such vessels, which the mooring owner anticipates
and authorizes to make use of the mooring or raft to vessels making use
of said mooring during the period for which the permit is issued. Those
applicants who do not own a boat at time of renewal application may
have until June 1 to submit the new boat registration, provided they
shall timely file an otherwise complete renewal application and pay the
required fee. Failure to subsequently provide the boat registration shall
render the permit subject to forfeiture.
E. All requests for new mooring space shall be made by submitting an
application provided by the Harbormaster, containing all information
required, and a copy of the subject boat registration, addressed to the
Portsmouth Harbormaster, Portsmouth Police Department, P.O. Box
767, East Main Road, Portsmouth, RI, 02871. All such applications
should be completely filled out and submitted with the appropriate fee.
F. The Harbormaster may remove from any public wharf, dock or pier in
Town waters any vessel not engaged in receiving or discharging cargo
or passengers. The Harbormaster may also determine the extent, time
and manner of accommodation respecting the position of vessels which
should be extended by the owners or master thereof to each other and
to require such accommodation to be extended.
G. The Harbormaster may remove from any mooring any vessel other than
the vessel owned by the registered holder of that mooring.
§ 215-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 215-3
C:182
§ 215-4. Commercial moorings.
§ 215-5. Mooring specifications.
H. Mooring specifications in this chapter shall not pertain to pulley lines;
however, any such systems shall fall under the Harbormaster's
jurisdiction.
I. The Harbormaster may remove from any mooring any vessel other than
the vessel owned by the registered holder of that mooring or any vessel
otherwise in violation of the terms of this chapter.
J. Any annual renewal of a mooring permit, commercial or otherwise, if
granted, shall be assessed a late fee of $100 if the reregistration form is
not filed with the Harbormaster on or before April 1 of the respective
year. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-11-13]
A. Any application for a commercial mooring shall be approved if said
mooring was in place prior to June 27, 1986. Commercial moorings
shall be renewed on a yearly basis. Commercial moorings not in
existence on June 27, 1986, shall be permitted only in Town waters
immediately adjacent to the upland waterfront business property
owned by the applicant.
B. All applications for commercial mooring permits shall contain the
following information:
(1) Name of business, owner's name, address and business telephone;
(2) Name, address and telephone of business manager, if different
from above;
(3) Number of moorings requested;
(4) Mooring fields in which moorings would be located;
(5) Description of facilities available for off loading, parking and
provision of sanitary facilities.
C. No person, other than a licensed marina operator, shall be granted
more than five commercial moorings.
D. Each commercial mooring holder must submit an annual report by April
1 of each year detailing all vessels which utilized said moorings during
the previous year, broken down by mooring, setting forth the vessel
name, registration number, length in feet and breadth, draft, type and
number of sleeping berths.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing a registered
mooring holder from leasing ground tackle from a commercial
enterprise.
§ 215-3 CHARTER § 215-5
C:183
§ 215-6. Access.
No person shall be issued a license for a mooring space unless said person
provides proof of reasonable access to said mooring across public property
A. Only mushroom anchors or cement blocks with reinforcing rods and
connecting eyes that have a base at least 1/2 the width of the block will
be acceptable.
B. All shackles will be properly seized.
C. All shackles, swivels and other hardware will be proportionate in size to
the chain.
D. The total scope of the mooring should be three times the depth of the
water at high tide. The bottom and top chain shall each consist of half
the length of chain.
E. It is recommended that the pennant be shackled into the top chain
below the buoy so that the buoy does not carry the strain.
F. The maximum length of the pennant shall be 2 1/2 times the distance
from the bow chock to the water plus the distance from the bow chock
to the cleat. Where chafing may occur, adequate chafe gear should be
used.
G. Minimum mooring specifications.
Pennants
LOA
(feet)
Mushroom
(pounds)
Bottom
Chain
(inches)
Top
Chain
(inches)
Nylon/
Dacron
(inches)
Stainless
Wire
(inches)
Under 16 75 3/8 5/16 1/2 1/4
16 to 19 150 3/8 5/16 1/2 1/4
20 to 22 200 1/2 5/16 5/8 1/4
23 to 25 250 1/2 5/16 3/4 1/4
26 to 30 300 5/8 3/8 3/4 1/4
31 to 35 400 5/8 3/8 3/4 3/8
36 to 40 500 3/4 1/2 7/8 3/8
41 to 50 600 3/4 1/2 1 1/2
51 to 65 750 1 1/2 1 1/4 1/2
Vessels over 65 feet shall comply with the Harbormaster's directions.
H. Any change in these minimum mooring requirements should be in favor
of heavier mushrooms and bottom chains.
I. Cement clumps may be allowed at 10 times the weight required for
anchors with digging qualities.
§ 215-5 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 215-6
C:184
or private property with consent of the owner thereof, including adequate
provision for parking of vehicles.
§ 215-7. Registration fees. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-11-13; 1-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01-13]
Mooring registration fees shall be defined on a yearly basis by the Town
Council.
§ 215-8. Assignment of mooring spaces.
All assignments of mooring space shall be made by the Harbormaster.
Moorings shall be assigned in chronological order of receipt of a completed
application. Any appeals to assignment of mooring space shall be made in
writing to the Mooring Assignment Appeals Committee, c/o Town Clerk, P.O.
Box 155, Portsmouth, RI, with a copy to the Harbormaster. The Mooring
Assignment Appeals Committee shall resolve the appeal.
§ 215-9. Waiting lists.
The Harbormaster shall maintain a waiting list of applications for mooring
spaces. Moorings will be granted in a ratio of not less than five Portsmouth
residents to each nonresident in all cases of assignment of mooring spaces
from waiting lists.
§ 215-10. Forfeiture of mooring space.
A. Any registered holder shall be deemed to have forfeited his registered
mooring space by reason of the following:
(1) Removal of tackle and notification to the Harbormaster that the
space is available.
(2) Failure to reregister for such space by April 1 of any season.
(3) Failure to replace any piece of mooring tackle not complying with
the mooring tackle standards hereinafter set forth within 14 days
after being advised by the Harbormaster of noncompliance.
(4) Failure to resurface or replace mooring within 60 days after being
advised by the Harbormaster that the mooring is in need of
attention.
(5) Failure to mark said space with an appropriate winter mooring
spar.
(6) Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
(7) Failure to mark said space with an appropriate winter mooring spar
as required by § 215-12 hereof.
B. Forfeiture of mooring space may be appealed to the Mooring
Assignment Appeals Committee.
§ 215-6 CHARTER § 215-11
C:185
§ 215-11. Abandonment of tackle.
Any registered holder of mooring space who is abandoning his mooring
space and owns the ground tackle of that mooring space may offer to
sell the tackle occupying such space to the next person assigned to said
mooring space. If such tackle is not sold or rented, it shall be removed by
the registered mooring holder. The next person assigned to such space is
under no obligation to buy or rent the mooring tackle from the previous
holder of that mooring space or the owner of the ground tackle of that
mooring space. Failure to remove such tackle upon notification may require
the Harbormaster to remove said tackle at the expense of the owner of the
tackle.
§ 215-12. Winter mooring spars.
Winter mooring spars shall be set in all mooring spaces for which the ball
has been removed. Spars shall be set prior to December 1 of each year,
but in no event prior to October 1, and shall be readily visible in a vertical
position above the water at all times and shall be removed not later than
June 1 of the next succeeding year.
§ 215-13. Anchoring.
§ 215-14. Rafting.
Rafting on a single mooring shall be allowed as a temporary accommodation
if it does not interfere with adjacent single moorings or anchorages. Owners
of boats in a raft shall be available to tend to the vessels in the event of
heavy weather. Rafting shall be limited to three boats in addition to the boat
properly registered to the subject mooring. Any rafted vessel shall be of
a size not exceeding that of the boat properly registered to that mooring.
It is the responsibility of the registered mooring holder to ensure that the
outermost boats drop anchor to avoid dragging the mooring or encroaching
on other mooring spaces or navigational channels.
§ 215-15. Numbering.
A. No vessel will be allowed to anchor in Town waters utilizing her own
ground tackle and be left unattended. The owner or operator and party
may go ashore, but shall not leave the area. They shall be available to
tend to the vessel in the event of heavy weather.
B. When anchoring in a mooring area, it shall be the anchored vessel's
responsibility to remain clear of all moored vessels, taking into account
all possible changes of wind or tide situation.
A. Each mooring in Town waters will be assigned a number by the
Harbormaster. This number will be displayed in contrasting color on
each mooring buoy, pickup buoy, and winter marker in block letters at
least four inches in height.
§ 215-11 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 215-15
C:186
§ 215-16. Guest moorings.
Guest moorings issued under the previous ordinance shall be renewed
on a yearly basis. Owners of residential waterfront properties may be
allowed one guest mooring to be located in waters immediately adjacent
to upland residential waterfront property owned by the applicant. Private,
nonguest moorings of other residents shall be given priority over guest
moorings in regards to placement. For good cause shown, more than one
guest mooring may be allowed upon application to the Mooring Assignment
Appeals Committee.
§ 215-17. Maintenance requirements; inspections.
§ 215-18. Speed of vessels.
B. The Harbormaster may remove any unnumbered mooring, buoy, ball or
other like marker. In the event the Harbormaster discovers an
unnumbered mooring, buoy, ball or marker, he/she shall attach thereto
a tag ordering the owner thereof to submit to the Harbormaster the
information concerning the owner thereof and vessel making use
thereof. If no response is received within 14 days, the Harbormaster
may remove said mooring, buoy, ball or marker.
A. The registered holder of a mooring shall maintain his mooring in a safe
condition. Any chain, shackle, swivel or other component which has
become warped or worn by 1/3 of its normal diameter shall be replaced.
Failure to maintain a safe mooring hereunder shall be cause for
revocation of said mooring by the Harbormaster. The Harbormaster or
his designated agents may inspect any mooring at any time to
determine compliance with this section.
B. In all cases, the holder of a mooring registration shall have his mooring
inspected by a qualified inspector at least once every two years from
the date the mooring is set. He/she shall notify the Harbormaster in
writing of the date the inspection was performed and shall arrange for a
written report of said inspection to be submitted to the Harbormaster
by the inspector, setting forth the specifications of the mooring. Each
such report shall contain a certification by the inspector that he/she has
familiarized himself/herself with this chapter and the mooring
specifications prescribed herein. A mooring inspector must hold a
certificate as a certified SCUBA diver and must be familiar with the
minimum mooring and mooring tackle specifications of this chapter.
A. No vessels of any description shall be navigated or operated at a speed
in excess of five miles per hour, or in such a manner to cause an
excessive wake, within the following areas:
(1) Within the waters of the Portsmouth Basin, so called, being that
expanse of water between Portsmouth and Tiverton, south of the
Navigational Aid, Can 17, and north of the Stone Bridge Abutment.
§ 215-15 CHARTER § 215-18
C:187
§ 215-19. Waterskiing and personal watercraft.
§ 215-20. Skin and scuba diving.
§ 215-21. Violations and penalties; prohibited acts.
(2) That expanse of water in Potter's Cove between Navigational Aid
Nun Buoy 4 and the shore.
(3) That expanse of water in Blue Bill Cove north of Hen Island and
south of Spectacle Island, between the escape bridge and the state
boat ramp.
B. Penalties for violation of this section and § 215-19 hereof shall be as
follows:
(1) Speed of vessels:
(a) First offense: $50.
(b) Second offense: $75.
(c) Third offense: $100.
(2) Waterskiing and other violations: $50.
A. Except as otherwise set forth herein, waterskiing and/or the operation
of personal watercraft are prohibited in the following areas; provided,
however, vessels with water-skiers may commence operation within
200 feet of a shoreline at such speed and course (preferably
perpendicular to the shoreline) as may be reasonably necessary to
commence a run and may operate within said two-hundred-foot area
incidental to finishing a run, provided said operation is performed in a
safe and prudent manner with due regard for the safety and welfare of
swimmers, divers, moored or anchored vessels and the skier:
(1) Portsmouth Basin.
(2) Blue Bell Cove, north of Hen Island and south of Spectacle Island.
(3) Within 200 feet of any shoreline.
B. Personal watercraft may operate within said prescribed areas only at
the slowest speed at which the craft can be operated and maintain
steerage way.
C. Waterskiing and the operation of personal watercraft must be practiced
in conformance with the requirements of R.I.G.L. § 46-27-2 et seq.
A. No person shall skin or scuba dive within 50 yards of the channels in the
Portsmouth Basin without the expressed consent of the Harbormaster.
B. All persons diving in the Town waters shall properly mark their diving
areas.
§ 215-18 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 215-21
C:188
§ 215-22. Collection of fines. [Added 4-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-04-27]
The Harbormaster, pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 46-4-6.13, shall have the authority
to collect any fines levied under the authority of this chapter by mail, not
exceeding $100.
Chapter 221
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES
§ 221-1. Purpose.
For the purpose of promoting general health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Town of Portsmouth and for efficiently and effectively
treating hazardous wastes while protecting the environment from
contamination, it is the intent of this chapter to regulate the siting and
ongoing operation of hazardous waste management facilities to the extent
permitted by the "Rhode Island Hazardous Waste Management Facilities
Act of 1982," being Title 23, Chapter 19.7, of the General Laws of the State
of Rhode Island, R.I.G.L. § 23-19.7-1 et seq., as amended.
§ 221-2. Definitions.
The definitions included within Chapter 19.7 (Hazardous Waste
Management Facilities) of Title 23 of the General Laws of Rhode Island and
all amendments thereto are incorporated within this chapter as though fully
set forth herein.
A. Every person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter, every
owner, master or person in charge of any vessel who shall neglect or
refuse to obey the directions of the Harbormaster in matters within the
authority of the Harbormaster and every person who shall resist or
oppose such Harbormaster in the execution of his duties shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not exceeding $100 for each offense.
B. Each day that such neglect or refusal to obey shall continue after notice
thereof is given by the Harbormaster to an owner, master or person in
charge of such vessel or mooring deemed to be in violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Any person who shall remove from a location assigned by the
Harbormaster any moorings belonging to another without the authority
of the owner and Harbormaster shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not exceeding $100 for each offense.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to secure a vessel to the Town dock
at Sand Point on Prudence Island, otherwise known as the "rescue
dock," and leave same unattended. Any person violating this provision
shall, upon conviction thereof, by fined not less than $50.
§ 215-21 CHARTER § 221-3
C:189
§ 221-3. Prohibition of landfills and injection wells.
No property located totally or partially within the Town of Portsmouth shall
be used either for a landfill and/or injection well for the storage, disposal,
elimination, destruction or siting of hazardous waste.
§ 221-4. Restrictions.
A hazardous waste management facility shall not be sited in the Town of
Portsmouth unless the following restrictions are fully met:
A. A development site for a hazardous waste management facility shall be
located a minimum of 300 feet within the zoning district boundary lines
of an HI Zone, from the nearest residential or farming use of a
residential or farming zone.
B. A development site for a hazardous waste management facility shall be
located at least 2,500 feet from centers of population, including but not
limited to elderly housing, primary and secondary schools, nursing
homes, and any buildings where the concentration of population
exceeds one person per 100 square feet of building area. Said minimum
distance shall be measured from the property line as shown on maps in
the Tax Assessor's office.
C. A development site for a hazardous waste management facility shall be
located at least 2,500 feet from a public recreational facility. Said
minimum distance shall be measured from the property line as shown
on maps in the Tax Assessor's office.
D. Hazardous waste management facilities shall be prohibited within
1,000 feet of environmentally sensitive areas. These areas include but
are not limited to areas of steep slope, e.g., slopes of 5% or more; areas
identified as freshwater wetlands; water-related sensitive areas as
delineated on the State of Rhode Island 208 Areawide Water Quality
Management Plan [Rhode Island Statewide Planning Project (FRCJF-
01-13)]; and areas of flood hazard districts as delineated within the
one-hundred-year-flood zone or plain of the Town of Portsmouth.
E. A development site for a hazardous waste management facility shall be
at least 1,000 feet from any pond, stream, river or watercourse. Parking
lots and surrounding structures associated with the hazardous waste
management facility shall not disturb topography within the above
distances from watercourses and wetland areas.
F. The following regulations for an industrial hazardous waste
management facility shall apply:
(1) Minimum lot area: 200,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard: 75 feet.
§ 221-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 221-4
C:190
§ 221-5. Application filing.
§ 221-6. Local Assessment Committee.
(4) Minimum rear yard: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard: 75 feet.
(6) Maximum lot coverage (%): 25%.
(7) Maximum height:
(a) Principal structure: 35 feet.
(b) Accessory structure(s): 25 feet.
A. Any developer seeking to site a hazardous waste management facility in
the Town of Portsmouth shall file with the Town Clerk of the Town of
Portsmouth 10 copies of the entire filing made pursuant to the
"Hazardous Waste Management Act of 1978" (R.I.G.L. § 23-19.1-1 et
seq.) in seeking a permit for such facility. Said copies shall be filed with
the Town Clerk within 10 days of filing under the Act.
B. In addition to the foregoing, any person seeking any renewals,
extensions or modifications of a DEM variance for any facility in the
Town of Portsmouth or in a neighboring community shall file with the
Town Clerk a copy of the entire application within 10 days of filing for
such variance.
C. In addition, any such developer shall file with the Town Clerk of the
Town of Portsmouth 10 copies of a proposed impact report as herein
required for review by the Local Assessment Committee. This filing
shall be made within 10 days of receiving the permit.
A. Appointment.
(1) There shall be appointed a Local Assessment Committee consisting
of no less than five nor more than nine members, including the
chief executive officer, the city or Town Council President or, if
either the Council President is the chief executive officer or
chooses not to serve on the Local Assessment Committee, another
member of the Council chosen by the Council, the Chairman of the
Planning Commission, and not less than two public members
appointed by the chief elected official, at least one of whom shall be
knowledgeable in environmental matters by reason of training or
experience. The Committee shall elect its own Chairman. Service
on any other board or committee of the Town or on any other
assessment committee shall not bar participation on an assessment
committee of any such member, and such person may be
designated as a public member for the purpose of this chapter. An
assessment committee may consider more than one hazardous
waste management facility siting application.
§ 221-4 CHARTER § 221-6
C:191
§ 221-7. Variances; special exceptions.
(2) The Local Assessment Committee shall be appointed within 45 days
after the issuance of necessary state permits for construction or
substantial alteration of a hazardous waste management facility
under the provisions of the Rhode Island Hazardous Waste
Management Act of 1978, as amended, which facility proposes to
be sited in or have impact upon the Town of Portsmouth. The
Committee shall serve until such time as siting or impact
agreements are negotiated with the developer and ratified by the
Town Council of the Town of Portsmouth or until such time as a
siting or impact agreement is reached in accordance with Chapter
19.7 of Title 23 of the General Laws of Rhode Island, R.I.G.L.
§ 23-19.7-1 et seq., as amended.
(3) Prior to dissolving at the end of its mandated existence, the
Committee shall suggest to the Town Council the appointment of a
Town official, board or department which is to be responsible for
monitoring of the construction and on a regular basis the ongoing
practices and procedures of the hazardous waste management
facility involved in its review and to assure the continued safe
operation in compliance with the siting or impact agreement and
other Town ordinances and regulations. The Committee may
require the developer to make regular or specifically defined
reports to such official, board or department, and a system of
inspections, reports and funding by the developer for such
monitoring may be included in the siting or impact agreement. The
Town Council shall have the authority to take any appropriate
action pursuant to the agreement as a result of the ongoing
hazardous waste management facility operation and this provision.
B. Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Local Assessment
Committee shall be those set forth in Chapter 19.7 of Title 23 of the
General Laws of Rhode Island, R.I.G.L. § 23-19.7-1 et seq., and all
amendments thereto.
C. Ratification. No siting or impact agreement negotiated by the Local
Assessment Committee shall be binding upon or enforceable against
the Town of Portsmouth until the Local Assessment Committee holds a
public hearing on the proposed siting or impact agreement and,
following said public hearing, the agreement is ratified by the Town
Council. The Town Council shall by this chapter have the power to
approve or reject any such siting or impact agreement.
A. Prohibition against variances or special exceptions. Notwithstanding
any provision in the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Portsmouth,46 no
developer shall be entitled to receive any variance or special exception
for any requirement in this chapter.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 221-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 221-7
C:192
§ 221-8. Notification of receipt of application.
The Town Clerk shall notify forthwith all members of the Town Council
upon receipt from the Department of Environmental Management of notice
that an application to construct or substantially alter a hazardous waste
management facility has been received. Council members shall be notified
of applications for hazardous waste management facilities both within the
Town of Portsmouth and in neighboring communities.
§ 221-9. Council ratification required.
§ 221-10. Notice of public hearing; conduct of hearings.
B. Procedure for DEM variances. Upon receipt of the Town Clerk of any
notice of a variance application filed with the Department of
Environmental Management pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 23-19.1-11 of the
General Laws, the Town Council shall review said application or cause
the same to be reviewed by some other Town official, board or
department and request an advisory opinion therefrom. If, in the Town
Council's determination, the variance might adversely affect the Town,
its citizens or the environment, the Council may authorize such action
as it deems appropriate, including opposing the application.
A. The Town Council of the Town of Portsmouth shall hereby be
empowered to approve or reject any proposed siting or impact
agreement submitted to it by the Local Assessment Committee herein.
The Town Council shall exercise their power to approve or reject the
proposed siting or impact agreement only after there has been a public
hearing as set forth in this chapter.
B. A two-thirds majority vote of the Council shall be necessary for
approval. Once approved, the siting or impact agreement statement
shall be binding and enforceable upon all parties thereto.
A. Notice of the public hearing required to be held by the Assessment
Committee shall be sent by certified mail to all owners of real property
within 500 feet of the property being proposed for a hazardous waste
management facility not less than 10 days prior to such hearing.
Additional public notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town at least seven days prior to the date of
the hearing.
B. The Committee shall afford all interested persons an opportunity to be
heard at the public hearing, and the hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the customary procedural rules governing Town
Council public hearings. Since the hearing is for informational
purposes, no right of appeal shall exist.
§ 221-7 CHARTER § 221-11
C:193
§ 221-11. Additional standards.
In addition to the provisions herein, all hazardous waste management
facilities shall comply with the relevant portions of all Zoning Ordinance47
requirements as from time to time established by the Town of Portsmouth.
§ 221-12. Project impact report.
The project developer shall submit to the Town Council a project impact
report delineating the potential environmental and other impacts of the
following minimum considerations:
§ 221-13. Affidavit from applicant.
The applicant shall submit an affidavit acknowledging his understanding of
the applicable standards provided herein and his continuing agreement to
comply with these standards.
Chapter 230
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 274. Junked or abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 382.
A. Public or private water and aquifers.
B. Fire-fighting, police protection and other public services to be provided.
C. Sewer facilities.
D. By-products of a facility.
E. Monitoring procedures and practices.
F. Proximity to food processors.
G. Taxation.
H. Economic security of community.
I. Economic viability of developer.
J. Natural resources.
K. Risk to public health, safety and welfare.
L. Transporting (routes and methods).
M. Training of emergency personnel.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 221-11 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 221-13
C:194
§ 230-1. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of purchasing, selling, bartering or
dealing in junk, old metals or secondhand automobiles, whether as keeper
of a shop or storehouse for the reception of such junk, etc., or as a gatherer
of such junk, etc., in any bag, wagon, cart or automobile, or as a foundryman
or other person receiving such junk, etc., for the purpose of melting such
junk, etc., or of converting such junk, etc., into castings, unless such person
shall be duly licensed by the Town Council and subject to the conditions and
restrictions of this chapter.
§ 230-2. Application for license.
Every applicant for any such license shall set forth with full particulars,
upon a form to be furnished by the Town Clerk, answers to the following
questions:
§ 230-3. Notice and hearing.
No license shall be granted under this chapter except upon written
application which shall be duly advertised and upon which a public hearing
shall be held. Such advertising shall be in a public newspaper, published in
the county, to appear once a week for two successive weeks prior to such
hearing, provided that no license shall be granted under this chapter in
any location where the owners or occupants of the greater part of the land
within 200 feet of such building or place of business shall file with the Town
Council their objection to the granting of such licenses.
§ 230-4. Fees.
The annual fee for such licenses shall be as follows:
A. Name and address, both of residence and of business of the applicant.
B. Business or employment of the applicant during the five years next
preceding application.
C. Age of the applicant.
A. For a keeper of a shop, storehouse, business or junkyard: $25;
B. For a gatherer: $5;
C. For a foundryman or other person receiving such junk, etc., for the
purpose of melting such junk, etc., or of converting such junk, etc., into
castings: $5.
§ 221-13 CHARTER § 230-5
C:195
§ 230-5. Expiration of license; revocation.
All licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one
year from the date of their issuance, provided that any such licenses so
granted may be revoked at any time by the Town Council for cause, and no
rebate shall be made from the license fee for such license for less than one
year.
§ 230-6. Display of license.
Every keeper of any junk shop, junkyard or storehouse, licensed according
to the provisions of this chapter, shall display in a conspicuous place within
such shop, yard or storehouse the license last granted to him/her.
§ 230-7. Inspection by Chief of Police.
Every shop, storehouse, bag, wagon, cart, junkyard, automobile or foundry
or place of business of any such licensed person shall be subject to the
inspection and examination of the Chief of Police or any of his authorized
agents.
§ 230-8. Records.
Every such licensed person shall keep in a book a contemporaneous record
in the English language of the business done by him/her as follows: a
description of every article purchased or sold by him/her, at the time of
purchase or sale, the name and residence of the person from whom such
article was purchased or to whom such article was sold by him/her, and the
day or hour of such purchase or sale. Such book or record shall be subject
to examination at any time by the Chief of Police or any of his authorized
agents and also by members of the Town Council.
§ 230-9. Holding period.
Every such licensed person shall keep any property purchased or received
by him/her for a period of 10 days from the date he/she acquires such
property, and during that period, such property shall not be disfigured or
treated in any way by which its identity may be destroyed or affected,
except that any person licensed as a gatherer may at any time sell any such
property to a keeper or a shop or storehouse or a foundryman or other
person licensed as above provided within such period, provided that any
licensed person may sell and melt such property within such period of 10
days with the permission in writing of the Chief of Police.
§ 230-10. Dealing with minors.
No person licensed as herein provided shall directly or indirectly either
purchase or receive in barter or exchange any junk or metals or secondhand
automobiles from any minor, knowing or having reason to believe him/her
to be a minor, unless such minor shall be licensed in accordance with this
chapter.
§ 230-5 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 230-11
C:196
§ 230-11. Hours of business.
No keeper of any junk shop, junkyard or storehouse shall do or suffer to be
done any business therein between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
§ 230-12. Storage; fencing.
No junk, old metal or secondhand automobiles shall be stored by such
licensed person in the open on any lot or tract of land within the Town,
unless the area to be used for such purpose is enclosed by a tight board
fence at least six feet in height that shall be located or erected not less
than 10 feet from the boundary lines of such lot or tract of land. Openings
between boards shall not exceed 1/2 inch.
Chapter 236
LAND DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 10, Art. II.
Earth removal — See Ch. 155.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
320.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 336.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 339.
Tree preservation and protection — See Ch.
375.
Zoning — See Ch. 405.
§ 230-11 CHARTER § 230-12
C:197

I
Purposes and Applicability
A. General purposes.
The purpose of these regulations is to establish procedural and substantive
provisions for the subdivision and development of land that will, consistent
with the provisions of the Portsmouth Comprehensive Community Plan, the
Zoning Ordinance,48 all other duly adopted land development regulations
of the Town of Portsmouth, and Section 45-23 of the R.I. General Laws,
accomplish the following:
1. Protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community;
2. Provide for the orderly, thorough and expeditious review and approval
of subdivisions and land development projects, by the establishment
and consistent application of procedures for record-keeping on all
matters of land development and subdivision review, approval and
construction.
3. Promote high quality, and appropriate design and construction of
subdivisions and land development projects;
4. Protect existing natural and built environments and mitigate the
significant negative impacts of proposed development on those
environments;
5. Promote subdivision and land development designs that are wellintegrated
into surrounding neighborhoods, and concentrate
development in areas that can best support intensive use because of
natural characteristics and existing infrastructure.
6. Provide for design and construction standards to reflect the intent of
the community comprehensive plan with regard to the physical
character of the various neighborhoods and districts of the community;
7. Require measures for mitigating the impact of new development on the
community that are based on clear documentation of needs and are
fairly applied and administered;
8. Direct the development of land consistent with state of the art practices
that promote and foster growth in a manner that protects the Town's
distinctive character while at the same time accommodating economic
growth;
9. Guide land development with an emphasis on siting subdivision
improvements so as to allow for the maximum preservation of existing
natural features;
10. Insure that proposed designs institute best management practices that
acknowledge existing site constraints and the natural setting.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
A CHARTER A
C:199
B. Applicability.
Any person proposing to subdivide any land in the Town of Portsmouth shall
make a plat thereof and submit same to the Planning Board, through the
Administrative Officer, for approval. No plat of a subdivision of land in the
Town shall be accepted for filing or recording in the land evidence records
of the Town until it shall have been approved by the Planning Board, and
such approval entered in writing on the plat by the Chair or Secretary of the
Planning Board.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any development shall
take place thereon, before any permit for the erection of a structure shall be
granted, and before any lot within the subdivision shall be sold, the owner
of said land, or his designated representative, shall apply for and secure
approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the procedures
herein.
C. Construction and intent.
D. Effective date.
These regulations shall take effect on December 31, 1995, and shall
supersede all other subdivision regulations in effect at the time of such
adoption.
11. Make adequate provision for traffic; to lessen traffic accidents; to
secure a well-articulated street and highway system; to promote safety
from fire and other dangers.
12. Facilitate the adequate, efficient and economic provision of
transportation, water supply, sewerage, recreation and other public
utilities and amenities.
1. These regulations are not intended to supersede, abrogate, or interfere
with any provision of any ordinance of the Town of Portsmouth.
2. In the event of a conflict between general regulations and a regulation
applicable to a specific type of subdivision, the more specific regulation
shall be controlling.
3. These regulations are intended to be interpreted so as to be consistent
with, and further the implementation of, the Comprehensive
Community Plan and the Rhode Island Land Development and
Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992.49 Consistency with the
Comprehensive Plan means in accordance with the goals, policies,
procedures, maps and other policy statements in the plan.
4. If any section or subsection of these regulations is held invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the
validity of the remainder of these regulations.
49.Editor's Note: See RIGL Title 45, Ch. 23, § 45-23-25 et seq.
A PORTSMOUTH CODE E
C:200
E. Vested rights-continuation of prior regulations.
Nothing herein contained shall impair the validity of any plat legally
recorded prior to the effective date of these regulations. Subdivisions that
have been formally submitted to the Planning Board for approval under
the Regulations in effect prior to November 27, 1995 (the date these
regulations were first advertised for public comment) may be continued to
be reviewed by the Planning Board and approved under those Regulations
in accordance with the following:
1. Final approvals. Any subdivision which, at the time of adoption of
these amendments, has received final approval, or final approval with
conditions, from the Planning Board, may initiate or construct any part
of the development, or record said plans in accordance with the
Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time final approval was granted.
The Planning Board, may, in its discretion, grant extensions to any such
final approval in accordance with the procedure for such extensions as
set forth in the Regulations in effect at the time of final approval.
2. Preliminary approvals. Any subdivision which, at the time of adoption
of these amendments, has received preliminary approval, or
preliminary approval with conditions, from the Planning Board, may
continue to be reviewed by the Planning Board in accordance with the
Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time preliminary approval was
granted provided any one of the following conditions has been met:
a) The final plat, including all the material required in the Final Plat
Checklist, is filed with the Planning Board within one (1) year from
the date of preliminary approval; or,
b) The subdivision is located within an area and is of a nature to be
within the jurisdiction of the Rhode Island Coastal Resources
Management Council (CRMC) and the preliminary plans as
approved by the Planning Board, have been filed with CRMC for an
Assent as required by the Coastal Resources Management
Program; or,
c) The subdivision is located within an area and is of a nature to be
within the jurisdiction of the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (RIDEM) and the preliminary plans as
approved by the Planning Board have been filed with RIDEM for
approval as required by the Freshwater Wetlands Act.50
3. Other status. Any subdivision which, at the time of adoption of these
Regulations, has not received final or preliminary approval; or has been
reviewed by the Planning Board for preliminary review but no approval
therefor has been granted; or has received preliminary approval more
than one (1) year prior to the date of adoption of these regulations; or
for which only preapplication conference(s) has (have) been conducted
shall be required to be reviewed under the revisions to the Subdivision
50.Editor's Note: See RIGL § 2-1-18 et seq.
E CHARTER E
C:201
and Land Development Regulations adopted on December 13, 1995
pursuant to the Rhode Island Land Development and Subdivision
Review Enabling Act of 1992.51
a) The Planning Board shall determine vested rights for subdivisions
submitted for approval prior to November 27, 1995. Appeals from a
decision regarding the application status and vested rights of any
subdivision shall be made to the Planning Board of Appeal as herein
provided.
51.Editor's Note: See RIGL Title 45, Ch. 23, § 45-23-25 et seq.
E PORTSMOUTH CODE E
C:202
II
Definitions
A. Generally.
Words or terms used in these regulations shall have the meanings stated in
this section, unless explicitly noted otherwise within any other section.
Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular includes
the plural and the plural the singular. The word "used" includes "designed,
intended, or arranged to be used." The word "shall" is mandatory; the word
"may" is permissive; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the
word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "land" includes the words
"marsh" and "water."
B. Definitions of terms.
The following terms for the purposes of these regulations are defined below:
ABUTTER — One whose property abuts, that is, adjoins at a border,
boundary, or point with no intervening land. For the purpose of notification,
an abutter shall include one whose property is directly across the street.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Secretary of the Planning Board, or
in his absence the Chair or Vice Chair of the Planning Board, who will
administer the land development and subdivision regulations and
coordinate with Town boards and commissions, Town staff and State
agencies. Qualifications of said individual subject to provisions of Article
XII, Section A.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION — Re-subdivision of existing lots which
yields no additional lots for development, and involves no creation or
extension of streets. Such re-subdivision shall only involve divisions,
mergers, mergers and division, or adjustments of boundaries of existing
lots.
APPLICANT — Any person, either owner or duly authorized agent, filing a
plat or an application for a subdivision with the Planning Board. If not the
owner, applicant shall present satisfactory documentation that he/she is the
duly designated agent of the owner.
BOARD OF APPEAL — The Town review authority for appeals of actions
of the Administrative Officer and the Planning Board on matters of land
development or subdivision, which shall be the Portsmouth Zoning Board of
Review constituted as the board of appeal. See Article XIV.
BOND — See improvement guarantee.
BUILD — The word "build" shall include the words "erect", "construct",
"alter", "enlarge", "move", "modify" and any other words or terms of like
significance.
BUILDABLE LOT — A lot where construction for the use(s) permitted on
the site under the Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance is considered practicable
A CHARTER B
C:203
by the Planning Board, considering the physical constraints to development
of the site as well as the requirements of the pertinent Federal, State and
Town regulations. See Article XIII "Developable Land Area".52
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS — A notice issued by the
Administrative Officer informing an applicant that the application is
complete and meets the requirements of the municipality's regulations, and
that the applicant may proceed with the approval process. See Article III.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development approach in which building
lots may be reduced in size and buildings sited closer together, usually in
groups or clusters, provided that the total development density does not
exceed that which could be constructed on the site under conventional
zoning and subdivision regulations. The additional land that remains
undeveloped is then preserved as open space and recreational land.
COMMON SPACE LAND — Land within or related to a development, not
individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and
intended for the residents of the development. It may include
complementary structures and improvement.
CONCEPT PLAN — A drawing with accompanying information showing the
basic elements of a proposed land development plan or subdivision as used
for pre-application meetings and early discussions, and classification of the
project within the approval process. As such, it allows general intentions
to be proposed and discussed without the extensive costs involved in
submitting a detailed proposal.
CONSISTENCY WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A requirement of
all Town land use regulations which means that all such regulations and
subsequent actions shall be in accordance with the public policies arrived at
through detailed study and analysis and adopted by the municipality as the
comprehensive community plan as specified in R.I. General Laws 45-22.2-3.
DEDICATION, FEE-IN-LIEU-OF — Payments of cash which are authorized
in the Town regulations when requirements for mandatory dedication of
land are not met because of physical conditions of the site or other reasons.
The conditions under which such payments will be allowed and all formulas
for calculating the amount shall be specified in advance in the Town
regulations.
DESIGN FLOOD — The relative size or magnitude of a major flood or
reasonable expectancy, which reflects both flood experience and flood
potential and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway, the flood hazard
area, and the water surface elevations.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land included in a proposed development. Also, the holder of an option or
contract to purchase, or any other person having enforceable proprietary
interest in such land. (May also be referred to as the developer.)
52.Editor's Note: See Art. XIII, Sec. A.4.a).
B PORTSMOUTH CODE B
C:204
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Zoning, subdivision, land development
plan, development plan review, historic district, official map, flood plain
regulation, soil erosion control or any other governmental regulation of the
use and development of land.
DIVISION OF LAND — A subdivision.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — The system through which water flows from the
land, including all watercourse, waterbodies and wetlands.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner
of the property shall not erect any structures or vegetation nor other use
that would impede the use for which the easement is granted.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS — Natural features, resources, or land
characteristics that are sensitive to change and may require conservation
measures or the application of special development techniques to prevent
degradation of the site, or may require limited development, or in certain
instances, may preclude development. See also physical constraints to
development.
ESCROW — A deed, a bond, money, or letter of credit delivered to the Town,
which shall be delivered by the Town to the grantee only upon fulfillment of
one (1) or more specified conditions.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved subdivision or site plan, after all conditions,
engineering plans, and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed, or guarantees properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guarantee.
FINAL PLAN — The final stage of land development and subdivision review
required prior to recording of lots, sale of lots, or start of construction.
FINAL PLAT — The final drawing(s) of all or a portion of a subdivision to
be recorded after approval by the Planning Board and any accompanying
material as described in the Town's regulations and/or required by the
Planning Board.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — See R.I. State Building Code.
GOVERNING BODY — The Portsmouth Town Council, having the power to
adopt Ordinances, accept public dedications, release public improvement
guarantees, and collect fees.
GRADE — The slope of a street, or other public way, specified in percentage
(%) terms.
GROUND COVER — A planting of low growing plants or sod that in time
forms a dense mat covering the area, preventing soil from being blown or
washed away and the growth of unwanted plants.
B CHARTER B
C:205
GUTTER — A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement
edge of a road for purposes of catching and carrying off runoff water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that substantially reduces or
prevents the infiltration of water.
IMPOUNDMENT — A body of water, such as a pond, confined by a dam,
dike, floodgate or other barrier.
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE — A security instrument accepted by a
municipality to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required
by the land development and subdivision regulations, or required by the
municipality as a condition of approval, will be completed in compliance
with the approved plans and specifications of a development. See Article X.
IMPROVEMENT — Any natural or built item which becomes part of, is
placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (ISDS) — A sewage disposal
system or any other sewage treatment device approved by the State.
IRREGULARLY SHAPED LOTS — Irregularly shaped lots are lots that are
not basically rectangular in shape, particularly within the required front
yard area. Irregularly shaped lots shall receive special consideration by the
Board in that lot frontage may be determined at a depth of thirty feet (30'),
radially opposite and concentric with the front boundary providing that the
front boundary line is not less than seventy-five feet (75') in length. This
thirty-foot (30') strip to be excluded from the overall lot size requirement.
LOCAL REGULATIONS — The land development and subdivision review
regulations adopted under the provisions of the R.I. Land Development and
Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992.53 For purposes of clarification,
throughout these regulations, where reference is made to local regulations,
it shall be understood as the land development and subdivision review
regulations, the zoning ordinance, and all related ordinances and rules
properly adopted pursuant to the above enabling act.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security instrument which may be
required and accepted by the Town to insure that necessary improvements
will function as required for a specific period of time. See improvement
guarantee.
MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — Any land development plan not
classified as a minor land development plan or administrative subdivision.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as either an
administrative subdivision or a minor subdivision.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A service street that runs parallel to a
higher-order street which, for purposes of safety, provides access to
abutting properties and separation from through traffic. May be designed
as a residential access street or subcollector as anticipated daily traffic
dictates.
53.Editor's Note: See RIGL Title 45, Ch. 23, § 45-23-25 et seq.
B PORTSMOUTH CODE B
C:206
MASTER PLAN — An overall plan for a proposed project site outlining
general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic
parameters of a major development proposal, rather than giving full
engineering details. Required in major land development or major
subdivision review. See Article VI.
MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A development plan for a
residential project as defined in Town regulations, provided that such
development does not require waivers or modifications as specified in these
regulations. All nonresidential land development projects shall be
considered as major land development plans.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A plan for a residential subdivision of land
consisting of five (5) or fewer units or lots, provided that such subdivision
does not require waivers or modifications as specified in these regulations.
All nonresidential subdivisions shall be considered as major subdivisions.
MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS — See Article XIII.
MULTI-FAMILY BUILDING — A building which contains three (3) or more
units.
MULTIPLE DWELLING UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision designed
or intended for the erection thereon of one (1) or more structures each
containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
PARCEL — A lot, or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under
single control, and usually considered a unit for purposes of development.
It is also referred to as a tract.
PARKING AREA OR LOT — All that portion of a development that is used
by vehicles, comprising the total area used for vehicular access, circulation,
parking, loading and unloading.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security that may be accepted by
the Town as a guarantee that the improvements required as part of an
application for development are satisfactorily completed.
PERMITTING AUTHORITY — The Town agency of government specifically
empowered by State enabling law and Town Ordinance to hear and decide
specific matters pertaining to local land use.
PERSON — A natural person, a corporation, a partnership, an association
or any other organization or entity.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that permits full or partial absorption of
water.
PHASED DEVELOPMENT — Development, usually for large-scale projects,
where construction of public and/or private improvements proceeds by
section(s) subsequent to approval of a master plan for the entire site. See
Article VII.
PHYSICAL CONSTRAINTS TO DEVELOPMENT — Characteristics of a site
or area, either natural or man-made, which present significant difficulties
B CHARTER B
C:207
to construction of the uses permitted on that site, or would require
extraordinary construction methods. See also environmental constraints.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum contiguous
size, as specified by Ordinance, to be planned, developed, operated, and
maintained as a single entity containing one (1) or more structures to
accommodate commercial or office uses, or both, and appurtenant common
areas and other uses incidental to the predominant uses.
PLANNING BOARD — The official planning agency of the Town of
Portsmouth, whether designated as the plan commission, planning
commission, plan board, or as otherwise known. The body established by
the Town that has the responsibility to prepare a comprehensive plan
and make recommendations concerning that plan to the Town Council, to
rule upon subdivisions as provided in the Subdivision Regulations, and to
rule upon, review or advise upon other proposals as provided in these
regulations.
PLANNING BOARD OR THE TERM BOARD — The Planning Board of the
Town of Portsmouth.
PLAT — A drawing or drawings of a land development or subdivision plan
showing the location, boundaries, and lot lines of individual properties, as
well as other necessary information as specified in the Town regulations.
PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE — An initial meeting between
developers and Town representatives which affords developers the
opportunity to present their proposals informally and to receive comments
and directions from the Town officials and others. See Article III.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The required stage of land development and
subdivision review which shall require detailed engineered drawings and all
required State and Federal permits. See Articles V, VI and X.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any street or other roadway, sidewalk,
pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, drainage feature, or
other facility for which the Town government or other governmental entity
either is presently responsible, or will ultimately assume the responsibility
for maintenance and operation upon Town acceptance.
PUBLIC INFORMATIONAL MEETING — A meeting of the Planning Board
or governing body preceded by a notice, open to the public and at which
the public shall be heard (for developments of more than five (5) lots.) See
Article VI. Section C.3.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Town, municipal agency, board of education, State or
county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservation uses.
PUBLIC WATER AUTHORITY — For the purposes herein, a public water
authority shall be the Portsmouth Water and Fire District, the Newport
Water Department, or the Prudence Island Utilities Company, as applicable
to the geographic area of Town serviced by or within the franchise area of
same.
B PORTSMOUTH CODE B
C:208
RE-SUBDIVISION — Any change of an approved or recorded subdivision
plat or in a lot recorded in the municipal land evidence records, or that
affects the lot lines of any areas reserved for public use, or that affects
any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of the Portsmouth
land development and subdivision regulations. For the purposes of these
regulations any such action shall constitute a subdivision.
RESIDENTIAL ACCESS STREET — The lowest order of residential street.
Provides frontage for access to private lots, and carries traffic having
destination or origin on the street itself. Designed to carry traffic at slowest
speed. Traffic volume should not exceed two hundred fifty (250) ADT at any
point of traffic concentration. The maximum number of housing units should
front on this class of street.
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR — The highest order of residential street.
Conducts and distributes traffic between lower-order residential streets
and higher-order streets (arterials and expressways). Since its function
is to promote free traffic flow, access to homes and parking should be
prohibited. Collectors should be designed to prevent use as shortcuts by
non-neighborhood traffic. Total traffic volume should not exceed three
thousand (3,000) ADT.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area including streets, easements and open space portions
of a development.
RESIDENTIAL SUBCOLLECTOR — Middle order of residential streets.
Provides frontage for access to lots and carries traffic to and from adjoining
residential access streets. Traffic should have origin or destination in the
immediate neighborhood. Traffic volume should not exceed five hundred
(500) ADT at any point of traffic concentration.
RETAINING WALL — A structure erected between lands of different
elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the washing down or
erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm water main, shade trees, or for another
special use.
SCREEN — A structure or planting consisting of fencing, berms, and/or
evergreen trees or shrubs providing a continuous view obstruction within a
site or property.
SCS — U.S. Soil Conservation Service.54
SEDIMENTATION — A deposit of soil that has been transported from its site
of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other means. See Portsmouth Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Ordinance.55
54.Editor's Note: Now known as the "Natural Resources Conservation Service."
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 320, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
B CHARTER B
C:209
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground system with a septic tank used for the
decomposition of domestic wastes.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of
sewage.
SETBACK — The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front
line of a building or any projection thereof.
SHOULDER — The graded part of the right-of-way that lies between the
edge of the main pavement (main traveled way) and the lot line.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SITE PLAN — An accurately scaled development plan that illustrates the
existing conditions on a land parcel as well as depicting details of a
proposed development.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement,
substantial improvement or other improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STORM WATER DETENTION — A provision for storage of storm water
runoff and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or
storm. A man-made or natural water collector facility designed to collect
surface and sub-surface water in order to impede its flow and to release the
same gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the development of
the property, into natural or man-made outlets.
STORM WATER RETENTION — A provision for storage of storm water
runoff. A pond, pool or basin used for storage of storm water runoff.
STREET CLASSIFICATION — A method of roadway organization that
identifies a street hierarchy according to function within a road system,
that is, types of vehicles served and anticipated volumes, for the purposes
of promoting safety, efficient land use and the design character of
neighborhoods and districts. Local classifications shall use the following as
major categories:
ARTERIAL — A major street that serves as an avenue for the circulation
of traffic into, out of, or around the municipality and carries high
volumes of traffic.
a.
B PORTSMOUTH CODE B
C:210
STREET HARDWARE — The mechanical and utility systems within a street
right-of-way, such as hydrants, manhole covers, traffic lights and signs,
utility poles and lines, and parking meters.
STREET, ACCESS TO — An adequate and permanent way of entering a lot.
All lots of record shall have access to a public street for all vehicles normally
associated with the uses permitted for that lot.
STREET, ALLEY — A public or private thoroughfare primarily designed to
serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose
principal frontage is on some other street.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one (1) outlet and having
an appropriate vehicular turnaround, either temporary or permanent, at the
closed end.
STREET, LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A freeway or expressway
providing for through traffic. Owners or occupants of abutting property on
lands and other persons have no legal right to access, except at such points
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway.
STREET, PRIVATE — A thoroughfare established as a separate tract for
the benefit of multiple, adjacent properties and meeting specific, municipal
improvement standards. This definition shall not apply to driveways.
STREET, PUBLIC — All public property reserved or dedicated for street
traffic.
STREET, STUB — A portion of a street reserved to provide access to future
development, which may provide for utility connections.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used,
for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified by
the functions they perform. The word "street" shall be defined as the
entire width between boundary lines of every way when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. See street
classification.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person who (1) having an interest in land, causes it,
directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or who (2) directly or
indirectly sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or
advertises to sell, lease, or develop, any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or
plat in a subdivision, or who (3) engages directly or through an agent in
the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or
development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a
subdivision. (May also be referred to as the developer.)
COLLECTOR — A street whose principal function is to carry traffic
between local streets and arterial streets but that may also provide
direct access to abutting properties.
b.
LOCAL — Streets whose primary function is to provide access to
abutting properties.
c.
B CHARTER B
C:211
SUBDIVISION — The division or re-division, of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels. Any adjustment to existing
lot lines of a recorded lot by any means shall be considered a subdivision.
All re-subdivision activity shall be considered a subdivision. The division of
property for purposes of financing constitutes a subdivision.
TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE — A committee appointed by the
Planning Board for the purpose of reviewing, commenting, and making
recommendations to the Planning Board with respect to approval of land
development and subdivision applications.
TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT — Improvements built and maintained by a
developer during construction of a development project and prior to release
of the improvement guarantee, but not intended to be permanent.
TOPSOIL — The original upper layer of soil material which is usually darker
and richer than the subsoil.
TOWN — Means the Town of Portsmouth.
VARIANCE — A waiver from compliance with a specific provision of the
Subdivision Regulations granted to a particular property owner because of
the practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship that would be imposed by
the strict application of that provision of the Regulations.
VESTED RIGHTS — The right to initiate or continue the development of
an approved project for a specified period of time, under the regulations
that were in effect at the time of approval, even if, after the approval, the
regulations change prior to the completion of the project. See Article I.
WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS — See Article XIII.
B PORTSMOUTH CODE B
C:212
III
Applications
A. General.
Any person intending to subdivide land in the Town of Portsmouth shall
follow the procedure established in these Rules and Regulation and shall
provide all the material required in the checklists for the appropriate
subdivision. The Planning Board shall refuse to consider a plat of a
subdivision until all items in the appropriate checklists have been submitted
by the applicant, and no subdivision shall be considered as having been
submitted to the Board unless the proposed plat is accompanied by all the
material required by the appropriate checklist.
All proposed subdivisions must meet at least the minimum design
requirements set forth in these Rules and Regulations. No streets or other
improvements may be installed until the Planning Board has approved the
final plat. No lots may be sold until the final plat has been signed by the
Planning Board Chairman or Secretary and recorded in the land evidence
records of the Town.
B. Pre-application meetings - concept plans.
1. One (1) or more pre-application meetings shall be held for all major
land development or subdivision applications. Pre-application meetings
may be held for administrative and minor applications, upon request of
either the Planning Board or the applicant. Pre-application meetings
shall allow the applicant to meet with the Planning Board or
appropriate officials, boards and/or commissions, planning staff, and,
where appropriate, state agencies, for advice as to the required steps in
the approvals process, the pertinent Town plans, ordinances,
regulations, rules and procedures and standards which may bear upon
the proposed development project.
2. At the pre-application stage the applicant may request the Planning
Board for an informal concept plan review for a development. The
purpose of the concept plan review is also to provide Planning Board
input in the formative stages of major subdivision and land
development concept design. (Note: a "concept plan" is not to be
confused with a "preliminary plan" or a "master plan".)
3. Applicants seeking a pre-application meeting or an informal concept
review shall submit materials on or before the twenty-fifth (25th) of any
month in order to be heard at the regular meeting of the Board held on
the second (2nd) Wednesday of the month. However, the Board may, in
its discretion, order a different date for such meeting.
4. Pre-application meetings shall aim to encourage information sharing
and discussion of project concepts among the participants. Preapplication
discussions are intended for the guidance of the applicant
and shall not be considered approval of a project or its elements. Any
A CHARTER B
C:213
C. Application for development and certificate of completeness.
tentative approval or acceptance of a pre-application concept plan
by the Board shall not be binding upon the Board. Pre-application
discussions are not to be considered as vesting of any sort in
subdivision, zoning or any other land use ordinances of the Town. The
plat shall not be entitled to be recorded nor shall the Board be required
to hold a public hearing on the pre-application concept plan filed.
5. Concept plan submittal contents. Plan drawn on sheet at least eight
point five inches by eleven inches (8.5" x 11") and not more than
twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36"), on which shall be at
least the following:
a) Notations with date, scale, north arrow, original parcel size;
b) Existing Plat(s) and Lot(s) number(s) and owner(s);
c) A locus map at a scale of approximately one inch equal one
thousand feet (1" = 1,000');
d) Boundaries of the entire original tract in a shaded heavy line;
e) All lots and parcels shall be drawn in approximate location and
designated numerically in sequence. The frontage and area in
square feet shall be shown for every proposed lot or parcel.
f) Plan must show all existing and proposed streets, existing streams,
wetlands and other environmental features in their approximate
size and location.
1. Initial application. Applications for subdivision approval shall be
made to the Administrative Officer, who shall review all applications for
form and content in conformity with the requirements set forth herein.
Complete applications shall then be officially filed for review by the
Planning Board, and the Administrative Officer shall stamp all such
applications with the date of official submission to the Town.
2. Classification. The Administrative Officer shall advise the applicant as
to which approvals are required and the appropriate Board for hearing
an application for a land development or subdivision project. The
following three (3) types of applications, as defined in Article II.
Definitions, may be filed:
a) Administrative subdivision. Re-subdivision of existing lots which
yields no additional lots for development, and involves no creation
or extension of streets.
b) Minor subdivision or minor land development plan. A plan for a
residential subdivision of land consisting of five (5) or fewer units
or lots, provided that such subdivision does not require waivers or
modifications.
B PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:214
c) Major subdivision or major land development plan. Any subdivision
not classified as either an administrative subdivision or a minor
subdivision. All nonresidential subdivisions shall be considered as
major subdivisions.
See also Article II. Definitions of "Concept Plan", "Preliminary
Plan", "Master Plan", and "Pre-application conference".
3. Application submission requirements.
a) Contents of an application shall be, at a minimum, the
requirements set forth in these regulations and applicable
checklists found in Appendix A.56 for the three (3) types of
applications. The Administrative Officer may, at his discretion,
waive or allow later submission of any minor submission
requirements, provided that such information is deemed by him to
be unnecessary for proper review of the application by the Planning
Board. Such decision shall be in writing only.
b) Applicants seeking an application meeting shall submit materials
on or before the twenty-fifth (25th) of any month in order to be
heard at the regular meeting of the Board held on the second (2nd)
Wednesday of the month following, provided, however that the
Board may in its discretion order a different date for such meeting.
4. Certificate of completeness. An application shall be complete for
purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action when so
certified in writing on the appropriate checklist by the Administrative
Officer. In the event such certification of the application is not made
within the time specified in these regulations for the type of plan, the
application shall be deemed complete for purposes of commencing the
review period. If the application lacks information required for such
applications as specified in these regulations and the Administrative
Officer has notified the applicant in writing of the deficiencies in the
application, the application shall be deemed not complete.
5. Technical review committee. The Planning Board reserves the right
to establish a Technical Review Committee for any specific subdivision
application and to make recommendations to the Planning Board. When
reviewed by the Technical Review Committee:
a) If the land development or subdivision plan is approved by a
majority of the committee members, the application shall be
forwarded to the Planning Board with a recommendation for
approval with or without further review.
b) If the plan is not approved by a majority vote of the committee
members, the application shall be referred to the Planning Board
with a recommendation to deny.
56.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
C CHARTER C
C:215
6. Planning board consideration.
a) Notwithstanding Subsections 2, 3 and 4 above, the Planning Board
may subsequently require correction of any information found to be
in error and submission of additional information specified in these
Rules and Regulations but not required by the Administrative
Officer prior to certification, as is necessary to make an informed
decision.
b) Where the review is postponed with the consent of the applicant,
pending further information or revision of information, the time
period for review shall be stayed and shall resume when the
Planning Board determines that the required application
information is complete.
c) Certificate from the Town Tax Collector that all taxes due on the
subject land have been paid and that there are no outstanding tax
liens thereon must be filed. No plat shall be approved by the
Planning Board in the absence of such certificate.
C PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:216
IV
Administrative Subdivisions
This article applies to the re-subdivision of existing lots which yields no
additional lots for development, which involves no creation or extension of
streets. Such re-subdivision shall only involve divisions, mergers, mergers
and division, or adjustments of boundaries of existing lots.
General
A.
Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed administrative subdivision
shall submit to the Administrative Officer the items required by these
regulations.
B.
The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the
Administrative Officer within a fifteen (15) day period from the date of its
submission according to the provisions of Article III. Section C Certificate
of Completeness.
C. Review process.
1. Within fifteen (15) days of certification of completeness, the
Administrative Officer, or the technical review committee, shall review
the application and approve, deny or refer it to the Planning Board with
recommendations. The officer or committee shall report its actions to
the Planning Board at its next regular meeting, to be made part of the
record.
2. If no action is taken by the Administrative Officer or the technical
review committee within the fifteen (15) days, the application shall be
placed on the agenda of the next regular Planning Board meeting.
3. If referred to the Planning Board, the Board shall consider the
application and the recommendations of the Administrative Officer and/
or the technical review committee and shall either approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the application within sixty-five (65) days of
certification of completeness. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
administrative subdivision plan and a certificate of the Administrative
Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act within the required
time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the
applicant.
4. Denial of an application by the Administrative Officer and/or the
technical review committee shall not be appealable and shall require
the plan to be submitted as a minor subdivision application.
A CHARTER C
C:217
5. Approval of an administrative subdivision shall expire ninety (90) days
from the date of approval unless within such period a plat in conformity
with such approval is submitted for signature and recording as
specified in Article XIII Procedures.
6. All requirements herein for zoning, access, irregular shape lots,
availability of water, ISDS approvals, procedures, recording and vesting
shall apply to administrative subdivisions.
C PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:218
V
Minor Land Development and Minor Subdivision Review
A. Applicability.
A plan for a residential subdivision of land consisting of five (5) or fewer
units or lots, provided that such subdivision does not require waivers or
modifications as specified in these Regulations, shall be reviewed subject
to the provisions of this Article. All nonresidential subdivisions shall be
considered as major subdivisions.
B. Procedures.
1. Review stages. Minor plan review shall consist of two (2) stages,
preliminary and final. If a street creation or extension is involved, a
public hearing is also required. The Planning Board may vote to
combine the approval stages, providing requirements for both stages
have been met by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Board.
2. Submission requirements. Any applicant requesting approval of a
proposed minor subdivision or minor land development, as defined in
this Regulation, shall submit to the Administrative Officer the items
required by the Application Checklist for Minor Land Developments and
Minor Subdivisions.
3. Certification. The application shall be certified complete or incomplete
by the Administrative Officer within twenty-five (25) days, according to
the provisions of Article III.
4. Re-assignment to major review. The Planning Board may re-assign a
proposed minor project to major review only when the Planning Board
is unable to make the positive findings required in Article XIII.
5. Decision.
a) If no street creation or extension is required, the Planning Board
shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions, the preliminary
plan within sixty-five (65) days of certification of completeness, or
within such further time as is agreed to by the applicant and the
Board, according to the requirements of Article XIII.
b) If a street extension or creation is required, the Planning Board
shall hold a public hearing prior to approval according to the
requirements in Article VI and shall approve, deny, or approve with
conditions, the preliminary plan within ninety-five (95) days of
certification of completeness, or within such further time as is
agreed to by the applicant and the Board, according to the
requirements of Article XIII.
c) If an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and the Board
as provided in Article III, this time period shall be stayed.
A CHARTER B
C:219
C. Failure to act.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act within
the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of
the applicant. If an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and the
Board as provided in Article III, this time period shall be stayed.
D. Final plan.
A Final Plan shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer, which shall
conform to the requirements of the "Final Plat Checklist - Minor Land
Developments and Minor Subdivision",57 and contain all special conditions
imposed by the Planning Board. The Planning Board may delegate final plan
review and approval to either the Administrative Officer or the Technical
Review Committee. The officer or committee shall report its actions to the
Planning Board at its next regular meeting, to be made part of the record.
E. Vesting.
Approval of a minor land development or subdivision plan shall expire
ninety (90) days from the date of approval unless within such period a plat
or plan, in conformity with such approval, and as defined in this act, is
submitted for signature and recording as specified in Article XIII. Validity
may be extended for a longer period, for cause shown, if requested by the
applicant in writing, and approved by the Planning Board.
F. Minor subdivision involving no street creation or extension.
Any subdivision of a parcel of land into at least two (2) but no more than
five (5) lots for the purpose of development, all of which have frontage on a
public street, which meet all applicable area and dimensional requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance58 but which do not require the extension or
creation of a street shall be considered to be a minor subdivision and shall
be reviewed according to the applicable provisions of this Article.
d) All changes and conditions shall be noted on the plans prior to
signature by the appropriate Planning Board official and recording.
1. Certificate from the Town Tax Collector that all taxes due on the subject
land have been paid and that there are no outstanding tax liens thereon.
No plat shall be approved by the Planning Board in the absence of such
certificate.
1. Minor subdivisions involving the creation of two (2) lots:
57.Editor's Note: The Final Plat Checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
B PORTSMOUTH CODE F
C:220
a) Minor subdivisions described above involving the creation of no
more than two (2) lots (one (1) original lot plus one (1) new lot)
shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedure established in
Article XII. The applicant shall be required to submit to the
Administrative Officer all plans and supporting materials as
required by the Preliminary Plat Checklist for Minor Subdivisions.59
b) Any further subdivision of either of the two (2) lots created
hereunder at any time after the effective date of these Regulations,
whether immediate or future, shall be considered to be a minor
subdivision of three (3) or more lots or a major subdivision and
shall be reviewed under the applicable provisions of these
Regulations.
c) Criteria for review. The following criteria shall be used by the
Planning Board in their review of any two (2)-lot minor subdivision
within this subsection:
(1) Potential for further subdivision. The Planning Board shall
consider whether the parcel being subdivided has the potential
for further subdivision under current applicable zoning
regulations.
If it has such potential, the Planning Board shall consider
the impacts from such future development in their review of
the proposed subdivision and may impose any or all of the
Lot Development Standards provided below as necessary to
mitigate such impacts.
(2) Adequacy of the street on which the proposed lots front.
(a) The lots must be provided with access to a street which is
adequate for access for vehicular traffic; and,
(b) The frontage must provide safe and adequate access to a
public street.
(3) Adequacy of the access from the lots onto the street.
(a) The lots must be accessible by the fire department, police
department and other agencies charged with protection of
the public peace, safety and welfare; and,
(b) The lots must be physically accessible from the street upon
which they front, i.e., they cannot be isolated by
topographic or natural features which prevent adequate
physical access from the street.
59.Editor's Note: The Preliminary Plat Checklist for Minor Subdivisions is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
F CHARTER F
C:221
(4) Conformance with zoning. The proposed lots must be in
conformance with all applicable zoning ordinance
requirements.
(5) Conformity with the comprehensive plan. The proposed lots
shall be in conformity with the Town's Comprehensive
Community Plan with regard to:
(a) Discouraging the development of residential lots having
direct frontage on major streets.
(b) Establishing a functional classification of roads that
encourages residences to take access from local roads.
(c) Preserving visual quality and rural character.
(6) Relationship to adjacent or nearby uses. The proposed lots and
access thereto shall be designed so as to minimize conflict with
existing adjacent uses, driveways, buildings or other
structures, streets, intersections, hills, curves or other similar
existing features.
d) (Reserved)
e) Lot development standards. Standards which may be imposed by
the Planning Board on any two (2)-lot minor subdivision as a
condition of approval may include the following:
(1) The location of the proposed access driveway along the road
frontage may be modified or relocated.
(2) The proposed number of access driveways onto any street from
any lot or group of lots may be modified or limited. (See also
Traffic Sensitive District in Article X.) [Amended
4-29-199860]
(3) Driveways of adjacent lots, or groups of contiguous lots may be
combined and the use of common driveways may be required
where feasible.
(4) Screening, buffering, and/or landscaping of the lot and/or
driveway from adjacent public streets may be required.
(5) Preservation of any existing unique natural and/or historic
features such as trees or stone walls may be required. The
applicant shall endeavor to preserve such features, and the
Planning Board may require specific such features to be
preserved.
60.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from '(2) The proposed number of access driveways onto any
street from any lot or group of lots may be modified or limited. (See also Traffic Sensitive
District in the Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance)'
F PORTSMOUTH CODE F
C:222
(6) Provisions may be made for ensuring adequate sight distances
from the proposed access driveway along adjacent public
streets in order to alleviate any potentially hazardous situation.
(7) Subdivision of lots having frontage along Traffic Sensitive
District roads shall adhere to the standards of Article X.
[Amended 4-29-199861]
2. Minor subdivisions involving the creation of three (3) to five (5) lots.
Minor subdivisions described above involving the creation of three (3),
four (4) or five (5) lots for the purpose of development shall be reviewed
by the Planning Board in accordance with the procedure established in
Article XII. The applicant shall be required to submit to the
Administrative Officer all plans and supporting materials as required by
the Preliminary Plat Checklist for Minor Subdivisions.62 Any further
subdivision of any lot(s) at any time after the effective date of these
Regulations, whether immediate or future, so as to create a total of six
(6) lots or more from the original lot, after the effective date of adoption
of these Regulations shall be considered to be a major subdivision and
shall be reviewed under the provisions of Article VI.
a) Criteria for review. In their review of any three (3) to five (5)-lot
minor subdivision, the Planning Board shall use the criteria for
review of a two (2)-lot minor subdivision involving no street
creation or extension as provided in Section F.1. above. In addition,
the Committee and Planning Board may also consider the
following:
(1) Feasibility of internal access streets. Wherever possible and
practical, the lots shall be developed on remaining portions of
the parcel being subdivided so as to avoid creation of
individual lots having direct frontage on an existing public
arterial or collector street. In such cases, the Planning Board
shall require the applicant to submit alternative plans to
demonstrate the feasibility of creating other types of
subdivisions, such as a three (3) to five (5)-lot minor
subdivision with an internal street, a residential compound, or
a conventional subdivision. If the Planning Board determines
that such development is feasible and practical, the creation of
frontage lots shall be prohibited and the applicant shall be
required to develop the property in an alternative fashion.
b) Lot development standards. If the creation of three (3) to five (5)
frontage lots is not prohibited under the provisions of (2)(a) above,
the Planning Board shall review the proposed frontage lots as a
three (3) to five (5)-lot minor subdivision. Standards which may be
61.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from '(7) Subdivision of lots having frontage along Traffic
Sensitive District roads shall adhere to the standards of Article III of the Portsmouth
Zoning Ordinance.'
62.Editor's Note: The Preliminary Plat Checklist for Minor Subdivisions is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
F CHARTER F
C:223
G. Minor subdivisions involving street creation or extension.
Any subdivision of a parcel of land into at least two (2) but no more than
five (5) lots for the purpose of development and which requires the creation
or extension of a public street shall be considered a minor subdivision and
shall be reviewed by the Planning Board in accordance with the procedures
set forth in Section B herein. Standards for the design and required
improvements of such minor subdivisions shall be as follows:
imposed by the Planning Board as a condition of approval of any
three (3) to five (5)-lot minor subdivision involving no street
creation or extension may include any of the standards for the
development of a two (2)-lot minor subdivision as provided in
Section 1.c (1)-(6) above, plus any of the following:
(1) Improvements to the street on which the proposed lot(s)
front(s) may be required in order to provide safe vehicular
access. Provided, however that the standards for construction
or upgrading of any such access street(s) shall not exceed
those standards required by Article X of these Subdivision
Regulations for construction of streets in minor subdivisions.
(2) Easements may be required to be granted to the Town to
prohibit individual driveway access from lots onto frontage
streets if adequate provision is made for access from individual
lots to service roads.
(3) Provisions may be made for incorporating proposed frontage
lots into future subdivision of contiguous land, if such future
subdivision is determined to be feasible by the Planning Board.
Such provisions may include the following:
(a) Preparation of a concept plan to indicate future access to
and development of residual land contiguous to proposed
frontage lots;
(b) Reservation of land or easements to provide for future
access from access streets to contiguous land; and/or,
(c) Temporary driveways for frontage lots with provisions
made for future permanent driveways to be connected to
future streets in subdivision of contiguous land.
1. Creation or extension of a public street. Any minor subdivision that
proposes the creation or extension of a public street shall be required to
meet the design improvement standards for public streets as provided
in Article X.
2. Creation or extension of a private street. Creation or extension of
private streets shall not be permitted.
F PORTSMOUTH CODE G
C:224
3. Subdivision of lots having frontage along Traffic Sensitive District roads
shall adhere to the standards of Article X. [Amended 4-29-199863]
4. As-Built Road and Public Improvement Construction Drawings showing
compliance with these regulations and any special conditions imposed
by the Planning Board and/or any applicable division of the State of
Rhode Island shall be required prior to the release of any performance
or road bonds.
63.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from '(3) Subdivision of lots having frontage along Traffic
Sensitive District roads shall adhere to the standards of Article III of the Portsmouth
Zoning Ordinance.'
G CHARTER G
C:225

VI
Major Land Development and Major Subdivision Review
A. Applicability. [Amended 1-10-2018]
A plan for a residential subdivision of land consisting of more than five (5)
lots or any subdivision not classified as either an administrative subdivision
or minor subdivision shall be reviewed subject to the provisions of this
article. All nonresidential land development projects shall be considered as
major land development.
B. Review stages.
Major plan review shall consist of three (3) stages:
Master Plan.
Preliminary Plan.
Final Plan.
following the pre-application meeting(s) specified in Article III. Also
required is a public informational meeting and a public hearing.
C. Major land development and major subdivision — master plan
review.
1. The Planning Board may vote to combine the approval stages, providing
requirements for both stages have been met by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the Board.
2. The Planning Board may vote to combine review stages and to modify
and/or waive requirements as specified in Article XIII. Review stages
may be combined only after the Planning Board determines that all
necessary requirements have been met by the applicant.
1. Submission requirements.
a) The applicant shall first submit to the Administrative Officer the
items required by these regulations for master plans.
b) Requirements for the master plan and supporting material for this
phase of review shall include, but not be limited to: information on
the natural and built features of the surrounding neighborhood,
existing natural and man-made conditions of the development site,
including topographic features, the freshwater wetland and coastal
zone boundaries, the floodplains, as well as the proposed design
concept, proposed public improvements and dedications, tentative
construction phasing, and potential neighborhood impacts.
c) When an application is submitted for Master Plan approval, the
applicant shall submit to the applicable Town, state or private
agency as provided in the Master Plan Checklist for Major Land
Developments and Major Subdivisions,64 a copy of the Master Plan
A CHARTER C
C:227
narrative report for their review and comment. Comments may
be solicited from (1) Town agencies including, but not limited
to, the town planner, the Department of Public Works, Fire and
Police departments, the conservation commission; (2) adjacent
communities, as appropriate; (3) state agencies, as appropriate,
including the Departments of Environmental Management and
Transportation, and the Coastal Resources Management Council;
and (4) federal agencies, as appropriate. Each agency so notified
by the applicant shall be requested to provide its comments on a
form to be provided to the applicant by the Administrative Officer.
Comments shall be received from each agency prior to the date
of the informational meeting. All such written forms and
supplementary material shall be delivered to the Administrative
Officer by the reviewing agency within the time limits prescribed.
If comments are not received by the Administrative Officer by
that date, it shall be assumed that the agency does not wish to
comment.
The Administrative Officer shall receive and coordinate review and
comments by said agencies and officials.
d) Each department or agency to which such a request for comments
is made shall deliver to the Administrative Officer a completed
written form, and any supplementary material, which shall
describe:
(1) An estimate of the impact of the subdivision on the facilities
and/or services provided by the department or agency;
(2) Whether existing facilities and/or services are adequate to
serve the subdivision's residents;
(3) Whether plans for the necessary improvements to existing
facilities and/or services are included in the Town's Capital
Improvement Program or are otherwise planned; and,
(4) An estimate of how long it would take to provide any necessary
improvements to existing facilities and/or services.
2. Certification. The application must be certified, in writing, complete or
incomplete by the Administrative Officer within twenty-five (25) days,
according to the provisions of Article III. The running of the time period
set forth herein will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a
certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative
officer and will recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected
application by the applicant. However, in no event will the
administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as
complete or incomplete less than ten (10) days after its resubmission.
[Amended 1-10-2018]
64.Editor's Note: The Checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
C PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:228
3. Informational meeting. A public informational meeting shall be held
prior to the Planning Board decision on the master plan, unless the
master plan and preliminary plan approvals are being combined, in
which case the public informational meeting shall be optional, based
upon Planning Board determination.
a) Public notice for the informational meeting is required and shall be
given at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the meeting in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Town. Postcard notice
shall be mailed to the applicant and to all property owners within
the notice area, as specified by Town regulations.
b) At the public informational meeting the applicant shall present the
proposed development project. The Planning Board shall allow oral
and written comments from the general public. All public
comments shall be made part of the public record of the project
application.
c) If the public informational meeting on the master plan and the
public hearing on the preliminary plan are combined as provided in
Article VI, Section B., all comments from reviewing agencies shall
be received prior to the date of the public hearing.
4. Decision. The Planning Board shall, within ninety (90) days of
certification of completeness, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant, through the submission of a written
waiver, approve of the master plan as submitted, approve with changes
and/or conditions, or deny the application, according to the
requirements of Article XIII. All changes and conditions shall be noted
on the plans prior to signature by the appropriate Planning Board
official and recording. [Amended 1-10-2018]
a) The Planning Board may, at the master plan stage of review, require
that the development be completed in phases, per the provisions of
Article VII. Any such phasing shall be noted on the plans.
b) A landscaping plan may be required as part of site plan and
subdivision design as part of Master Plan approval for major
subdivisions.
c) The Planning Board may require that up to five percent (5%) of the
subdivided area be set aside for permanent open space or
recreation purposes. A fee in lieu of such dedication may be set by
the Planning Board to be used for open space or recreation
purposes near the proposed subdivision.
5. Failure to act. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the master plan and a certificate
of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to
act within the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued
on request of the applicant.
C CHARTER C
C:229
D. Major land development and major subdivision - preliminary
plan.
6. Vesting. [Amended 1-10-2018]
a) The approved master plan shall be vested for a period of two (2)
years, with the right to extend for two (2) one-year extensions upon
written request by the applicant, who must appear before the
Planning Board for the annual review. Vesting may be extended for
a longer period, if requested by the applicant in writing and
approved by the Planning Board, as long as it can be proven, to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board, that work is proceeding on
either the approval stages or on the construction of the
development as shown in the approved master plan documents.
Master plan vesting shall include the zoning requirements,
conceptual layout and all conditions shown on the approved master
plan drawings and supporting materials.
b) The initial four-year vesting for the approved master plan shall
constitute the vested rights for the development as required in the
Zoning Ordinance.
1. Submission requirements.
a) The applicant shall first submit to the Administrative Officer the
items required by these regulations for preliminary plans.
b) Requirements for the preliminary plan and supporting materials for
this phase of the review shall include, but not be limited to:
engineering plans depicting the existing site conditions,
engineering plans depicting the proposed development project, a
perimeter survey, all permits required by state or federal agencies
prior to commencement of construction, including permits related
to freshwater wetlands, the coastal zone, floodplains, preliminary
suitability for individual septic disposal systems, public water
systems, and connections to state roads.
c) Final written comments and/or approvals of the Department of
Public Works, the Town solicitor, other Town government
departments, commissions, or authorities as appropriate.
d) Prior to approval of the preliminary plan, copies of all legal
documents describing the property, proposed easements and
rights-of-way.
2. Certification. The application must be certified, in writing, complete or
incomplete by the Administrative Officer within twenty-five (25) days,
according to the provisions of Article III. The running of the time period
set forth herein will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a
certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative
officer and will recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected
application by the applicant. However, in no event will the
C PORTSMOUTH CODE D
C:230
E. Major land development and major subdivision - public hearing
and notice.
administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as
complete or incomplete less than ten (10) days after its resubmission.
[Amended 1-10-2018]
3. Public hearing. Prior to Planning Board decision on the preliminary
plan, a public hearing, which adheres to the requirements for notice
described in Section E herein, must be held.
4. Public improvement guarantees. Proposed arrangements for
completion of the required public improvements, including construction
schedule and/or financial guarantees shall be reviewed and approved
by the Planning Board at preliminary plan approval.
5. Decision. A complete application for a major subdivision or
development plan shall be approved, approved with conditions or
denied within ninety (90) days of the date when it is certified complete,
or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer,
through the submission of a written waiver. All changes and conditions
shall be noted on the plans prior to signature by the appropriate
Planning Board official and recording. [Amended 1-10-2018]
6. Failure to act. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a
certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall
be issued on request of the applicant.
7. Vesting. The approved preliminary plan shall be vested for a period of
two (2) years with the right to extend for two (2) one-year extensions
upon written request by the applicant, who must appear before the
Planning Board for the annual review and provide proof of valid state or
federal permits as applicable. Thereafter, vesting may be extended for a
longer period, for good cause shown, if requested, in writing by the
applicant, and approved by the Planning Board. The vesting for the
preliminary plan approval shall include all general and specific
conditions as shown on the approved preliminary plan drawings and
supporting material. [Amended 1-10-2018]
1. A public hearing shall be required for a major land development project
or a major subdivision or where a street extension or creation requires
a public hearing for a minor land development project or minor
subdivision.
2. Notice requirements. Public notice of the hearing shall be given at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Town following the Town's usual and
customary practices for such advertising. Notice shall be sent to the
applicant and to each owner within the notice area as below, by
D CHARTER E
C:231
F. Major land development and major subdivision - final plan.
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the time and place of the
hearing not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
All notices shall specify the general nature of the hearing, and shall
also include the street address of the subject property, or if no street
address is available, the distance from the nearest existing intersection
in tenths (1/10's) of a mile. These regulations may require a
supplemental notice that an application for development approval is
under consideration be posted at the location in question. Such posting
shall be for informational purposes only and shall not constitute
required notice of a public hearing.
3. Notice area and recipients.
a) All abutting property owners to the proposed development's
property boundary, as defined in Article II Definitions, shall receive
notice.
b) Watersheds. Additional notice within watersheds shall also be sent
as required in Article XI.
c) Adjacent municipalities. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent
by the Administrative Officer to the Administrative Officer of an
adjacent municipality if (1) the notice area extends into the
adjacent municipality, or (2) the development site extends into the
adjacent municipality, or (3) there is a potential for significant
negative impact on the adjacent municipality.
d) A supplemental notice shall be posted at the office of the Town
Clerk. This posting shall be for information purposes only and shall
not constitute required notice of a public hearing.
4. Notice cost. The cost of notification, including actual advertising and
mailing costs, shall be borne by the applicant.
1. Submission requirements:
a) The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer the items
required by the Town regulations for final plan, as well as all
material required by the Planning Board when the application was
given preliminary approval. All changes and conditions shall be
noted on the plans.
b) Arrangements for completion of the required public improvements,
including construction schedule and/or financial guarantees.
c) Certification by the tax collector that all property taxes are current.
d) For phased projects, the final plan for phases following the first
phase, shall be accompanied by copies of as-built drawings not
previously submitted of all existing public improvements for prior
phases.
E PORTSMOUTH CODE F
C:232
e) All changes imposed by other agencies or departments and all
other changes not specifically ordered by the Planning Board shall
be noted by the applicant on the plans and/or in narrative form.
2. Certification. The application for final plan approval shall be certified
complete or incomplete by the Administrative Officer within forty-five
(45) days, according to the provisions of Article III. If the Administrative
Officer certifies the application as complete and does not require
submission to the Planning Board as per Subparagraph 3. below, the
final plan shall be considered approved.
3. Referral to the Planning Board. The Administrative Officer shall refer
the final plans to the Planning Board for review. The Planning Board
shall, within forty-five (45) days after the certification of completeness,
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant,
approve or deny the final plan as submitted.
a) The Board reserves the right to amend its preliminary approval or
conditions if the plans have changed significantly for any reason
since the preliminary approval.
4. Failure to act. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the final plan and a certificate of
the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act
within the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on
request of the applicant.
5. Recording. The final approval of a major subdivision or land
development project shall expire one (1) year from the date of approval
unless, within that period, the plat or plan shall have been submitted for
signature and recording as specified in Article XIII. The Planning Board
may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording for an
additional period.
6. Acceptance of public improvements. Signature and recording as
specified in Article XIII shall constitute the acceptance by the Town of
any street or other public improvement or other land intended for
dedication. Final plan approval shall not impose any duty upon the
Town to maintain or improve those dedicated areas until the Town
Council accepts the completed public improvements as constructed in
compliance with the final plans.
7. Validity of recorded plans. The approved final plan, once recorded, shall
remain valid as the approved plan for the site unless and until an
amendment to the plan is approved under the procedure set forth in
Article XIII, or a new plan is approved by the Planning Board.
F CHARTER F
C:233

VII
Phasing of Major Land Development and Subdivision Projects
A. Determination of necessity for phasing.
B. General requirements for phased projects.
1. When a Major Land Development or Major Subdivision is submitted for
Master Plan approval as provided in Article VI, the Planning Board shall
review the adequacy of existing and projected future public
improvements, services and facilities which may be impacted by the
proposed development in its entirety. In so reviewing, the Planning
Board shall consider comments received under procedures established
in Article VI.C.
2. If the Planning Board determines that such improvements, services and
facilities, including but not limited to water supply, sewerage, streets
and associated drainage facilities, schools, recreational facilities, and
fire and police protection will not be adequate to serve the residents of
the subdivision or development at the time of recording of the plat, the
Planning Board shall have the authority to establish a rate of
development of the entire subdivision by requiring it to be built in
phases.
1. If phasing is required, the Planning Board shall review and/or approve
the entire master plan first, per the provisions of Article VI Section C.,
except as provided herein. Thereafter the applicant shall be required to
submit plans for preliminary and/or final review and/or approval by
phase(s) as stipulated per Article VI.
2. Based on the responses received from the various departments and
agencies, the Planning Board shall establish, at the time of master plan
approval, a rate of development of the entire subdivision or
development that will permit residential construction only when
improvements, services and facilities will be adequate to serve the
residents of the subdivision or development. As part of such a phasing
plan, the Planning Board may require that improvements be installed,
or lots sold, in two (2) or more phases.
3. The Planning Board may, at its discretion, impose conditions for
determining the physical limits of phases, for allowing progression to
additional phases, for allowing two (2) or more phases to proceed in
review or construction simultaneously, for interim public improvements
or construction conditions, for changes to master or preliminary plans,
and may include other provisions as necessitated by special conditions.
4. The master plan approval shall contain information on the physical
limits of the phases, the schedule and sequence of public improvement
installation, improvement guarantees, and the work and completion
schedules for approvals and construction of the phases.
A CHARTER B
C:235
C. Vesting of master plan.
The master plan shall remain vested as long as it can be proven, to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board, that work is proceeding on either the
approval stages or on the construction of the development as shown in
the approved master plan documents. Master plan vesting shall include the
zoning requirements, conceptual layout and all conditions shown on the
approved master plan drawings and supporting materials.
5. The Planning Board shall specify improvement guarantees related to
each particular phase. If any off-site improvements or other
improvements or conditions which are not directly related to a
particular phase are required as a condition of approval, the Board
shall, in setting the guarantee amount for each phase, clearly specify
when such guarantees are to be provided.
B PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:236
VIII
Land Development Projects
(Reserved)
CHARTER C
C:237

IX
Development Plan Review
A. Applicability.
B. Procedure.
1. Development plan review of applications for certain uses, as specified
in the Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance,65 requiring a special use permit or
a variance, shall be conducted by the Planning Board and shall be
advisory to the permitting authority.
2. Development plan review undertaken by the Planning Board shall be
subject to Sections 45-23-25 through 45-23-74 of the R.I. General Laws
(the Subdivision Enabling Act) plus all Subdivision Regulations of the
Town of Portsmouth.
1. Applications subject to Development Plan Review shall, immediately
upon receipt of an application to the Zoning Board of Review, refer the
site plan and related documents to the Portsmouth Planning Board for
review and advice. Two (2) copies of the site plan shall be delivered to
the Portsmouth Planning Board. Said Portsmouth Planning Board shall
make a written report to the Zoning Board of Review within forty-five
(45) days of receipt of said plan by the Planning Board at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.
2. Applications which are materially changed after review by the Planning
Board may, at the discretion of the Zoning Board of Review, be referred
back to the Planning Board for further review.
3. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit waivers of any regulations
unless approved by the permitting authority pursuant to these
Regulations.
4. Preliminary plans may be submitted to the Planning Board for informal
discussion, provided however, any tentative advisory opinion of a
preliminary plan by the Planning Board shall not be binding upon the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Review.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
A CHARTER B
C:239

X
Design and Improvement Standards
A. General and purpose.
The purpose of good subdivision and site design is to create a functional
and attractive development, to minimize adverse impacts, and to ensure
that a project will be an asset to the community. To promote this purpose,
land development projects and subdivisions shall conform to the following
standards which are designed to result in a well-planned community
without adding unnecessarily to development costs. These design and
improvement standards are to promote high quality development in
character with the rural nature of the Town of Portsmouth, help create
neighborhoods and non-residential areas that are pleasant and functional,
help create roads and other public improvements that serve their intended
purposes for generations to come at minimal added cost to the taxpayer,
and to minimize adverse environmental impacts of development.
B. Responsibility of the applicant.
The applicant, at his own expense, shall construct all improvements
required by the Planning Board as part of its approval of any subdivision, in
accordance with the specifications of these Rules and Regulations.
1. Paper streets. Where access to property being subdivided is proposed
to be from streets which are platted but either not constructed or
inadequate as to width or condition, the applicant shall be required to
construct said access street, in full accordance with this Article, from
the public street(s) to one (1) or more of the roads to be constructed, as
determined by the Planning Board.
2. Professional standards. Wherever it is mandated by these Regulations
that certain tasks associated with subdivision plans and improvements
be performed by registered professional civil engineers, registered land
surveyors, and/or landscape architects, as appropriate and required. All
such tasks shall be performed according to existing and amended
standards of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations
Board of Registration for Professional Civil Engineers and Board of
Registration for Land Surveyors.
3. Generally accepted engineering principles. Any situation, definition, or
practice not fully covered by these Regulations shall be done according
to generally accepted engineering principles.
4. Construction sequence. The applicant shall provide and be bound by a
sequence of development and construction activities. As part of the
final plan approval, the applicant shall submit for approval a sequence
of major activities including installation of drainage facilities,
construction of streets or street segments, landscaping, erosion
controls, and utilities. This approved sequence may be amended from
time to time. Minor changes may be approved by the Public Works
A CHARTER B
C:241
C. Site design criteria.
Director in consultation with the Administrative Officer. Major changes
such as the sequence of construction of streets, must be approved by
the Planning Board. [Added 4-29-1998]
1. Design of the development shall take into consideration all existing
Town and regional plans for the surrounding community. In designing a
subdivision, the Board shall require the applicant to incorporate the
standards herein.
2. Preservation of unique and natural features. Development of the site
shall be based on the characteristics of the site and upon the site
analysis. To the maximum extent practicable, development shall be
located to preserve the natural features of the site, to avoid areas of
environmental sensitivity, and to minimize negative impacts and
alteration of natural features, historic and cultural resources, and areas
of scenic value which contribute to the character of the Town.
a) Among other considerations the Planning Board shall consider are
the prevailing winds, flooding, hurricane damage, adjoining land
uses, topography, swampy areas, health, welfare and safety.
Existing stream channels should be preserved.
b) Environmental features such as stone walls, specimen trees, water
bodies or other outstanding natural or man-made features shall be
retained insofar as possible, and incorporated into the design of the
subdivision so as to preserve the character of the land.
c) Where possible, extensive heavy grading or filling should be
avoided. Development and disturbance of natural features shall be
avoided in areas having a slope of greater than twenty percent
(20%).
d) The development shall be laid out to avoid adversely affecting
ground water and aquifer recharge; to take full advantage of the
terrain characteristics and contours to reduce the cuts and fills; to
avoid unnecessary impervious cover; to prevent flooding; to
provide adequate access to lots and sites; and to mitigate adverse
effects of shadow, traffic, drainage, and utilities on neighboring
properties.
e) The following specific areas shall be preserved as undeveloped
open space or lot area, to the extent consistent with the reasonable
utilization of land, and in accordance with applicable state or Town
regulations:
(1) Unique and/or fragile areas, including freshwater wetlands
and coastal features;
B PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:242
(2) Significant trees or stands of trees, or other vegetative species
that are rare to the area or are of particular horticultural or
landscape value;
(3) Lands in the flood plain, as defined in Article II;
(4) Steep slopes in excess of twenty percent (20%) as measured
over a ten (10)-foot interval unless appropriate engineering
measures concerning slope stability, erosion, and resident
safety are taken;
(5) Habitats of endangered wildlife, as identified on applicable
federal or state lists; and
(6) Historically significant structures and sites, as listed on federal
or state lists of historic places.
3. Site analysis. An analysis of the subdivision site and nearby areas shall
be required by the Planning Board for all major subdivisions. The scope
and content of the site analysis shall be discussed during the preapplication
meeting and shall be presented by the applicant during the
Master Plan stage of review. Such an analysis may be required by the
Planning Board for minor subdivisions if the Board finds that the
proposed development may have a negative impact on the existing
natural and built environment or would be inappropriate for the
character of the surrounding neighborhood.
a) Such a site analysis shall include written and/or graphic analysis of
the following characteristics of the development site: site context;
geology and soil; agricultural lands; wetlands; coastal features;
topography; ecology; existing vegetation, structures, and road
networks; visual features; and past and present use of the site.
4. Residential lot design standards.
a) Lot dimensions - general. All lots shall be designed so as to contain
at least the Minimum Developable Land Area required by Article IV
of the Zoning Ordinance, and so that intended structures and
improvements may be constructed within the limits of the Land Use
Requirements Table therein.66
(1) Lots in a subdivision not served by a public sewer or water
district shall be a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square
feet of developable land area, or as otherwise designated by
the Zoning Ordinance, and designed to comply with State
regulations on the separation of drinking water wells from
ISDS and from the property line, street or other structures.
(2) A subdivision of land located in an area served by a public
water district shall be predicated upon said subdivision being
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
C CHARTER C
C:243
serviced by said public water district. In order to obtain the
benefits of the smaller lot area and other lowered
requirements of subdivisions in a public water district, said
owner must utilize public water district. Intention to do so shall
be evidenced by approval of detailed plans for the installation
of public water lines by the appropriate water district, which
shall be required prior to final approval and recording of the
plat.
(3) In the event any subdivision of whatsoever nature is developed
in a public water district wherein the owner does not utilize
said facilities, all requirements as to said subdivision shall be
based upon and shall be the same as those specified in areas
not within a public water district.
b) Lot configuration. The Planning Board may prohibit or require
modification to lots shaped or configured so as to conflict with the
use of the land for the intended purpose. Long, narrow strips of
land, unusual shapes, angles, dimensions, and usable portions
separated by easements shall be avoided. The Planning Board may
vary street locations, lot shapes and dimensions, yards, and
setbacks for the purpose of encouraging and promoting flexibility,
economy and environmental soundness in layout and design,
provided that the lots' areas and dimensions, yards, and setbacks
within the subdivision conform to the minimum requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance,67 and provided that such standards shall be
appropriate to the type of development permitted.
(1) All lots shall have frontage on a public street equal to the
minimum lot width specified in the Town's Zoning Ordinance.
For purposes of these Regulations, streets platted but not
improved or accepted for maintenance by the Town, shall not
be considered existing improved public streets. Where these
streets are incorporated within the subdivision, they shall be
improved by the developer to meet the Subdivision Regulation
standards.
(a) With the written approval of the Planning Board, a lot may
have less frontage than that required by the Zoning
Ordinance on a cul-de-sac turnaround provided that the
distance between the side lot lines on opposite sides of the
lot as measured at the front yard depth is no less than the
lot width required by the Zoning Ordinance for that zoning
district.
(b) With Planning Board approval, lots created pursuant to
Article VIII of the Zoning Ordinance and consisting
entirely of "common lands" as those terms are defined in
Article VIII, Section C.7.(a) & (b) of the Zoning Ordinance,
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
C PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:244
and lots set aside for permanent open space or recreation
purposes pursuant to Article VI, Section C.4.c) of the
Portsmouth Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations may be exempted from the requirement of
possessing frontage on a public street. [Added
6-23-1999]
(2) Irregular shaped lots other than on a cul-de-sac may receive
special consideration by the Board in that lot frontage may be
determined at a depth of thirty feet (30'), radially opposite and
concentric with the front boundary providing that the front
boundary line is not less than seventy-five feet (75') in length.
This thirty-foot (30') strip to be excluded from the overall lot
size requirement.
(3) Side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to
curved street lines unless the Planning Board determines that
a variation from this rule will provide a better street or lot plan.
c) Every lot shall have sufficient access to it for emergency vehicles as
well as for those needing access to the property in its intended use.
d) Vegetated buffer areas shall be required where necessary to avoid
adverse impacts from adjacent uses.
5. Commercial and industrial development design. Commercial and
industrial developments shall be designed according to the same
principles governing the design of residential developments; namely,
buildings shall be located according to topography, with
environmentally sensitive areas avoided to the maximum extent
practicable; factors such as drainage, noise, odor, and surrounding land
uses considered in siting buildings; sufficient access shall be provided;
and adverse impacts buffered.
6. Traffic sensitive districts. [Amended 4-29-199868]
a) Traffic Sensitive Districts are established for the following
purposes:
(1) To facilitate the movement of traffic along major roads in
Portsmouth in a safe and orderly manner;
(2) To reduce the number of and increase the spacing of driveways
which may disrupt traffic flow;
68.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from '6 TRAFFIC SENSITIVE DISTRICTS - RESTRICTION OF
ACCESS. When a tract fronting on a public street designated herein or in the Town's
Zoning Ordinance as in a" Traffic Sensitive District" is to be subdivided into more than 10
lots, the Planning Board may require that the lots adjoining the existing street be
provided with frontage on a Marginal access street, and that access to the public street be
required.'
C CHARTER C
C:245
(3) To reduce infringement on the rights of the public to travel
roadways in a safe manner, while at the same time providing
for adequate access and egress to properties; and
(4) To protect the public safety along major thoroughfares in the
Town where accidents have frequently occurred.
b) All driveway openings onto streets listed in Subparagraph f) of this
Subsection shall have suitable turnaround space so that
automobiles do not back out onto said streets.
c) On any lot with frontage on the streets listed in Subparagraph f) of
this Section the following shall apply:
(1) Only one (1) driveway or curb opening onto streets listed in
Subparagraph f) of this Section shall be created to serve the
original lot; or
(2) Future subdivision or lots created from the original lot shall be
served by a single common driveway or curb opening onto the
streets listed in Subparagraph f) of this Section; or
(3) A public street or street system approved by the Planning
Board under the provisions of the Rules and Regulations
Regarding the Subdivision of Land shall be created to serve all
subsequent lots created from the original lot.
d) Common driveways, rights-of-way or other common means of
access to adjacent streets listed in Subparagraph f) of this Section
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Review before any building permit shall be issued for lots
created from the original lot.
e) When a tract fronting on a public street designated herein or in the
Town's Zoning Ordinance as in a "Traffic Sensitive District" is to be
subdivided into more than ten (10) lots, the Planning Board may
require that the lots adjoining the existing street be provided with
frontage on a marginal access street, and that access to the public
street be restricted.
f) This Section shall be applicable only to lots having frontage on the
following streets:
(1) East Main Road (Route 138).
(2) West Main Road (Route 114).
(3) Bristol Ferry Road (Route 114).
(4) Turnpike Avenue.
(5) Union Street.
(6) Middle Road.
C PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:246
D. Street layout, design, and arrangement.
(7) Sandy Point Avenue.
(8) Wapping Road.
(9) Glen Road.
(10) Boyd's Lane.
(11) Braman's Lane.
1. General standards.
a) Streets in the subdivision shall be coordinated with each other and
with the existing street system in a manner satisfactory to the
Planning Board, with due regard to securing safety, and
emphasizing the attractiveness of the street layout.
b) The arrangement of streets shall be considered in relation to the
existing street system, and to existing topographic and natural
conditions. The road system shall be designed to permit the safe,
efficient, and orderly movement of traffic; to meet, but not exceed
the needs of the present and future population served; to have a
simple and logical circulation pattern; to respect natural features
and topography; and to create an attractive streetscape.
c) Streets in the subdivision shall connect to and be accessible from a
public way or, with the written approval of the Planning Board, an
existing private way, which must be deemed adequate in the
opinion of the Planning Board to provide access. If the streets in the
subdivision connect to a private way, the applicant must have rights
to the private way for the purpose ways are intended and
commonly used.
d) Access. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to
streets unless such strips are to be deeded to the Town at the time
of acceptance of the street by the Town. Reserve strips prohibiting
access to streets or adjoining property are allowed only where
required by the Planning Board along Connector or Through
Streets; and where, in the opinion of the Board, such strips are in
the public interest.
e) The Planning Board shall be satisfied that adequate access for
emergency vehicles is provided to all of the lots in the subdivision.
f) Access to adjoining property for pedestrian and/or bicycle
circulation shall be required wherever the Planning Board
determines that such connection will increase accessibility
between adjoining subdivisions, to existing or proposed sidewalks
or bicycle paths, from subdivisions to major public or private
schools, recreation areas or other facilities or where the public
C CHARTER D
C:247
safety will be significantly enhanced by such pedestrian and/or
bicycle connections.
In order to foster compliance with the specified design speeds,
discernible and effective curvilinear street design shall be
introduced as part of the road layout so that the maximum straight
length of any portion of the proposed roadway in a residential
subdivision shall not exceed three hundred feet (300') in length.
The centerline radii of the curve shall be as close to the minimum
required as is practical. Larger radii will be discouraged.
2. Layout standards - residential subdivisions.
a) Wherever possible in residential subdivisions, the road system shall
be designed to serve the needs of the neighborhood and to
discourage use by through traffic. However, in major subdivisions,
access shall be designed to avoid street systems which have only
one (1) principal means of egress. In order to provide for
alternative access, at least two (2) vehicular access streets may be
required by the Planning Board, in major subdivisions when
determined by the Board to be feasible. Proposed streets within a
major subdivision shall provide for their continuation or projection
to intersect with principal streets on the perimeter of the
subdivision or with adjacent vacant property in order that the
streets may be extended at a future time.
(1) A curvilinear road layout, avoiding long straight runs, is
generally required to achieve these goals since curves tend to
slow traffic speeds and provide varied views within the
subdivision.
(2) The minimum center line radii of streets shall be one hundred
fifty feet (150'); greater radii may be required for principal
streets. The centerline radii of the curve shall be as close to the
minimum as practical. Larger radii will be discouraged.
(3) Design speeds for residential roads shall be twenty-five (25)
miles per hour.
b) The location of Residential Streets within the subdivision shall be
such that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. The
Planning Board may require the construction of streets to abutting
land as part of an overall plan to enhance traffic circulation in the
Town.
c) Proposed subdivision streets shall not be located along the
subdivision boundary. If a boundary location is the only acceptable
point of access, the road must turn away as soon as practical from
the boundary line in order to mitigate any negative impact to
abutters.
D PORTSMOUTH CODE D
C:248
3. Layout standards - commercial/industrial subdivisions. The same
standards for commercial/industrial subdivisions shall be applied as for
residential subdivisions, except that wider intersections, straighter
roads, less steep slopes and other requirements designed to increase
safety and ease of access may be required by the Planning Board.
4. Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets. Dead-end streets without cul-de-sacs
shall not be permitted except where the Board shall find the same to be
necessary or desirable due to the small size of the subdivision or
unusual topographical conditions.
a) Where a dead-end street is to provide access to adjacent property,
the Planning Board may require provision for a temporary circular
turn-around or 'tee' until such time as the adjacent tract is
developed and the street is extended. A bond may be required to
insure completion of the street or construction of a permanent culde-
sac within a reasonable period of time. Reservation of strips of
land impeding this access will not be permitted unless such land is
dedicated to the Town in conjunction with the final plat.
b) All permanent dead-end streets shall terminate in a cul-de-sac
constructed according to these regulations. Dead-end streets shall
have at their closed end a turn-around with a minimum outside
curb radius of forty feet (40') and a right-of-way radius of fifty feet
(50'). The Planning Board may limit the length of a dead-end street
where necessary to ensure adequate and safe circulation of
vehicular traffic.
c) Where streets are terminated temporarily, and may be further
extended at a future time, a temporary cul-de-sac shall be
constructed as specified in these regulations. A defeasible
easement shall be granted to the Town for that portion of a cul-desac
right-of-way which would be abandoned when temporary culde-
sac is extended.
(1) Whenever a temporary cul-de-sac is abandoned in order to
extend a street, the developer shall remove excess pavement
and curbing, landscape such area, and install straight
pavement and curbing aligned with the rest of the roadway.
d) For all dead-ends and cul-de-sacs, whether permanent or
temporary, an easement, which shall not be built upon or
obstructed by deed, shall be granted to the Town of at least thirty
feet (30') in width to a nearby existing street to be used for
emergency access. Location of said easement shall be determined
by the Planning Board.
e) Cul-de-sacs shall not be used as a method to gain additional lots
with reduced frontage.
5. Street rights of way and pavement width. Streets shall be not less than
fifty feet (50') in width between property lines and the hard surface for
D CHARTER D
C:249
the traveled way shall be not less than twenty-four feet (24'), and
centered between property lines. All paved points of access and egress
from said ways to existing Town and state highways shall not be less
than thirty feet (30') wide, said thirty-foot width to extend thirty feet
(30') back from the state or Town property line. [Amended 1-10-2018]
a) The Planning Board may require wider rights of way where
drainage methods used require the Town to own and maintain land
beyond fifty feet (50'). The Planning Board may permit narrower
pavement widths on dead-ends and cul-de-sacs which will never be
extended or connected to another street and where traffic,
drainage and utility considerations allow.
6. Specific layout standards - street intersections.
a) New street intersections should avoid being located directly
opposite existing dwellings and driveways in order to protect the
residents from headlight glare, noise, and traffic.
b) Street intersections shall either coincide precisely with, or be offset
by at least two hundred feet (200') from other intersections.
Intersections shall be at ninety degree (90°) angles. Lesser angles
between seventy-five degrees (75°) and ninety degrees (90°) may
be approved by the Planning Board.
c) Intersections shall not be allowed where visibility is restricted,
such as on or just below steep hillcrests or on sharp curves. Streets
shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as practical at right
angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty
degrees (60°).
d) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a street
line radius of not less than one half (1/2) of the wider right-of-way.
Roadway pavements at intersections or where roadways intersect
circular pavements shall be rounded with a minimum radius
required for the larger classified street at the intersection.
e) The minimum pavement radii and centerline offsets for all
classifications of streets is shown in Table 1:
Table 1
Pavement Radii and Centerline Offsets
Street Classification
Pavement Radii
(feet)
Street Centerline
Offsets
(feet)
Local Residential
Street
15 300
Connector/Collector
Street
20 500
D PORTSMOUTH CODE D
C:250
Table 1
Pavement Radii and Centerline Offsets
Street Classification
Pavement Radii
(feet)
Street Centerline
Offsets
(feet)
Through/Arterial 20 1,000
Commercial/Industrial
Connector
30 1,000
f) Three-way intersections, especially within the subdivision, will be
encouraged in order to slow traffic and minimize the possibility of
collisions. Four-way intersections are not permitted unless in the
opinion of the Planning Board public safety will not be
compromised. Street jogs shall have minimum centerline offsets
from the larger classified street as shown in Table 1.
7. Median islands and entrance features. Where Residential Through
Streets or Commercial & Industrial Streets intersect existing or
proposed roadways, an unpaved median island and separate turning
lanes may be required. This requirement and the number of turning
lanes shall have a direct relationship to anticipated traffic movements
and volume. This requirement may be waived by the Planning Board, if
in its opinion, a median island and/or separate turning lanes are
unnecessary.
a) If required, the median island shall extend at least sixty feet (60')
back from the intersection and be at least nine feet (9') in width for
Residential Streets and twelve feet (12') in width for Commercial &
Industrial Streets for the first thirty feet (30') back from the
intersection, then taper to two feet (2') in width (unless a
continuous median island is required). Said median island shall be
identified by signage and designed to be highly visible to oncoming
traffic.
Median islands shall have granite or concrete curbing. The
unpaved median island shall consist of pervious cover such as
grass, gravel, or wood chips and shall be planted with a sufficient
number of shrubs to present a year-round visual mass. However,
to maintain visibility at the intersection, all shrubs shall not be
planted closer than ten (10) feet to the intersection. Shrubs shall
be at least one and one-half feet (1 1/2') high but not greater than
three feet (3') high, such as spreading juniper or yew.
b) The number of turning lanes and consequently the pavement width
on each side of the median island shall be determined by the
Planning Board. Where median islands and the maximum number
of turning lanes are required, the right-of-way width at the
intersection may need to be wider.
D CHARTER D
C:251
E. Street construction standards and specifications.
8. The grade of the slopes adjacent to the paved way shall be at a ratio of
at least five (5') horizontal to one (1') vertical [twenty percent (20%)
slope - no greater]. The developer shall show cross sections of slopes on
the drawings at intervals of no greater than fifty feet (50').
9. Geometric data. Table 2 below shall be used as a guide in designing
local streets within a subdivision. The Planning Board may, at its
discretion, order more stringent requirements:
Table 2
R.O.W. Width 50'
Pavement Width (includes berms) 30'
Maximum Grades at Centerline: 9%
- Within 150' of intersections 2.5%
Minimum Grades at Centerline 1%
Minimum Radius of Curve 150'
Minimum Tangent between Curves of
Centerline
100'
Minimum Sight Distance 200'
Cul-De-Sac Turnaround
- R.O.W. diameter 100'
- Pavement diameter* 90'
- Maximum Grade 4.0%
- Minimum Grade 2.0%
Intersection Fillet Curve
- R.O.W. Minimum Radius 30'
- Pavement Minimum Radius 25'
Pavement Crown 3.5"
* Where approved by the Planning Board, cul-de-sacs may be
designed with a circle with a forty-foot (40') radius unpaved center.
The Planning Board will determine landscape requirements for the
unpaved center.
1. General.
a) Construction of all required improvements shall be in accordance
with all specifications set forth herein, and shall, as a minimum,
meet the construction specifications contained in Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, published by the
State of Rhode Island, Department of Public Works, Division of
Road and Bridges, revision of 1971, and any subsequent
corrections and addenda. The following specifications for
D PORTSMOUTH CODE E
C:252
construction of streets shall be in addition to the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, and shall serve
to further clarify and explain specific construction requirements in
the Town of Portsmouth. The Planning Board may, at its option,
impose additional requirements in specific situations.
b) The developer shall, at all times during construction, ensure that all
roads in which he is installing utilities are in passable condition and
shall take appropriate measures to eliminate the creation of any
dust or erosion nuisance during construction.
c) All construction must proceed with erosion controls in place.
(1) Whenever construction is suspended for the winter or for any
other reason, erosion controls shall be repaired as necessary in
order to serve their intended purpose for the period of
suspension.
d) The asphalt installer must have a minimum of five (5) years
relevant experience, and be approved by the Director of the
Department of Public Works in advance.
e) Traffic passing over constructed streets shall be limited to wheeled
vehicles. No tracked equipment shall be permitted.
f) Prior to the construction of any building, the abutting road shall
have, at a minimum, the Binder Course installed.
2. Road preparation. The entire right-of-way to within three feet (3') of the
right-of-way line shall be cleared and grubbed prior to other
construction, except upon approval of the Director of Public Works.
Healthy trees within the right-of-way shall be left standing provided
that the trunk is no more than three feet (3') from the property line. All
root systems, trees, stumps, bushes and other objectionable material
shall be removed and disposed off site.
a) Earth Excavation. All earth excavations shall conform to the lines
and grades as shown on the approved final plan. Any change in
approved excavations due to unforeseen sub-surface conditions
shall first be approved by the Director of Public Works to ensure the
change does not conflict with any expressed concerns of the
Planning Board. Earth excavation shall include, but not be limited
to, the removal of clay, sand, gravel, loam, soft or disintegrated
rock which can be removed without blasting, boulders of less than
one (1) cubic yard in volume, or one-half (1/2) cubic yard in all
trenches, and other unacceptable materials within the limits of the
roadway drainage, or other excavation. Earth excavation also shall
include the removal of all stumps, backfilling of stump holes and
other surface irregularities with suitable fill materials.
(1) Ledge and rock excavation. Rock and ledge excavations shall
include all hard rock which can be removed by drilling or
E CHARTER E
C:253
splitting by hand, by mechanical means or by blasting, and
shall be removed to a depth at least twelve inches (12") below
sub-grade, and, where applicable, ledge side slopes shall be at
least four feet (4') vertical to one foot (1') horizontal.
b) Subsurface water. Where ground water is encountered within
three feet (3') of finished grade, adequate drainage designed by the
applicant's engineer and approved by the Director of Public Works
shall be constructed to lower ground water levels to a depth of at
least four feet (4') below finished grade within the street right-ofway.
c) Retaining walls. Where street and shoulder grades require more
than two feet (2') of cut or fill, retaining walls may be required
along abutting property lines unless an alternative is approved by
the Planning Board. Details to be approved by the Planning Board.
d) Sub-drains (on lots). Installation of conduits such as tile, pipe, or
tubing beneath the ground surface on a lot for the purpose of
diverting the ground water, to intercept or prevent water
movement into a wet area, to relieve artisan pressure, to remove
surface runoff, to serve as an outlet for other drains, or to replace
natural subsurface drainage patterns that are interrupted or
discontinued due to construction operations shall be allowed only
with the written approval of the Planning Board and the
supervision by the Department of Public Works. The location and
design of lot sub-drains shall be indicated on the drainage plan as
required in Section F. of this Article, and shall be designed
according to specifications contained in the Rhode Island Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook, 1989, as amended.
3. Materials. Depth of materials shall be measured after thorough
compaction.
a) Base course. The Base Course shall consist of twelve inches (12")
bank run gravel borrow which conforms to the requirements of
Subsection M.01.09 Table I, Column I of the RI Standard
Specifications plus the following:
(1) It shall be practically free from loam, silt, clay and vegetable
matter.
(2) It shall contain no cobbles whose diameter is over three inches
(3"). [Amended 4-29-199869]
(3) At least fifty percent (50%) by weight of the gravel shall be of
the sizes retained upon a one-quarter inch (1/4") sieve.
69.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from '(2) It shall contain no Cobbles whose diameter is over (2/
3) the depth of the course being laid.'
E PORTSMOUTH CODE E
C:254
(4) Not over thirty-five percent (35%) of the particles passing a
one-quarter inch (1/4") sieve shall pass a No. 40 mesh sieve.
(5) Not more than ten percent (10%) of the particles passing a
one-quarter inch (1/4") sieve shall pass a No. 200 mesh sieve.
(6) Recycled asphalt or recycled concrete may be used in the base
course only with the written approval of the Director of Public
Works, who may stipulate material and installation
specifications, and who may require an analysis of material
installed.
b) Base Surface. The Base Surface shall consist of processed gravel a
compacted depth of two inches (2") of crushed Bank Run Gravel
with a foreign content of not more than fifteen percent (15%),
which conforms to the requirements of Subsection M.01.09. Table
I, Column II of the RI Standard Specifications.
c) The Binder Course shall consist of two inches (2") of Bituminous
Concrete Pavement (hot mix) Class 12.5 conforming to the
requirements of Section 401 of the RI DOT Standard Specifications
For Road and Bridge Construction. [Amended 1-10-2018]
d) The Surface Course shall consist of one-and-one-half inches (1 1/2")
of Bituminous Concrete Pavement (hot mix) Class 9.5 conforming
to the requirements of Section 401 of the RI DOT Standard
Specifications For Road and Bridge Construction. [Amended
1-10-2018]
4. Construction methods.
a) Sub-base. All underground sewer and water lines, utilities, laterals,
service lines and related facilities shall be installed prior to any
street construction. Following filling and compaction of all utility
trenches, the sub-base shall be thoroughly compacted with a ten
(10) ton roller or its equivalent as necessary to achieve ninety-five
percent (95%) compaction, true to the lines, grades and cross
sections shown on the approved drawings, and all subgrades shall
be shaped on lines parallel to finished road surface. Said rolling
shall provide a stable and unyielding base. All soft spots shall be
excavated to firm material and brought to subgrade with gravel or
other approved material.
b) Manholes and catch basins - All manholes, catchbasins and other
underground utility access from the street surface shall initially be
installed so that their tops are at Binder Course grade level, then
raised to the level of the surface course upon the installation of the
surface course.
c) Base course. Bottom inspection is required before placing gravel.
Grade stakes with elevation shall be in place and approved by the
Director of Public Works prior to installation of gravel. Grades shall
E CHARTER E
C:255
be as shown on the approved final plans. Deviations from said
elevations may be approved in writing only by the Director of
Public Works. After the sub-base has been properly prepared and
the curbs or shoulders set, the Base Course of bank run gravel shall
be spread for the full width and in such volume as to provide a
twelve-inch (12") cross section after compaction with a ten (10) ton
roller or equivalent.
d) Base surface. Following thorough compaction of the Base Course,
processed gravel shall be spread for the full width and in such
volume as to provide a two inch (2") cross section after compaction
with a ten (10) ton roller or equivalent.
e) Binder course. The Binder Course shall consist of an application of
Bituminous Concrete Pavement (hot mix) Class I, Type I-1 applied
as follows:
(1) The Base Surface shall be clean of all debris, protrusions shall
be removed from any holes, ripples or unevenness in the
surface shall be brought back to true line and cross section,
prior to Binder Course application.
(2) The Binder Course shall be applied at a temperature of two
hundred fifty (250°) to three hundred fifty degrees (350°)
Fahrenheit by means of an approved paving spreader. Such
material shall be placed in sufficient quantity to provide a
minimum compacted cross section of one and one-half inches
(1 1/2").
(3) Compaction. The Binder Course shall be compacted as
specified in Section 401.03.11 of the RI Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications.
(4) Six (6) months after the application of the binder course, if the
surface course has not been installed, the binder course shall
be vacuum swept clean and a continuously machine applied
spray type tack coat shall be applied over the binder course
and an emulsion over all curbs and seams, with the approval of
the Director of Public Works.
f) Surface course. The surface course shall be installed no later than
six (6) months after the binder course is completed, and after
inspection and approval by the Director of Public Works. The
surface course shall consist of an application of Bituminous
Concrete Pavement (hot mix) Class I, Type I-1, applied as follows:
(1) The Binder Course shall be vacuum swept clean of all sand and
debris, ripples or unevenness in the surface shall be brought
back to true line and cross section by the spot application and
proper compaction of Class I mix.
E PORTSMOUTH CODE E
C:256
F. Drainage.
(2) The Surface Course shall be applied at a temperature of two
hundred fifty (250°) to three hundred fifty degrees (350°)
Fahrenheit by means of an approved paving spreader. Such
material shall be placed in sufficient quantity to provide a
minimum compacted cross section of one and one-half inches
(1 1/2").
(3) Compaction. The surface course shall be compacted as
specified in Section 401.03.11 of the RI Standard Specification.
Upon completion of the application and compaction of the
Surface Course, the street shall be allowed to stand for a
minimum of eight (8) hours without traffic.
(4) The finished surface shall have a minimum cross-slope of 0.024
(1/4") per foot.
g) Curbing. There shall be constructed at the time of the installation
of the binder course and again at the surface course a monolithic
(or integral) paved "Cape Cod" berm of twelve inches (12") wide on
each side of the road. The outside elevation of the berm shall be
two inches (2") above road crown elevation.
(1) Slope faced precast concrete or granite curbing meeting RI
DOT Standard 7.21 may be required at intersection fillet
curves in lieu of extruded Cape Cod curbing. Precast or poured
concrete wheelchair ramp curbs meeting RI DOT Standard
7.19 shall be installed in areas of frequent pedestrian use as
required by the Director of Public Works.
h) Seasonal limits. No bituminous material shall be laid when the
temperature of the area is under or likely to fall under forty
degrees (40°) Fahrenheit during the following twenty-four (24)
hours or during other unfavorable weather conditions, as may be
determined by the Director of Public Works.
1. General. Subdivision proposals shall be reviewed to determine whether
such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed
subdivision is in a flood-prone area, such proposal will be reviewed to
assure that (a) it is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage
within the flood-prone area, (b) all public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage, and (c) adequate drainage is
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards by ensuring, at a
minimum, that there will be no net increase in the peak discharge rate
of stormwater runoff from the site.
a) The Planning Board may, at its discretion, require that the rate of
runoff be decreased from the condition existing prior to subdivision
development.
E CHARTER F
C:257
b) If a detention or retention of water is required by the Planning
Board, the detention/retention areas shall be completed prior to
placement of any pavement in the subdivision. The bottom of all
retention, detention, sediment ponds, flood control holding and
similar facilities shall be a minimum of twenty-four inches (24")
above the seasonal high water table. If a development is to be
phased or roadways to be constructed sequentially per an approved
Construction Sequence, then drainage facilities sufficient to handle
each phase or road section shall be completed prior to placement of
any pavement in said phase. In no case shall construction of any
improvements be permitted until suitable and adequate drainage
facilities to accommodate said construction are functional and
inspected. [Amended 4-29-199870]
c) Calculations, design and methods shall be done by a registered
professional civil engineer in accordance with the Rhode Island
Stormwater Design & Installation Standards Manual, 1993 as
amended.
d) All stormwater facilities shall be protected from the buildup of
sediment by use of hay bales or filter screens during construction,
and cleaned out prior to release of bonds.
e) All drainage plans shall comply with the provisions of Article III,
Section F pertaining to Flood Hazard Areas, as applicable. [Added
4-29-1998]
2. Drainage plan - general.
a) At the preliminary plan stage, the applicant shall establish that
adequate provision is made for the disposal of surface water
without significantly increasing flood hazards or creating
conditions harmful to the proposed development or to the adjacent
or nearby land and property. Within public water supply watershed
areas, the drainage plan shall also show measures to ensure that
the public water supply quality is protected. Plan shall provide for
adequate and sufficient drainage facilities throughout the course of
construction and development. [Amended 4-29-199871]
b) The applicant shall submit all computations in determining predevelopment
and post-development rates of storm water runoff to
the Planning Board at the preliminary review, as further detailed in
Subparagraph 3 below. The Planning Board may forward the
computations to a review agency or official for verification and
review prior to approving the subdivision. These computations
70.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from '(b) If a detention or retention of water is required by the
Planning Board, the detention/retention areas shall be completed prior to construction of
any improvements in the subdivision. The bottom of all retention, detention, sediment
ponds, flood control holding and similar facilities shall be a minimum of 24" above the
seasonal high water table.'
71.Last sentence added 4-29-1998.
F PORTSMOUTH CODE F
C:258
shall be based upon an analysis of peak discharge from a two
(2), ten (10), and twenty-five (25) year frequency, twenty-four (24)
hour duration, type III72 distribution storm, and shall use the
methodology contained in a report entitled Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55 (Second Edition)
USDA, Soil Conservation Service, 1986, and any subsequent
amendments thereto. Where the use of the above report is not
practical for reasons based on accepted engineering practice, the
Planning Board may permit the use of alternate methodologies for
calculating storm water discharge. Provided, however, that such
alternate methodologies shall be made at the time of application
for a Master Plan review. All computations shall be prepared by a
professional civil engineer registered in the State of Rhode Island
and the engineer's seal shall be affixed to all required documents.
[Amended 4-29-1998]
c) The runoff management systems, a single component or a
combination of components, must properly regulate storm
discharges from the site to any outlet capable of handling the
designed stormwater discharge without increasing downstream or
off-site flooding, draining, soil erosion or other runoff related
problems to public or private land, facilities, or water resources.
Provision shall be made for maintenance of all components of the
runoff management systems prior to approval of the subdivision.
d) Drainage plan must consider all runoff from lots to be developed, as
well as to and from adjacent property. The grading of lots shall not
be designed to excessively drain onto road surfaces. No pumping of
stormwater or groundwater onto road surfaces shall be permitted.
3. Contents of drainage plan. A drainage plan prepared by a registered
professional civil engineer shall be submitted with the preliminary plat
material. It shall contain all elements required in the "Drainage and
Sediment Control Measures Checklist" attached hereto according to
the following:73
a) Topographic map at a suitable scale of the area within a half-mile of
the perimeter of the land being subdivided showing all existing and
proposed floodplains, watercourses and floodways, wetlands, storm
drains, culverts and all surface and subsurface drainage patterns
from the property being subdivided to the ultimate discharge point
of the watershed.
b) An estimate of the rate and quantity of storm water surface run-off
presently flowing from the land proposed to be subdivided and that
which would be generated by the proposed subdivision, calculated
on the basis of a twenty-five (25) year frequently rainfall. Due to the
72.Changed 4-29-1998 from type II.
73.Editor's Note: The Drainage and Sediment Control Measures Checklist is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
F CHARTER F
C:259
prevailing soils types in Portsmouth, computations shall include
consideration of all impervious surfaces to be created throughout
the fully built-out subdivision, including roads, sidewalks,
driveways and building.
c) The stormwater drainage calculations, runoff rates and system
design shall be based on the application of the appropriate method
as follows:
(1) The Rational Method. This method is the preferred method for
small systems of three (3) acres or less, where no wetlands,
ponds, or other storage depressions are present, and where
drainage is toward the point of analysis.
(2) TR-55. This is the preferred method for calculating runoff
volumes, peak discharge rate, and flood storage requirements
for site development between one (1) acre and two thousand
(2,000) acres.
(3) TR-20. This is for large complex watersheds and systems
beyond the scope of TR-55.
d) An analysis of the capability of existing and proposed watercourses,
storm sewers, culverts and other drainage facilities within the land
proposed to be subdivided to handle the run-off as calculated under
(2) above, and the effect upon floodways and flood holding capacity
of any floodplains.
e) Proposals for disposal of surface water run-off, downstream from
the subdivision without damage to land and improvements.
f) The drainage plan shall further indicate how the following specific
requirements shall be met:
(1) That each lot shall be adequately drained.
(2) That natural drainage patterns will be maintained whenever
possible.
(3) That all existing watercourses will be left open, unless
approval to enclose is granted by the Planning Board and
RIDEM.
(4) That all new open watercourses will be seeded, sodded, or
protected with stone rip rap depending on grades and soil
types.
(5) That an adequate drainage system shall be installed and
connected after treatment to a defined and approved
watercourse, and is designed so as to accommodate flows
resulting from up to a twenty-five (25)-year frequency storm.
F PORTSMOUTH CODE F
C:260
(6) Where any part of the drainage system is proposed for location
outside the public street right-of-way, provisions for future
maintenance approved by the Planning Board shall be
provided.
(7) That there is or will be adequate access for Town maintenance
vehicles to all drainage and stormwater facilities. That all
necessary easements to off-site watercourses will be obtained
by the applicant and granted to the Town of Portsmouth.
4. Drainage easements. The Planning Board may require, whenever
necessary, the provision of an easement of a suitable width across any
portion of the land being subdivided for the purpose of providing
adequate drainage. Such easement shall guarantee access to the Town
of Portsmouth to or along any proposed storm water drainage facility or
watercourse and shall guarantee the right to construct, maintain or
alter any such facility. See also Section M herein.
5. Detention/Retention pond safety, fencing and screening. Detention/
Retention ponds capable of holding water to a depth of twenty-four
inches (24") or more for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or more shall
be enclosed by a five foot (5') high green vinyl clad chain link fence,
unless the Planning Board deems otherwise. All slopes shall be no
greater than 3:1. The Planning Board, at its discretion, may require
additional vegetative screening, particularly where such ponds are
regularly visible from nearby residences.
6. Evaluation of drainage plan-by Board.
In the preparation of a Drainage Plan, the applicant is encouraged
to consider measures or construction techniques that can be used to
control peak discharges from the development through planned runoff
delay and infiltration into the ground. The Planning Board will
consider the character of the area being developed, existing ground
cover, the likelihood of damage due to flooding and the character
of nearby properties. At the preliminary plat stage, it will indicate
whether measures to reduce either the volume or the rate of run-off are
necessary to achieve desired objectives.
The Board may, after its review of the proposed drainage plan, require
that the following provisions apply:
a) Future-condition storm water run-off discharge do not exceed
present condition discharges into the floodway as calculated up to
a twenty-five (25)-year frequency storm.
b) Development be prohibited within the floodway which will result in
any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of a twenty-five
(25)-year frequency storm discharge.
c) That there is no reduction in the holding capacity of the one
hundred (100)-year flood plain.
F CHARTER F
C:261
d) All construction of drainage and flood protection systems and all
development within areas subject to flooding are adequately
designed so as to withstand a one hundred (100)-year frequency
storm.
e) Every lot be located so as to provide an area for construction of a
residential building which is not within a river line floodway.
7. Storm drain piping, catchbasins, and manholes.
Any connection to an existing public storm drainage system shall be
allowed only with the approval of the Planning Board and the Director
of Public Works, as applicable.
All necessary surface and sub-surface storm drainage structures and
facilities shall conform to the R.I. Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction. Such Standard Specifications may be modified at
the discretion of the Planning Board.
The Planning Board may require that surface and sub-surface storm
drainage pipes and facilities be installed and connected to dry wells or
watercourses, to retention or holding ponds, or to an existing public
storm drainage system.
a) Drainage pipes.
(1) All pipes shall be reinforced concrete with gasketed seals.
Minimum pipe size shall be twelve inches (12") in diameter for
laterals and eighteen inches (18") in diameter for all other
drainage pipes. [Amended 4-29-199874]
(2) Where pipe culverts are required across private drives, the
applicant shall furnish and install said culverts and provide
drives or roads to the road or highway.
(3) All drainage lines are to be saw cut, so as to be flush with the
inside surface of the catch basin.
(4) Excavation, fill and compaction. Compaction shall be in
accordance with R.I.D.O.T. Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction. The installation of the pipe shall be
surrounded in six inches (6") of clean broken stone which shall
be at least one-quarter inch (1/4") and not more than one and
one-half inches (1 1/2") in size. The pipe shall be laid true to
line and grade, and joints sealed with a commercial gasket
approved for drainage pipe used.
(a) In the event that groundwater is encountered during
excavation the drainage trench shall be excavated only as
fast as the pipe can be installed, with the bottom of the
74.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from '(1) All pipes shall be reinforced concrete with gasketed
seals. Minimum pipe size shall be 12" in diameter.'
F PORTSMOUTH CODE F
C:262
trench being excavated six inches (6") below the elevation
at which the pipe will be laid.
(5) Minimum cover. All subsurface storm drainage pipes within
street rights-of-way shall have a minimum cover of three feet
(3'). All drainage structures and facilities shall be inspected
and approved by the Director of Public Works before covering.
b) Manholes and catch basins. Catch basins shall be R.I. Standard
4.31 Type "R" or as directed by the Director of Public Works.
(1) Storm Drain Manholes or Catch Basins shall be located:
(a) At maximum separation of two hundred feet (200');
(b) At all angles in the storm sewer line;
(c) At all existing and new street intersections and all points
where catch basins, inlets or laterals are to be connected;
(d) At points where pipe sizes change;
(e) At points where the grade of the storm sewer changes;
(f) At the bottom of any hill or other significant slopes over
ten percent (10%).
(2) Notwithstanding State specifications, all catch basins and
manholes shall be of pre-cast concrete with neck for frame and
cover, and equipped with gaskets at all entrances. Frames and
covers shall be as specified by the DPW. Larger catch basins
may be required by the Director of Public Works and approved
by the Board.
(3) In the event that a catch basin is over six feet (6') deep, metal
rungs three-quarters inch (3/4") thick shall be set in the side of
the basin approximately twelve inches (12") to eighteen inches
(18") apart or as directed by the Director of Public Works.
(4) All manholes, catch basin and other underground utility access
from the street surface shall initially be finished to be level
with the surface of the binder course, then raised to the level of
the surface course upon the installation of the surface course.
(5) Cleanout. Piping manholes and catch basins shall be installed
as required and cleaned out prior to release of bonds.
(6) Where drainage pipes are forty-eight inches (48") or larger,
catch basins shall be approved by the Planning Board.
(7) All outgoing catch basin inverts shall be at least three inches
(3") or twenty-five one-hundredths feet (0.25') lower than
incoming catch basin inverts.
F CHARTER G
C:263
G. Erosion and sediment control.
H. Public water, power, lighting and communication utilities.
There shall be filed with the preliminary plat a plan and profile of all
contemplated underground utilities and construction. All electricity and gas
lines, street lighting lines, telephone, cable and other communication lines
1. A plan meeting the requirements of the Portsmouth Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Ordinance75 must be filed and approved prior to
subdivision preliminary approval for a major subdivision, and before
final approval for minor subdivision.
2. All erosion and sediment controls shall be in place prior to the start of
construction. Such controls shall be placed to minimize the flow of
sediment onto other properties and into catch basins. All catch basins,
sediment ponds, hay bales and other structures which may have
collected sediment shall be cleaned out after the binder course is
approved and prior to release of securities posted to guarantee proper
installation of public improvements.
3. The Planning Board may require the following measures to be employed
where necessary, and shall be shown upon preliminary subdivision
plans:
a) Sediment in run-off water shall be retained on the site insofar as
possible by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or
similar measures.
b) Stripping of vegetation, regrading, cut/fill operations, and extent of
disturbed areas shall be kept to a practical minimum. Temporary
vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed
critical areas during development.
c) Natural slopes and existing contours shall be retained insofar as
possible when locating streets, drainage and structures. No
grading or siting shall create conditions which would create
insufficient drainage or the likelihood of soil erosion.
d) Grading plans for individual lots in the subdivision may be required
by the Planning Board where it feels there is a reasonable
likelihood of erosion, drainage or siting problems.
e) Lot slopes. No earth, gravel or sand slope shall exceed a three (3)
horizontal to one (1) vertical ratio without the use of cribbing, a
retaining wall or similar structure.
f) Where the volume and/or velocity of the surface water run-off is
high, discharge points shall be adequately protected against
erosion or scour.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 320, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
G PORTSMOUTH CODE H
C:264
shall be installed underground. In cases where underground installation
is not feasible due to the physical condition of the site or other limiting
factors, an alternative location for these lines, including above ground, may
be approved by the Planning Board.
1. Physical location.
a) Electrical, Lighting and Communication Utilities shall be located in
the west and south shoulders of the street right of way. Such
facilities shall be located five feet (5') from the property line and
shall have thirty-six inches (36") of cover.
b) Gas facilities shall be located in the north and east shoulders. In
general, they shall be located seven feet (7') from the property line.
Gas lines shall be installed at a depth of sufficient to require thirtysix
inches (36") of cover.
c) Water mains shall be located in the north and east shoulders off the
paved roadway, as determined by the public water supply agency.
In general, they shall be located four feet (4') from the property
line.
d) All utilities shall be marked one foot (1') above the individual utility
with a metallic marking tape.
2. Installation.
a) Installation of all underground utilities shall be performed
according to the rules and regulations of the appropriate utility
company. Prior to preliminary approval of any subdivision the
applicant shall furnish a letter from the appropriate utility
companies indicating concurrence with the plan for installation of
the utility.
b) All backfill and compaction for excavations which are located or
may be located under road pavements shall be compacted in six
inch (6") lifts by mechanical means such as tamping, or by puddling
or jetting to a minimum of ninety-five-percent (95%) compaction.
c) Utility Manholes shall be of pre-cast concrete with neck for frame
and cover. Frames and covers shall be as specified by the utility
companies.
d) All utilities shall be installed, inspected and approved prior to the
installation of the binder course of road pavement.
3. Any deviation from these requirements shall be approved in writing by
the Public Works Director.
4. Each public utility company shall supply the other public utility
companies with an "as built mylar plan" of their facilities.
H CHARTER H
C:265
Each public utility company shall also supply the Director of Public
Works and the Planning Board with one (1) copy each of the above
mentioned "as built mylar plans".
5. Street lighting. The developer shall provide for street light installation
as recommended by the responsible public utility company and
approved by the Planning Board. These regulations are not intended to
install street lighting until approved by the Town Council. For each
street light not installed, prior to release of the bond, the developer
shall deposit with the Finance Director a fee commensurate with that
installation. The Public Works Director will then be responsible for
installation of the light at the appropriate time.
6. Public water supply.
a) Public water in Portsmouth is provided by either the Portsmouth
Water and Fire District, the Newport Water Department, or the
Prudence Island Utilities Corporation. In subdivisions situated
within a water district or water company franchise area, water
mains and water services to each lot or building site shall be
installed as approved by the public water authority. Where the
public water authority does not approve installation of water mains
and water services to each lot or building site, conduits for such
possible future water supply shall be installed to avoid future road
excavations. Specifications for installation of public water supply
lines shall be determined by the applicable agency. Approval of
plans for the installation of public water supply lines, if any, shall
precede final approval or recording of any plat by the Planning
Board. Inspection of installed water lines shall be done by the
appropriate water supply agency, notification of which shall be as
provided in Section N herein.
b) Water mains in any subdivision shall be located off the paved
roadway. Where water mains or conduits are installed in any
subdivision, the water service or conduits shall be installed from
the water main to each and every lot which is on the side of the
road in which the main is not installed, before any roadway
pavement or surface is installed.
c) Fire Hydrant location and maximum spacing, the number of
hydrant ports and thread type shall be approved by both the public
water authority and the Chief of the Fire Department, according to
their regulations and practices.
d) Detailed plans for the installation of public water mains and
hydrants shall be reviewed and approved by the appropriate public
water authority prior to the approval of the preliminary and final
plans by the Planning Board. Said approved plans shall be
submitted to the Administrative Officer and the applicant's civil
engineer shall certify that subdivision plans and water supply plans
coincide.
H PORTSMOUTH CODE H
C:266
I. Street names and street signs.
J. Landscaping. [Amended 1-10-2018]
A landscaping plan as required under this section shall be conceived in
a total pattern throughout the site, integrating the various elements of
site design, preserving and enhancing the particular identity of the site
and creating a pleasing site character. Landscaping may include plant
materials such as trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, flowers, etc., and may
also include other materials such as rocks, stone walls, paving materials,
planters, signage, and street furniture.
(1) No final plan shall be approved or recorded without sufficient
evidence of approval by the appropriate public water authority,
unless the applicant certifies in writing that the development
will not be served by public water.
7. Coordination. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to ensure that the
Town and the appropriate utilities agree to the same set of plans and
coordinate their inspection activities.
1. All street names must be submitted to the Fire Department for
preliminary approval and evidence of such preliminary approval shall
be submitted to the Planning Board for final approval.
a) New street names shall be substantially different in sound and
spelling from existing street names in the Town.
b) Street names shall be continued on extensions of existing streets,
and on new streets which begin or end directly across from the
terminus of an existing street.
2. The developer shall furnish and install street name signs at all street
intersections. Traffic control signs such as "Stop", "Slow Children", "No
Parking" and their locations shall be specified by the Chief of Police and
recorded in the NOTES section of the plans.
a) Street name and traffic control signs with supports, of a type
acceptable to the Director of Public Works shall be provided and
erected by the applicant at each street intersection in the
subdivision.
b) A portion of the Performance Bond shall be retained until street
signs are erected.
c) As an alternate, for each sign not installed, prior to release of the
bond the developer shall deposit with the Finance Director a fee
commensurate with that installation. The Director of Public Works
will then be responsible for installation of the sign(s) at the
appropriate time.
1. Landscape plan.
H CHARTER J
C:267
a) Applicability: A landscape plan shall be submitted to the Planning
Board for all land development and subdivision applications subject
to their approval at the preliminary review stage of minor
subdivision or land development plan and at the master plan stage
of a major subdivision or land development plan.
b) Submission contents:
(1) The plan shall indicate the location of all proposed landscaping
including construction details and identify existing and
proposed features such as:
• Trees;
• Shrubs and ground covers;
• Natural features such as stone walls and rock
outcroppings;
• Man-made elements such as retaining walls, fences,
signs, planters, underground and overhead utility lines,
etc.;
• Proposed grading at two-foot contour intervals;
• Lighting;
• Specifications for loaming, fertilizing and seeding; and
• Other proposed landscaping elements as required under
this article.
(2) A planting schedule shall be included to indicate proposed
planting by species, size at time of planting and maintenance
requirements. Where existing plantings are to be retained, the
plan shall indicate proposed methods of protecting them
during construction.
2. Landscape design standards.
a) Location. The type and amount of landscaping required shall be
allowed to vary with type of development. Areas which may be
required to provide landscaping shall include, but are not limited
to, the following:
(1) Drainage facilities, such as retention/detention basins, or
drainage swales;
(2) Entrance features;
(3) In public areas;
(4) Adjacent to buildings;
(5) Open space areas;
(6) Proposed recreation facilities;
J PORTSMOUTH CODE J
C:268
(7) Buffer areas;
(8) Lot areas which are disturbed during the construction process
or where extensive grading removes a significant amount of
natural vegetation; or
(9) Areas subject to regrading or stabilization for soil erosion and
sediment control purposes for soil stabilization.
b) Election. The plant or other landscaping material that best serves
the intended function shall be selected. Landscaping materials
shall be appropriate for the local environment, soil conditions, and
availability of water. The use of grasses that require minimal
watering and fertilization is encouraged, particularly in areas that
are ecologically sensitive.
c) Maintenance. Ongoing maintenance of landscaping shall be a
continuing requirement of compliance with the regulations. For
large projects, or significant landscape features, a minimum twoyear
maintenance agreement and/or bond may be required.
d) Corner vision clearance. Plantings abutting roadway intersections
must adhere to the vision clearance standard of Article IX, Section
C, of the Zoning Ordinance.
3. Street trees.
a) Purpose. The Town of Portsmouth recognizing the value of trees in
preserving the aesthetic and environmental qualities of the
community. It is the purpose of this subsection to promote and
protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing
for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of
street trees within the Town of Portsmouth.
b) Location. Street trees shall be planted within proposed lots on
private property paralleling street or travelled way;
c) Spacing. Street trees shall be planted at intervals of no more than
fifty feet (50') apart.
d) Species selection. Street tree species selection shall be selected
based upon the following criteria:
(1) No species shall be selected that are listed in the "Invasive
Plant Atlas of New England" (https://www.eddmaps.org/
ipane/);
(2) For guidance on planting species selections refer to "Planting
and Maintaining Sustainable Landscapes: A Guide for Public
Officials and the Green Industry," Barnstable County and
University of Massachusetts Extension, 2008 (available for
reference at the Portsmouth Public Library or the Building
Department Office at Town Hall);
J CHARTER J
C:269
K. Sidewalks.
Under certain conditions the Planning Board may require the installation
of sidewalks where pedestrian traffic is likely, such as near schools,
playgrounds, shopping areas, or high traffic volume streets. Location, width
and specifications to be set by the Planning Board.
L. Easements.
Easements may be required by the Planning Board where necessary for
the proper location and placement of improvements on private land as
described below. The Board may, in its own discretion, require the
dedication of land to the Town in lieu of easements if such dedication would
provide greater control over and access to the intended use. All easements
shall be duly recorded with metes and bounds and legal description.
Easements may be required for:
(3) Species shall be selected that are suitable for their intended
locations and service;
(4) Low-maintenance and disease-resistant species shall be
selected that do not require watering or fertilizers following
the care after initial planting; and
(5) A variety of diverse species shall be selected to safeguard
against vulnerability from pest infestation, weather events,
invasive species and climate change.
e) Specimen selection. All street trees shall:
(1) Be a minimum ten feet (10') in height, with a minimum caliper
size of two inches (2");
(2) Be nursery grown stock; and
(3) Comply with the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI
Z260.1 1-2004, as amended.
f) Planting specifications. The planting of street trees shall be
executed in accordance with the RIDOT planting detail sheet (R.I.
Standard 50.1.0) in Appendix.76
g) Tree Warden. Species and locations shall be subject to approval by
the Portsmouth Tree Warden.
1. Water line easements. Easements across lots or on rear or side lot lines
shall be provided for public water mains where required for looping of
the water system, as determined by the public water authority. The
Planning Board may require, as advised by the public water authority,
permanent easements plus temporary construction easements. The
nominal width for water line easements shall be twenty feet (20').
76.Editor's Note: The planting detail sheet is included as an attachment to this chapter.
J PORTSMOUTH CODE L
C:270
M. Monuments.
2. Drainage easements. Easements to install and maintain underground
drainage facilities on private land shall be dedicated to the Town where
required. The nominal width for such a drainage easement shall be
twenty feet (20'). Where above-ground drainage flows are directed over
private property which does not contain natural watercourses or
wetlands, or where publicly owned and maintained drainage systems
outfall on private land, a drainage easement shall be dedicated to the
Town over the area and at a location adequate for the intended purpose.
Easements into and upon aboveground drainage facilities such as
stormwater detention or retention basins shall be granted to the Town
wherever stormwater from Town-owned streets or other improvements
is intended to be directed to such basins.
a) Any required road drainage easements or right of way
recommended by the Director of Public Works shall be approved by
the Planning Board and obtained by the applicant and be not less
than twenty feet (20') wide. Easement piping to be no greater than
five feet (5') from the center line of the easement.
3. Grading easements. The Planning Board may require the dedication of
an easement to the Town in order to grade or to maintain grading on
private property where such grading is necessary to establish or
maintain adequate drainage, sight distances, or topographic features
required as a condition of subdivision approval.
4. Sight distance easements. Where deemed necessary by the Planning
Board to establish or maintain adequate sight distances for vehicular
traffic, the dedication of an easement to the Town may be required
which would prohibit the erection or maintenance of any visual
obstruction.
5. Bicycle or pedestrian access easements. Bicycle and pedestrian access
shall be provided, where required by the Planning Board, on a separate
strip of land dedicated to the Town or on an easement having a
minimum width of ten feet (10').
6. Other easements. At the discretion of the Planning Board, all other
required easements shall be of sufficient width and area for the
intended purpose. All utility easements shall be a minimum width of
twenty feet (20') and contain at least one (1) concrete bound. Utilities
shall be located on the centerline of all easements.
1. Every preliminary and final plan shall show the proposed location and
nature of all permanent monuments.
2. Placement and installation.
a) Monuments shall be placed by a Registered Land Surveyor on the
street line at the beginning and end of all horizontal curves on both
L CHARTER M
C:271
N. General construction procedures - inspections.
Each phase or step in the construction of required improvements listed
below shall be inspected and approved, in writing, on the site by the
Director of Public Works or his representative. No subsequent phase or step
shall commence until such inspection and approval of the prior phase or
step has been completed. The following procedures shall be followed by the
subdivider and by contractors under the direction of the subdivider in the
construction of any subdivision or related improvement:
sides of each subdivision (public) street and shall not be more than
five hundred feet (500') apart.
b) Monuments shall be of granite or concrete, at least thirty-six inches
(36") long, and set flush with the finished grade of the landscaped
shoulder.
c) Monuments shall be installed, before the performance bond is
released, in accordance with practices set forth by the R.I. Board of
Professional Surveyors.
1. Pre-construction meeting. A pre-construction meeting shall be held
with the Director of Public Works, the Administrative Officer,77 and the
inspector, if any, hired by the Town to inspect the job at least seven (7)
days prior to the start of any subdivision improvements. The subdivider
(or his duly authorized representative) and the on-site project manager
shall attend this meeting. [Amended 4-29-1998]
2. Request for inspection. Whenever an inspection is required the
developer shall request the Director of Public Works to make such
inspection. The Director of Public Works or his representative shall
within forty-eight (48) hours exclusive of Saturday, Sunday and
holidays, make such inspection and give to the developer written
approval or disapproval of the improvements inspected by him. No
subsequent step or phase shall commence until an inspection has been
made and approval granted.
3. Mandatory inspections.
a) During and following installation of all underground drainage and
utilities, prior to backfilling.
b) During and following preparation of the sub-base, backfilling and
the installation of curbing or shoulders, prior to the application of
the base course. A compaction test by a competent independent
inspection lab shall be provided after the installation of the subbase,
in locations determined by the Director of Public Works.
Bottom inspection is required before placing gravel. Grade stakes
with elevation shall be in place and approved by the Director of
Public Works prior to installation of gravel.
77.Note: Added 4-29-1998.
M PORTSMOUTH CODE N
C:272
O. Construction and/or improvement guarantees.
c) During and following spreading and compaction of the base course
of the roadway, prior to the application of the binder course.
d) Immediately prior to and during the application and compaction of
the surface course on the roadway and sidewalks. A bore core by a
competent independent inspection lab shall be provided after the
installation of the surface course, in locations determined by the
Director of Public Works.
e) During and following completion of all improvements and
installation of monuments.
f) At periodic intervals as required to ensure compliance with the
approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
g) Final Inspection immediately prior to release of any and all bonds
or portions thereof.
4. Additional inspections. The Planning Board, as part of its approval
conditions, or the Director of Public Works, at their discretion, may
require inspection at such other intervals or for installation of other
improvements which they may deem necessary to assure proper
construction and installation of improvements.
5. Field verification. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, the
developer's engineer shall be responsible for verifying all field
elevations and grades, plus locations of manholes, underground utilities
and piping. The developer's engineer shall be responsible for ensuring
that construction is done in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications, as well as the requirements of these regulations. The
developer's engineer shall submit reports on the progress of
construction to the DPW Director, with copy to the Administrative
Officer, as reasonably required by the DPW Director, not less than
weekly and at critical junctures as directed at the preconstruction
meeting. [Amended 4-29-199878]
6. Inspection authority. The Director of Public Works shall have the
authority to issue a "cease and desist order" on construction of required
improvements if he finds that work is not being done in a satisfactory
manner or according to approved plans. The results of all inspections
shall be reported to the Planning Board in writing.
1. Definition and purpose.
An improvement guarantee is a security instrument accepted by the
Town to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by
these Regulations or as a condition of approval of a subdivision plan by
78.Note: Last two sentences added 4-29-1998.
N CHARTER O
C:273
the Planning Board will be completed in compliance with the approved
plans and specifications.
Improvement guarantees shall be provided to ensure the proper
installation and maintenance of required street, utility, drainage and
other physical improvements and to ensure compliance with other
nonstructural conditions of final plat approval (if any). The nature and
duration of the guarantee shall be structured to achieve this goal
without adding unnecessary costs to the subdivider.
2. General procedures. Before any land development or subdivision plan is
endorsed by the Planning Board, and before the recording of any
subdivision plats, the Planning Board shall be required to approve
agreements for the completion of all required improvements.
a) The provisions of Subparagraphs 3 through 6 of this Article, below,
shall apply for financial guarantees of public improvements.
b) Improvements that are proposed to be privately owned and
maintained, such as, but not limited to, streets, utilities, and
drainage systems, may be covered by an improvement guarantee if
required by the Board.
3. Procedures for financial guarantees.
a) Amount.
Improvement guarantees shall be in an amount sufficient to cover
all costs and conditions to secure for the Town the actual
construction and complete installation of all of the required
improvements for active subdivisions or phases thereof as
appropriate, and the satisfactory completion of all conditions of
final approval within the time periods required for completion
provided in Subparagraph b) of this subparagraph below. The
amount of the bonds shall be set by the Planning Board. If the
subdivider disagrees with the amounts, he/she shall have the
opportunity to submit a detailed estimate along with supporting
justification for the proposed revisions. The Board may set the
guarantee in a reasonable amount in excess of the estimated costs
in order to anticipate for increases in economic or construction
conditions. [Amended 4-29-1998]
O PORTSMOUTH CODE O
C:274
At the expiration of the final plan approval period, if all required
improvements are not complete, the Planning Board shall review
the status of improvements and may (1) require the subdivider
to extend the duration of the entire improvement guarantee; (2)
reduce the amount of the improvement guarantee to cover the
estimated costs of remaining improvements; or (3) authorize the
Administrative Officer to take the steps necessary to ensure
completion of the remaining work by using improvement
guarantee funds.79
If at any time during the guarantee period the procedures,
implementation measures, methods, materials, and/or schedules
of construction are determined by the Planning Board not to be in
compliance with the approved plans, the Board may, after proper
notification to the subdivider, authorize the use of improvement
guarantee funds to ensure proper compliance.
b) Time period. All performance guarantees shall contain starting and
ending dates. No Performance Guarantee shall automatically
expire before construction is completed. All construction covered
by a Performance Guarantee under Subparagraph c) below shall be
completed within twenty-four (24) months after the Planning Board
endorses the Final Plat.
c) Required form. The security shall be in the form of a financial
instrument acceptable to the Finance Director and approved by the
Town Solicitor, and shall enable the Town to gain immediate access
to the secured funds within the period stipulated in the guarantee,
for cause. Performance covenants shall run with the land, such that
the ownership if all or a portion of subject land is transferred, the
new owner shall be subject to the provisions of the performance
covenant. Performance and maintenance guarantees may be
provided by one (1) of the following:
(1) Security bond. The subdivider may obtain an irrevocable
security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do
business in the State of Rhode Island.
(2) Letter of credit. The subdivider may provide an irrevocable
letter of credit from a bank or other financial institution.
79.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from 'a) Amount Improvement guarantees shall be in an amount
sufficient to cover all costs and conditions to secure for the Town the actual construction
and complete installation of all of the required improvements, and the satisfactory
completion of all conditions of final approval within the time periods required for
completion provided in subparagraph b) of this subparagraph below. The amount of the
bonds shall be set by the Planning Board. If the Subdivider disagrees with the amounts,
he/she shall have the opportunity to submit a detailed estimate along with supporting
justification for the proposed revisions. The Board may set the guarantee in a reasonable
amount in excess of the estimated costs in order to anticipate for increases in economic or
construction conditions. However, the amount of such increase shall not exceed 120
percent of the estimated cost of improvements.
O CHARTER O
C:275
(3) Escrow account. The subdivider may deposit cash, or other
instruments readily convertible into cash at face value, either
with the Town or in escrow with a bank.
d) Recording of performance covenant and sale of lots. Before
endorsement of its approval of the Final Plan, the Planning Board
shall require a Performance Covenant from the applicant which
shall ensure construction of ways and the installation of municipal
services in accordance with the applicable Subdivision Regulations
and conditions set by the Board. The Performance Covenant and
endorsed Final Subdivision Plan shall be recorded with the Town
Clerk. Lots shall not be released to allow sale or building unless
performance is secured by any of the three (3) methods described
above, which method or combination of methods may be selected
and varied by the Board, and required improvements have been
installed as stipulated herein.
e) Releases. Release of security shall be conditioned on the
satisfactory completion of construction and installation of required
improvements to the land within two (2) years of the date of final
approval. At the expiration of the final plan approval period, if all
required improvements are complete and satisfactory as-built
drawings have been received, any improvement guarantee shall be
returned to the subdivider, subject to the recommendation of the
Planning Board and approval by the Town Council. Partial releases
or reductions in the guarantee amount may also be authorized prior
to the expiration of final approval. A written request for release or
reduction of any improvement guarantees shall be made to the
Administrative Officer. After satisfactory inspection of all required
improvements, the Director of Public Works shall recommend in
writing to the Planning Board, which may then recommend to the
Town Council (a) to authorize the Finance Director to return all
improvement guarantees to the subdivider, (b) that the amount of
the guarantee being held by the Town be reduced to cover the
estimated cost of remaining improvements; or (c) that no releases
or reductions be made. No reduction in the amount of the security
at any one time shall be greater than fifty percent (50%) of the total
amount of the initial improvement guarantee, nor shall the
cumulative reductions reduce the security to less than fifty percent
(50%) of the initial improvement guarantee prior to final release of
the guarantee. The Planning Board may, in its sole discretion allow
a reduction in the amount of the initial improvement guarantee one
(1) time only prior to the provision of the security instrument by the
developer. [Amended 4-29-199880]
f) As-built drawings. Within thirty (30) working days of completion of
construction of all required improvements, and before the
80.Note: Last sentence changed 4-29-1998 from 'No reduction in the amount of the security
at any one time shall be greater than fifty percent (50%) of the total amount of the
security.'
O PORTSMOUTH CODE O
C:276
performance guarantee is released and the maintenance bond is
accepted, the developer shall furnish two (2) sets of transparent
mylar as-built drawings of required improvements to the
Administrative Officer. Additionally, a complete set of As-Built
Drawings showing all changes made to the original construction
plans shall be provided to the Administrative Officer. The As-Built
Drawings shall be marked "As-Built Drawing" and shall be certified
by a registered professional civil engineer or a registered land
surveyor.
g) Phased subdivisions. In the case of land development projects or
subdivisions which are approved and constructed in phases, the
Planning Board shall specify improvement guarantees related to
each particular phase. If any off-site improvements or other
improvements or conditions which are not directly related to a
particular phase are required as a condition of approval, the Board
shall, in setting the guarantee amount for each phase, clearly
specify when such guarantees are to be provided.
h) Acceptance of improvements.
(1) Upon completion of all required improvements, the subdivider
shall convey all public improvements to the Town for
ownership and maintenance. Private facilities, such as open
space and privately maintained drainage systems shall not be
conveyed to the Town. The applicant shall first request the
Department of Public Works to conduct a final inspection as
provided in Article X Section N. The Director of Public Works
shall certify to the Administrative Officer in writing that all
required improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
(2) The applicant shall also request, in writing to the
Administrative Officer, that public improvements, streets, land,
easements or other facilities be accepted by the Town. This
request shall contain a description of all facilities to be
accepted and shall be accompanied by an accurate legal
description of all streets, easements, land or other facilities by
metes and bounds and by reference to the final plat drawing(s)
and by a warranty deed transferring ownership to the Town
and describing any special conditions or other requirements.
(3) Upon certification of completion of all required improvements,
and upon receipt of all required information from the
applicant, the Administrative Officer shall place the request for
acceptance on the next available agenda of the Planning
Board. If all requirements of these Regulations have been met
by the applicant, the Planning Board shall recommend
acceptance by the Town Council of all such improvements to be
dedicated to the Town, and shall transmit such
recommendation to the Town Council in writing. In such
recommendation for acceptance by the Town Council, the
O CHARTER O
C:277
Planning Board shall also recommend an amount for a
maintenance bond in accordance with these Regulations and
shall recommend to the Town Council that no public
improvements or facilities be accepted for ownership and
maintenance until such maintenance bond has been submitted
as required in Subparagraph 4 of this Section.
(4) Upon their acceptance by the Town Council, all improvements
to be dedicated to the Town shall be permanently owned and
maintained by the Town as part of the municipal system and
the subdivider shall be no longer responsible for their care,
repair, or maintenance.
4. Maintenance guarantees. Prior to acceptance of the improvements for
maintenance by the Town and release of the security, the applicant shall
be required to file with the Finance Director a maintenance bond equal
to five percent (5%) of the total surety amount, guaranteeing the proper
functioning and durability of all improvements for a period of one (1)
year after the date of their acceptance by the Town. At the end of the
one (1)-year maintenance period, the Director of Public Works shall
inspect all improvements subject to the guarantee and shall certify in
writing to the Administrative Officer as to their condition. If found to be
unacceptable, the Administrative Officer shall recommend an extension
of the guarantee period to the Finance Director, and the original funds
shall not be returned to the subdivider. If public improvements are in
good condition and have not been damaged due to the fault of the
subdivider, or through faulty workmanship or design, the maintenance
guarantee shall be returned to the subdivider.
a) In cases where the Planning Board finds there are extenuating
circumstances, the initial maintenance period may be established
for a period longer than one (1) year. The reasons for establishing a
longer maintenance period and the nature of the extenuating
circumstances shall be made a part of the record.
5. Extension of time. If, due to circumstances beyond the control of the
applicant, the construction of required improvements to the land
cannot be completed within the prescribed time, the Planning Board
may grant a time extension for legitimate reason, for a period of time
determined by the Planning Board to be appropriate to ensure
satisfactory completion of all improvements. During such time
extension, all guarantees shall remain in full force and written
performance guarantees shall be extended for same amount of time.
Such requests for an extension of time shall be made in writing to the
Planning Board at least ninety (90) days prior to expiration of the
original security.
6. Default.
O PORTSMOUTH CODE O
C:278
P. Insurance.
The applicant shall be required to provide to the Town insurance sufficient
to indemnify the Town of Portsmouth against any claims for damage to
property or personal injury, including coverage for all persons authorized
in Article V. Section E. to inspect the improvements on behalf of the Town,
which may occur on the property being subdivided as a result of any
construction activity required as a condition of subdivision approval. Such
insurance shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer for review prior
to endorsement of the plat by the Planning Board, and shall remain in full
force and effect during the construction period.
a) Condition of default. The Town of Portsmouth shall hold the
applicant and surety in default of guarantee should any one (1) or
more of the following conditions occur:
(1) Failure to comply with all specifications for construction,
inspections, and/or required improvements to the land.
(2) Failure to properly notify the Director of Public Works on the
beginning and completion of all phases of construction of
required improvements to the land.
(3) Failure to protect existing improvements and/or properly
repair such improvements should any damage occur during the
construction within the subdivision.
(4) Failure to remove all debris from the site and adjacent areas
immediately and upon completion of construction with the
subdivision and/or as directed by the Director of Public Works.
(5) Failure to complete the required improvements to the land
within the time prescribed by these Rules and Regulations.
b) Certificate of default. Should any of the conditions cited in
Subparagraph 6.a) above occur, the Director of Public Works shall
certify in writing to the Planning Board that the subdivider has not
complied with the requirements of the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations. The Director of Public Works shall further certify the
extent of non-compliance and the conditions thereof.
c) Execution of guarantee. The Planning Board shall under the
provisions of Title 45, Chapter 23, Section 45-23-46, of the General
Laws of Rhode Island, 1992, as amended, execute only that portion
of the guarantee which shall be necessary to correct the deficiency
for which the subdivider and surety are held in default.
d) Payment by surety. Upon notification to the surety by the Planning
Board that the subdivider has been held in default of guarantee, the
surety shall promptly pay to the Town of Portsmouth that portion of
the guarantee which shall be necessary to correct the deficiency for
which the subdivider and surety are held in default.
O CHARTER Q
C:279
Q. Inspection fees. [Amended 4-29-199881]
Two percent (2%) of the total estimated cost of all required public
improvements as estimated in accordance with the procedure established
in Section O. shall be paid to the Town for deposit in an account to be
used to pay for inspection services. Inspection fees shall be paid in full
before final approval by the Planning Board or recording of the plat, or
phase thereof, or in any case prior to any construction, for which there
will be public improvements requiring inspection. The Planning Board may
require the developer to pay additional inspection fees based on actual costs
should the two-percent (2%) fee be insufficient. Inspection, verification and
preparation of reports by the developer's engineer shall not be compensable
out of the two-percent (2%) inspection fee.
R. Other fees.
Other fees shall be paid in accordance with a separate fee schedule adopted
by the Portsmouth Town Council.
81.Note: Last sentence added 4-29-1998.
Q PORTSMOUTH CODE R
C:280
XI
Adoption of Regulations and Amendments
A. Authority to create and administer regulations.
The Planning Board is empowered to adopt, modify and amend regulations
and rules governing land development and subdivision projects within the
Town of Portsmouth and to control land development and subdivision
projects pursuant to those regulations and rules.
B. Procedure for adoption and amendment.
C. Public hearing and notice requirements.
1. The Planning Board shall adopt or repeal, and provide for the
administration, interpretation, and enforcement of land development
and subdivision review regulations.
2. Provisions of these regulations and appendices may incorporate maps,
and other technical and graphic material. These regulations, and all the
amendments thereto, shall be consistent with all provisions of the
Rhode Island Land Development & Subdivision Review Enabling Act of
1992, as well as Portsmouth's Comprehensive Plan and Zoning
Ordinance.82
1. No regulations shall be adopted, repealed, or amended until after a
public hearing has been held upon the question before the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall first give notice of the public hearing
by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation within
Portsmouth at least once each week for three (3) successive weeks prior
to the date of the hearing, which may include the week in which the
hearing is to be held. At this hearing opportunity shall be given to all
persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed
regulations. Written notice, which may be a copy of the newspaper
notice, shall be mailed to the Associate Director of the Division of
Planning of the Rhode Island Department of Administration at least two
(2) weeks prior to the hearing. The newspaper notice shall be published
as a display advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the
normal type size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall:
a) Specify the place of said hearing and the date and time of its
commencement;
b) Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of these regulations is
under consideration;
c) Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the
regulations that may be printed once in its entirety, or may
summarize or describe the matter under consideration;
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
A CHARTER C
C:281
D. Publication and availability.
d) Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under
consideration may be obtained or examined and copied; and
e) State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or amended
prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising,
as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the
public hearing. Any such alteration or amendment must be
presented for comment in the course of said hearing.
2. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the
Planning Board of any municipality where there is a public or quasipublic
water source, or private water source that is used or is suitable
for use as a public water source, located within two thousand feet
(2,000') of the municipal boundaries.
3. Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any
state or municipal water department or agency, special water district,
or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water
resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as
a public water source located within either Portsmouth or two thousand
feet (2,000') of the municipal boundaries, provided, however, that a map
survey has been filed with the building inspector, which shall be kept as
a public record, showing areas of surface water resources and/or
watersheds and parcels of land within two thousand feet (2,000')
thereof.
4. No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render any
regulations invalid, unless such defect is found to be intentional or
misleading.
5. The above requirements are to be construed as minimum requirements.
1. Printed copies of these regulations shall be available to the general
public and shall be revised to include all amendments. Any appendices
shall also be available. A reasonable charge may be made for copies.
2. Upon publication of these regulations and any amendments thereto, the
Planning Board shall send a copy to the Rhode Island Department of
Administration's Division of Planning and to the State Law Library.
C PORTSMOUTH CODE D
C:282
XII
Administration
A. The Administrative Officer.
B. Technical Review Committee.
1. Administration of these Regulations shall be under the direction of the
Administrative Officer, who shall report to the Planning Board.
2. The Administrative Officer shall be appointed by and serve at the
pleasure of the Planning Board. He/She shall oversee and coordinate
the review, approval, recording and enforcement provisions of these
Regulations. The Administrative Officer shall serve as the chair of the
Technical Review Committee, if any. The minimum qualifications for
this position shall be at least (a) high school graduation with five (5)
years of direct experience in land use planning and site plan review, or
(b) a member of the Planning Board.
3. The Administrative Officer shall be responsible for coordinating reviews
of proposed land development projects and subdivisions with adjacent
municipalities as is necessary to be consistent with applicable federal,
state and local laws and as directed by the Planning Board.
4. Enforcement of these Regulations shall be under the direction of the
Administrative Officer. The officer shall be responsible for coordinating
the enforcement efforts of the zoning enforcement officer, the building
inspector, planning staff, the department of public works and other
local officials responsible for the enforcement or carrying out of
discrete elements of these Regulations.
1. The Planning Board, may, at its discretion, establish a Technical Review
Committee to conduct technical reviews of specific applications subject
to their jurisdiction on an as-needed basis. The Administrative Officer
shall serve as chair. Membership of this subcommittee shall be as
established by the Planning Board.
2. The Technical Review Committee's responsibilities shall include all
reviews required or requested by the Planning Board or the
Administrative Officer.
a) The timing and minimum content of such reviews shall be as
required in Articles III through X of these Regulations. The
Technical Review Committee shall review and comment upon
proposed road layout and design, drainage, impact upon adjacent
properties, impact upon natural resources, impact upon Town
services, and proposed covenants governing the proposed
subdivision.
b) A simple majority vote of the committee shall be necessary to
recommend to the Planning Board or Administrative Officer. If a
A CHARTER B
C:283
C. Administrative fees.
A reasonable fee schedule shall be adopted and amended as needed from
time to time by the Town Council, and attached to these Regulations. Fees
shall not exceed actual costs incurred, and shall be paid by the applicant for
the adequate review and hearing of applications, issuance of permits and
the recording of the decisions thereon. Said fee schedule shall specify the
timing of the payment of such fees, in coordination with these Regulations.
majority vote is not possible within the required time frame, the
plan may be referred back with or without comment.
3. Reports of the Technical Review Committee to the Planning Board shall
be in writing and shall be kept as part of the permanent documentation
on the development application. In no case shall the recommendations
of the Technical Review Committee be binding on the Planning Board in
its activities or decisions.
B PORTSMOUTH CODE C
C:284
XIII
Procedures
A. Required findings.
In all administrative, minor and major development applications the
approving authorities responsible for land development and subdivision
review and approval shall address each of the general purposes stated
in Article I and shall make positive findings on the following standard
provisions, as part of the proposed project's record prior to approval:
1. The proposed development is consistent with the Portsmouth
Comprehensive Community Plan and/or has satisfactorily addressed the
issues where there may be inconsistencies;
2. The proposed development is in compliance with the standards and
provisions of the Portsmouth's Zoning Ordinance;83
3. There will be no significant negative environmental impacts from the
proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all required
conditions for approval;
4. Subdivision, as proposed, will not result in the creation of individual
lots with such physical constraints to development that building on
those lots according to pertinent regulations and building standards
would be impracticable. (See definition of Buildable lot.) Lots with such
physical constraints to development may be created only if identified as
permanent open space or permanently reserved for a public purpose on
the approved, recorded plans; and
a) Developable land area.
This provision shall not apply to any lot of less than two (2) acres in
area existing and recorded prior to July 1, 1994.
For the purpose of calculating the minimum lot size required by
these Regulations or calculating the maximum number of units,
maximum lot coverage, or maximum density permitted in
accordance with any development standards contained in these
Regulations, the terms "land", "land area", "lot size", and "lot area"
or any such similar term shall mean "developable land area", which
is defined as follows:
Developable Land Area is the total gross land area of the parcel
proposed for development LESS the total of the following:
(1) Freshwater wetlands as defined in Title 2, Chapter 1 of the
General Laws of Rhode Island as amended and in any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. Provided, however, that
any setback requirement from the edge of a wetland as so
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
A CHARTER A
C:285
B. Precedence of approvals between Planning Board and other local
permitting authorities.
defined in Title 2, Chapter 1, shall not be included in the
calculation of wetland area.
(2) Coastal shoreline systems as defined by Section 120.0-2A.1 of
the Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Program, as
amended February 1982, or subsequent amendments thereto,
as follows:
(a) Beaches and barrier beaches.
(b) Cliffs, ledges and bluffs.
(c) Coastal wetlands.
(d) Sand dunes.
(e) All directly associated contiguous areas which are
necessary to preserve the integrity of such features.
(3) Any public or private street or street right-of-way.
(4) Existing water surfaces.
(5) Areas required for stormwater retention/detention under these
Regulations, or any other Ordinance of the Town of
Portsmouth, or by the RI Department of Environmental
Management, or by the RI Coastal Resources Management
Council.
(6) Areas required for utility easements of public utilities.
5. All proposed land developments and all subdivision lots shall have
adequate and permanent physical access to a public street. Lot
frontage on a public street without physical access shall not be
considered compliance with this requirement.
1. Zoning Board of Review.
a) Where an applicant requires both a variance from the Zoning
Ordinance and Planning Board approval, the applicant shall first
obtain an advisory recommendation from the Planning Board, as
well as conditional Planning Board approval for the first approval
stage for the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then
obtain conditional Zoning Board of Review relief, and then return
to the Planning Board for subsequent required approval(s).
b) Where an applicant requires both a special-use permit under the
Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance and Planning Board approval, the
applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation from the
Planning Board, as well as conditional Planning Board approval for
the first approval stage for the proposed project, which may be
A PORTSMOUTH CODE B
C:286
C. Release of lots for sale or building. [Amended 4-29-1998]
simultaneous, then obtain a conditional special-use permit from the
Zoning Board of Review, and then return to the Planning Board for
subsequent required approval(s).
2. Town Council. Where an applicant requires both Planning Board
approval and Town Council approval for a Zoning Ordinance or zoning
map change, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory
recommendation on the zoning change from the Planning Board, as well
as conditional Planning Board approval for the first approval stage for
the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain a
conditional zoning change from the Town Council, and then return to
the Planning Board for subsequent required approval(s).
1. Release of lots. A release of lots form to allow the sale or issuance of
building permits for individual lots in the subdivision as a whole or in
approved phases shall be signed by the Planning Board if all of the
following, as applicable, have been received by the Planning Board:84
a) A copy of the recorded final plan, filed per the provisions of Section
F. herein.
b) A copy of the recorded performance covenant, if applicable.
c) A copy of the recorded restrictive covenant, if applicable.
d) A form signed by the Administrative Officer that any special
conditions of approval, as required by the Planning Board, have
been met.
e) The construction of roads and required public improvements have
either been completed or the construction thereof secured by one
(1) or more of the methods described in Article X.
2. Sale of lots. The applicant shall record the Release of Lots form prior to
the sale of any of the subject lots.85
3. Building permits. The Building Inspector shall deem a building lot
inaccessible, and shall not issue a building permit for a new structure,
until all drainage, underground utilities, and a roadway binder course
for the entire frontage of the lot have been installed to the satisfaction
of the Director of Public Works, per the provisions of Article X. herein.86
84.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from 'A release of lots form to allow the sale or issuance of
building permits for individual lots in the subdivision as a whole or in approved phases
shall be signed by the Planning Board if all of the following, as applicable, have been
received by the Planning Board.'
85.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from '2. SALE OF LOTS The applicant shall record the release of
Lots form prior to the sale of any of the subject lots.'
86.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from '3) BUILDING PERMITS The Building Inspector shall
deem a building lot inaccessible, and shall not issue a building permit for a new structure,
until all drainage, underground utilities, and a roadway binder course for the entire
frontage of the lot have been installed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works,
per the provisions of Article X. herein.
B CHARTER D
C:287
D. Modifications and reinstatement of plans.
1. Waiver of development plan approval.
a) The Planning Board may waive requirements for development plan
approval where there is a change in use or occupancy and no
extensive construction of improvements is sought. The waiver may
be granted only by a decision by the Planning Board finding that
the use will not affect existing drainage, circulation, relationship of
buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting and other
considerations of development plan approval, and that the existing
facilities do not require upgraded or additional site improvements.
b) The application for a waiver of development plan approval review
shall include documentation, as required by the Planning Board, on
prior use of the site, the proposed use, and its impact.
2. Waiver and/or modification of requirements. The Planning Board shall
have the power to grant such waivers and/or modifications from the
requirements for land development and subdivision approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purposes and intents of the
provisions for these Regulations. The only grounds for such waivers
and/or modifications shall be where the literal enforcement of one (1) or
more provisions of the regulations is impracticable and will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question or where such waiver and/or modification is in the best
interest of good planning practice and/or design as evidenced by
consistency with the Portsmouth's comprehensive plan and Zoning
Ordinance.87
3. Reinstatement where deadline exceeded. When an applicant has
exceeded a deadline established by these Regulations for submission of
material for a subdivision or land development, thereby rendering a
previously granted approval invalid, an application for reinstatement of
a previously approved subdivision shall be made to the Planning Board
in writing by the subdivider. The Planning Board, in approving or
denying the request for an extension, shall make findings of fact which
shall be made part of the record. The application may be reinstated by
the Planning Board under the following conditions:
a) The subdivision is consistent with the Comprehensive Community
Plan;
b) The Subdivision Regulations are substantially the same as they
were at the time of original approval;
c) The zoning of the subdivision parcel is substantially the same as it
was at the time of original approval;
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
D PORTSMOUTH CODE D
C:288
E. Meetings — votes — decisions and records.
F. Signing and recording of plats and plans.
d) Physical conditions on the subdivision parcel are substantially the
same as they were at the time of original approval; and,
e) Any applicable State or federal regulations are substantially the
same as they were at the time of original approval.
4. Decision. The Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions or
deny the request for either a waiver or modification as described in
Paragraph 1 or 2 above, according to this Article.
1. All records of the Planning Board proceedings and decisions shall be
written and kept permanently available for public review. Completed
applications for proposed land development and subdivision projects
under review by the Planning Board, shall be available for public
review.
2. Participation in a Planning Board meeting or other proceedings by any
party shall not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not
in good faith, intentional misconduct, knowing violation of law,
transactions where there is an improper personal benefit, or malicious,
wanton, or willful misconduct.
3. All final written comments to the Planning Board from the
Administrative Officer, municipal departments, the technical review
committee, state and federal agencies, and Town commissions shall be
part of the permanent record of the development application.
4. Votes. All votes of the Planning Board shall be made part of the
permanent record and shall show the members present and their votes.
A decision by the Planning Board to approve any land development or
subdivision application shall require a vote for approval by a majority of
the current Planning Board membership.
5. Record decisions. All written decisions of the planning board shall be
recorded in the land evidence records within thirty-five (35) days after
the planning board vote. A copy of the recorded decision shall be mailed
within one (1) business day of recording, by any method that provides
confirmation of receipt, to the applicant and to any objector who has
filed a written request for notice with the administrative officer. [Added
1-11-2012]
1. All approved final plans and plats for land development and subdivision
projects shall be signed by the appropriate Planning Board official with
the date of approval. Plans and plats for major land developments and
subdivisions shall be signed by the Planning Board chairperson or the
secretary of the Planning Board attesting to the approval by the
Planning Board. All minor land development or subdivision plans and
plats and administrative plats shall be signed by the Planning Board
D CHARTER F
C:289
G. Changes to recorded plats and plans.
chairperson or secretary or the board's designated agent. [Amended
4-29-199888]
a) All recorded plans for merging adjacent lots as Administrative
Subdivisions shall be either 1) Class I Surveys or 2) full metes and
bounds descriptions of the revised parcel(s) accompanied by a
drawing to scale of the perimeter boundaries of the merged lot
conforming to the deed description. Deed descriptions may be
utilized only if they reference a pre-existing recorded plat(s).
b) All other recorded plans shall be Class I Surveys. Each plan shall be
stamped and dated by a registered professional surveyor in the
State of Rhode Island.
c) The size of all plans to be recorded in the Land Evidence Records
shall be within a minimum of twenty-two by thirty-two inches (22" x
32") and a maximum of twenty-four by thirty-six inches (24" x 36").
[Added 1-11-2012]
2. Upon signature, all plans and plats shall be submitted to the
Administrative Officer prior to recording and filing in the appropriate
municipal departments. The material to be recorded for all plans and
plats shall include all pertinent plans with notes thereon concerning all
the essential aspects of the approved project design, the
implementation schedule, special conditions placed on the development
by the Town, permits and agreements with state and federal reviewing
agencies, and other information as required by the Planning Board.
3. Other parts of the applications record for subdivisions and land
development projects, including all meeting records, approved master
plan and preliminary plans, site analyses, impact analyses, all legal
agreements, records of the public hearing and the entire final approval
set of drawings shall be kept permanently by the municipal
departments responsible for implementation and enforcement.
4. The Administrative Officer shall notify the statewide "911" emergency
authority and the local police and fire authorities servicing the new plat
with the information required by each of the authorities.
1. For all changes to the approved plans of land development projects or
subdivisions subject to this act, an amendment of the final development
plans is required prior to the issuance of any building permits. Any
changes approved in the final plan shall be recorded as amendments to
88.Note: Changed 4-29-1998 from '1. All approved final plans and plats for land development
and subdivision projects shall be signed by the appropriate Planning Board official with
the date of approval. Plans and plat for major land developments and subdivision shall be
signed by the Planning Board Chairperson or Secretary of the Planning Board attesting to
the approval by the planning Board. All minor land development or subdivision plans and
administrative plats shall be signed by the Planning Board chairperson or the secretary or
the board's designated agent.' Subparagraphs a. and b. added.
F PORTSMOUTH CODE G
C:290
the final plan in accordance with the procedure established for
recording of plats in Section E. above.
2. Minor changes, as defined in these Regulations, to a land development
or subdivision plan may be approved administratively, by the
Administrative Officer, whereupon a permit may be issued. Such
changes may be authorized without additional public hearings, at the
discretion of the Administrative Officer. All such changes shall be made
part of the permanent record of the project application. This provision
shall not prohibit the Administrative Officer from requesting a
recommendation from either the technical review committee or the
Planning Board. Denial of the proposed change(s) shall be referred to
the Planning Board for review as a major change.
3. Major changes, as defined in these Regulations, to a land development
or subdivision plan may be approved, only by the Planning Board and
must follow the same review and public hearing process required for
approval of preliminary plans as described in Article VI.
G CHARTER G
C:291

XIV
Appeals
A. The Board of Appeal.
The Portsmouth Zoning Board of Review shall be the board of appeal to hear
appeals of decisions of the Planning Board or the Administrative Officer
on matters of review and approval of land development and subdivision
projects.
B. Right of appeal.
C. Process of appeal.
D. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being
appealed.
E. Public hearing.
1. An appeal from any decision of the Planning Board, or Administrative
Officer charged in these Regulations with enforcement of any
provisions, except as provided herein, may be taken to the board of
appeal by an aggrieved party.
2. An appeal from a decision of the board of appeal may be taken by an
aggrieved party to the Newport County Superior Court.
1. An appeal to the board of appeal from a decision or action of the
Planning Board or Administrative Officer may be taken by an aggrieved
party. Such appeal must be taken within twenty (20) days after the
decision has been recorded and posted in the office of the Town Clerk.
2. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state clearly and unambiguously
the issue or decision which is being appealed, the reason for the appeal,
and the relief sought. The appeal shall either be sent by certified mail,
with a return receipt requested, or shall be hand-delivered to the board
of appeal. The Town Clerk shall accept delivery of an appeal on behalf of
the board of appeal.
3. Upon receipt of an appeal, the board of appeal shall require the
Administrative Officer to transmit forthwith to the board of appeal, all
papers, documents and plans, or a certified copy thereof, constituting
the record of the action which is being appealed.
1. The board of appeal shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within
forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the appeal, give public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties of interest. At the hearing
any party may appear in person, or may be represented by an agent or
attorney. The board shall render a decision within ten (10) days of the
close of the public hearing.
A CHARTER E
C:293
F. Appeals — standards of review.
G. Appeals to the Superior Court.
The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne by the
appellant.
2. The board of appeal shall only hear appeals of the actions of a Planning
Board or Administrative Officer at a meeting called especially for the
purpose of hearing such appeals and which has been so advertised.
3. The hearing, which may be held on the same date and at the same place
as a meeting of the Zoning Board of Review, must be held as a separate
meeting from any Zoning Board of Review meeting. Separate minutes
and records of votes as required by Section F. below shall be maintained
by the board of appeal.
1. In instances of a board of appeal's review of a Planning Board or
Administrative Officer's decision on matters subject to this chapter, the
board of appeal shall not substitute its own judgment for that of the
Planning Board or the Administrative Officer but must consider the
issue upon the findings and record of the Planning Board or
Administrative Officer. The board of appeal shall not reverse a decision
of the Planning Board or Administrative Officer except on a finding of
prejudicial procedural error, clear error, or lack of support by the
weight of the evidence in the record.
2. The concurring vote of three (3) of the five (5) members of the board of
appeal sitting at a hearing, shall be necessary to reverse any decision of
the Planning Board or Administrative Officer.
3. In the instance where the board of appeal overturns a decision of the
Planning Board or Administrative Officer, the proposed project
application shall be remanded to the Planning Board or Administrative
Officer, at the stage of processing from which the appeal was taken, for
further proceedings before the Planning Board or Administrative
Officer and/or for the final disposition, which shall be consistent with
the board of appeal's decision.
4. The board of appeal shall keep complete records of all proceedings
including a record of all votes taken, and shall put all decisions on
appeals in writing. The board of appeal shall include in the written
record the reasons for each decision.
1. An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the board of appeal, to the
Newport County Superior Court by filing a complaint setting forth the
reasons of appeal within twenty (20) days after the decision has been
recorded and posted in the office of the Town Clerk. The board of
appeal shall file the original documents acted upon by it and
constituting the record of the case appealed from, or certified copies
thereof, together with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the
E PORTSMOUTH CODE G
C:294
H. Appeals to the Superior Court — enactment of or amendment of
Town regulations.
clerk of the court within thirty (30) days after being served with a copy
of the complaint. When the complaint is filed by someone other than
the original applicant or appellant, such original applicant or appellant
and the members of the Planning Board shall be made parties to the
proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings upon the decision
appealed from, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on
appropriate terms and make such other orders as it deems necessary
for an equitable disposition of the appeal.
2. The review shall be conducted by the superior court without a jury. The
court shall consider the record of the hearing before the Planning
Board and, if it shall appear to the court that additional evidence is
necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may allow any
party to such appeal to present such evidence in open court, which
evidence, along with the report, shall constitute the record upon which
the determination of the court shall be made.
3. The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the Planning
Board as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The court
may affirm the decision of the board of appeal or remand the case for
further proceedings, or may reverse or modify the decision if
substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because of
findings, inferences, conclusions or decisions which are:
a) In violation of constitutional, statutory, ordinance or Planning
Board Regulations provisions;
b) In excess of the authority granted to the Planning Board by statute
or ordinance;
c) Made upon unlawful procedure;
d) Affected by other error of law;
e) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial
evidence of the whole record; or
f) Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or
clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
1. An appeal of an enactment of or an amendment of these Regulations
may be taken to the Newport County Superior Court by filing a
complaint, as set forth herein, within thirty (30) days after such
enactment, or amendment has become effective. The appeal may be
taken by any legal resident or landowner of Portsmouth or by any
association of residents or landowners of Portsmouth. The appeal shall
not stay the enforcement of these Regulations, as enacted or amended,
but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms,
G CHARTER H
C:295
I. Appeals to the Superior Court — priority in judicial proceedings.
Upon the entry of any case or proceeding brought under the provisions of
this chapter, including pending appeals and appeals hereinafter taken to
the court, the court shall, at the request of either party, advance the case,
so that the matter shall be afforded precedence on the calendar and shall
thereupon be heard and determined with as little delay as possible.
which may include the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as
it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal.
2. The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area or areas in which
the enactment or amendment is not consistent with the Comprehensive
Planning Act, Chapter 22.2 of this title; the Zoning Enabling Act of
1991, Section 45-24-27 et seq.; Portsmouth's comprehensive plan; or
Portsmouth's Zoning Ordinance.89
3. The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury. The court
shall consider whether the enactment or amendment of these
Regulations is consistent with the Comprehensive Planning Act,
Chapter 22.2 of this title; the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991, Section
24-27 et seq.; Portsmouth's comprehensive plan; or Portsmouth's
Zoning Ordinance. If the enactment or amendment is not consistent,
then the court shall invalidate the enactment or the amendment, or
those parts of such enactment or amendment which are not consistent.
The court shall not revise these Regulations to be consistent, but may
suggest appropriate language as part of the court decision.
4. The court may in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its own
motion, award reasonable attorney's fees to any party to an appeal, as
set forth herein, including a municipality.
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
H PORTSMOUTH CODE I
C:296
XV
Violations and Penalties
General.
A.
Any violation of these Regulations or any violation of any terms or
conditions of any action imposed by the Planning Board or of any other
agency or officer charged in these Regulations with enforcement of any of
the provisions shall be subject to the provisions of this Article.
B.
Violation of these Regulations includes any action related to the transfer
or sale of land in unapproved subdivisions. Any owner, or agent of the
owner, who transfers, sells or negotiates to sell any land by reference to or
exhibition of, or by other use, a plat of the subdivision before the plat has
been approved by the Planning Board and recorded in the municipal land
evidence records, shall be in violation of these Regulations and subject to
the penalties described herein.
C.
D.
The Town may also cause suit to be brought in the supreme or superior
court, or any municipal court, including a municipal housing court having
jurisdiction, in the name of the Town, to restrain the violation of, or to
compel compliance with, the provisions of this zoning ordinance. The Town
may consolidate an action for injunctive relief and/or fines under these
Regulations in the superior court.
E.
Any person, firm or corporation employed by an applicant or developer, who
shall violate or assist in the violation or fail to comply with the requirements
of any provision of these Regulations, or for a violation of any terms or
conditions of any action imposed by the Planning Board or of any other
agency or officer charged in these Regulations with enforcement of any of
its provisions, upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500) for each offense and each day of the
1. It shall be the duty of the Town Solicitor, on authorization by the Town
Council wherever a violation or a contemplated violation of these
Regulations is brought to its attention, to institute due legal
proceedings to compel compliance with said Regulations and to
restrain the erection, alteration or use of any building, structure or
other thing erected or used in violation of the provisions of these
Regulations.
A CHARTER E
C:297
existence of any such violation shall be deemed a separate offense, all such
fines shall inure to the benefit of the Town.
F. Enforcement.
1. Any member of the Portsmouth Planning Board, the Technical Review
Committee, if any, the Administrative Officer, Town Planner, the
Building Inspector, or Town Solicitor shall have the right to investigate
any subdivision, its layout, construction and adherence to these rules
and regulations in order to determine compliance with said rules and
regulations.
2. Enforcement of these Regulations shall be under the direction of the
Administrative Officer. The officer shall be responsible for coordinating
the enforcement efforts of the zoning enforcement officer, the building
inspector, Town Planner, the Department of Public Works and other
Town officials responsible for the enforcement or carrying out of
individual elements of these Regulations.
3. Furthermore, it shall be the duty of the Administrative Officer wherever
a violation or a contemplated violation of these Regulations is brought
to his attention to notify the Planning Board, Town Administrator and
the Town Council, and the Town Council shall cause to be instituted due
legal proceedings to compel compliance with the provisions of these
Regulations, and to restrain the erection, alteration or use of any
building, structure or other thing erected, altered or used in violation of
the provisions of these Regulations.
E PORTSMOUTH CODE F
C:298
Chapter 243
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 326.
§ 243-1. Prohibited acts.
Chapter 250
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 189.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 339.
Junked or abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 382.
A. No person shall throw, pour or in any manner deposit, place or cause to
be placed any filth, ashes, cinders, dirt, papers, rags, glass, wooden or
metallic substances or any other refuse matter in or upon any public
street, lane, highway, sidewalk or common within the limits of the Town,
nor in or upon any lands or premises belonging to the Town, provided
that this section shall not apply to any of the acts prohibited herein if
such acts shall be done under the direction and with the consent of the
surveyors of highways in their respective districts.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump, deposit or strew, or
cause to be thrown, dumped, deposited or strewn, any bottle, glass,
crockery, can, plastic or similar container, or part thereof, upon the
ground or within or about any building in any public park or beach or in
any public street or sidewalk.90
90.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
F CHARTER § 243-1
C:299

ARTICLE I
Parking Prohibited in Certain Areas
[Adopted 6-10-1929 by Ord. No. 48 (§§ 14-6 to 14-7 of the 1976
Code)]
§ 250-1. Parking prohibited; signs; violations and penalties.91
[Amended 7-14-1947 by Ord. No. 61; 7-14-1947 by Ord. No. 62;
2-12-1968 by Ord. No. 93A; 9-12-1977 by Ord. No. 118; 6-25-1979
by Ord. No. 93A; 1-26-1981 by Ord. No. 81-1]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle or other
object in the following areas:
(1) Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. upon any portion of the
shore or beach belonging to the Town at the easterly end of Sandy
Point Avenue, or upon any portion of Sandy Point Avenue, or, at any
time, on either side of Sandy Point Avenue from Adams Drive
easterly to the entrance to Sandy Point Beach.
(2) On either side of Willow Avenue for a distance of 1,000 feet running
in a westerly direction from the railroad right-of-way.
(3) On the south side of Seaconnect Boulevard from a point 100 feet
west of Edith Avenue to the east side of Ivy Avenue.
(4) On the east side of Ivy Avenue.
(5) On the east side of Edith Avenue.
(6) On the northerly and westerly side of Power Street from the
intersection of said Power Street with Water Street easterly and
northerly to East Power Street.
(7) On the northerly side of East Power Street.
(8) Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., from Monday through
Friday, inclusive, upon any portion of Reise Terrace, Education
Lane, Duffy Terrace or Independence Court, with the exception of
residents of said streets. [Added 5-26-1981 by Ord. No. 81-4;
amended 1-14-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1-14]
(9) On the east side of Cove Street from Park Avenue to Cedar Avenue.
[Added 11-14-1983 by Ord. No. 83-6]
B. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to erect appropriate
signs giving notice to the provisions of this article.
C. Violation of this article will be punishable by a fine. Said fine may be
payable by mail within 10 days of the date of violation; said fine may be
91.Editor's Note: Original § 14-6, Parking defined, of the 1976 Code, which immediately
preceded this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 250-1 CHARTER § 250-1
C:301
mailed to the Chief of Police, Portsmouth Police Department,
Portsmouth, Rhode Island; and said fine may be paid by cash, check
or money order. [Amended 5-14-1991 by Ord. No. 91-5-14A;
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08-15]
Schedule of Fines
All night parking $30
Parking in a prohibited area $30
Double parking $30
Parking in a loading zone $30
Parking to obstruct driveway $30
Standing in prohibited area $30
Parking within 25 feet of corner $30
Parking left wheels to curb $30
Parking on sidewalk $30
Snow emergency parking violation $30
Other parking offenses $30
Other violation $30
Parking within 10 feet of fire
hydrant
$50
No parking fire lane $50
Parking in a handicapped area $100
D. Notice of violation of this article shall be affixed to the motor vehicle or
other object, and said notice shall state the specific violation charged,
the fine for said violation, the time within which the privilege of paying
said fine by mail may be exercised and the place to which such fine may
be mailed.
§ 250-1 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 250-1
C:302
ARTICLE II
Bus Stops
[Adopted 9-1-1948 by Ord. No. 67 (§ 14-9 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 250-2. Parking restricted.
No person shall stop, set or park any vehicle other than a bus in any area
or section of any street or highway in the Town officially designated and
appropriately marked or indicated by signs as a bus stop.
§ 250-3. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $20 or by imprisonment for not more than 10 days, or
by both said fine and imprisonment.
§ 250-2 CHARTER § 250-3
C:303

ARTICLE III
Vehicles Equipped With Sound Devices
[Adopted 10-8-1956 by Ord. No. 83 (§§ 14-3 to 14-5 of the 1976
Code)]
§ 250-4. Permit required.
No person shall operate a vehicle equipped with sound devices, namely
public address systems, on the streets and highways within the limits of the
Town, unless he/she shall first obtain from the Town Council or the Chief of
Police, acting in its behalf, a written permit for that purpose.
§ 250-5. Fee.
There shall be no charge for the written permit required by § 250-4.
§ 250-6. Operation restrictions.
Whenever any person wishes to operate any such vehicle equipped with
such sound devices on the streets and highways within the limits of the
Town, such operation shall be limited to the hours between sunrise and
sunset, during which time such operation will be specifically prohibited at
any and all times in the areas adjacent to churches and other places of
peaceful assemblage. All such operations shall be specifically prohibited on
Sundays.
§ 250-4 CHARTER § 250-6
C:305

ARTICLE IV
Prudence Island
[Adopted 9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 104 (§§ 14-10 to 14-14 of the 1976
Code)]
§ 250-7. North side of Landing Lane; Cram Park Homestead.
[Amended 11-23-1987 by Ord. No. 87-11-23]
§ 250-8. South side of Landing Lane.
Parking shall be limited to eight hours on the south side of Landing Lane on
Prudence Island.
§ 250-9. Sand Point Dock. [Amended 2-23-1981 by Ord. No. 81-2]
A. Parking shall be banned on the north side of Landing Lane on Prudence
Island.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 250-13B, twenty-four-hour parking
shall be allowed at the Town-owned Cram Park Homestead (Tax Map
77, Lot 111), subject to the following:
(1) No motor vehicle shall be allowed to remain on said property for a
continuous period in excess of two weeks.
(2) Parking on the center strip of said parking area shall be limited to
24 hours.
(3) Motor vehicles bearing a plainly visible parking permit of the type
duly issued by the Prudence Island Public Safety Officer shall be
exempt from the provisions of Subsection B(1), but in no event shall
such vehicle be allowed to remain on said property for a continuous
period in excess of three weeks from May 1 through October 31 of
each calendar year and four weeks during any other time.
[Amended 6-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-06-12]
(4) No person shall keep or cause to be kept a boat trailer in said
parking area, when not actively engaged in launching or retrieving
a boat.
(5) Parking permits shall be of the size and design prescribed by the
Town Council and shall be issued only to those persons eligible
pursuant to regulations from time to time prescribed by the Town
Council.
A. Parking shall be prohibited on the Sand Point Dock at ferry arrival and
departure times, except for the purpose of loading or unloading cargo.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person not engaged in a matter involving
emergency, rescue or other danger to human life to tie up and leave
unattended any boat or other object to the Prudence Island Volunteer
Fire Department float located at Sand Point Dock at any time.
§ 250-7 CHARTER § 250-10
C:307
§ 250-10. Junk cars at Sand Point Dock.
No junk cars will be allowed on the Sand Point Dock until they have been
consigned to leave the island.
§ 250-11. Spectators at Sand Point Dock.
Spectators will not linger on the Sand Point Dock when bidding farewell or
greeting guests during the time when cargo is being loaded or unloaded
from the ferry or dock.
§ 250-12. Vehicle and licensing requirements; exceptions. [Added
7-11-1977 by Ord. No. 119]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to land upon Prudence Island any
motor vehicle which has not met the standard state inspection required
for such motor vehicle for the current year.
B. Inspection criteria.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Special Service Officer of the Police
Division, or his designate, to, from time to time, inspect all motor
vehicles on Prudence Island to ascertain if such motor vehicles are
fit and safe to operate on the public highways and driftways and to
order the repair or removal of the same.
(2) All motor vehicles must have lights, brakes, a properly enclosed
and installed gas tank and a safe front-end suspension system.
(3) All cars, trucks and similar motorized vehicles must also have doors
and windshields.
C. Every motor vehicle upon Prudence Island shall be assigned a number
by the Special Service Officer, which shall be displayed on both the
front and rear of said vehicle in digits no smaller than four inches tall,
and said number shall be recorded and kept by the Special Service
Officer.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon
the highways and driftways of Prudence Island without a valid
operator's license.
E. Farm tractors, mowing machines and similar motorized equipment are
excluded from this section, except the conditions as set forth in
Subsection B(1).
§ 250-10 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 250-12
C:308
ARTICLE V
Use of Motor-Driven Vehicles
[Adopted 8-27-1973 (§ 14-1 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 250-13. Use on Town property restricted.
§ 250-14. Permission to operate required. [Added 9-8-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a minibike, dirt bike, moped,
go-cart, or any other unregistered motor vehicle upon the property of
another, or upon public property, without the express written permission of
the owner of the property.
A. The use of the properties belonging to the Town for riding horses,
minibikes and other motor-driven vehicles, except in designated areas,
shall be prohibited. This subsection shall not apply to roads and rightsof-
way owned or maintained by the Town.
B. All vehicular or pedestrian traffic and parking on properties belonging
to the Town shall be prohibited from 9:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m., with the
exception of properly authorized meetings, activities and recreational
events. This subsection shall not apply to roads and rights-of-way
owned or maintained by the Town.
§ 250-13 CHARTER § 250-14
C:309

ARTICLE VI
Parking or Standing During Emergencies
[Adopted 2-28-1977 by Ord. No. 116; amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 250-15. Temporary parking or standing restrictions.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to prohibit, temporarily, the
standing or parking of any vehicle, other than authorized emergency
vehicles, on any local highway or part thereof in an impending or existing
emergency, provided there is reasonable justification for such prohibition.
Vehicles parked in places where parking is prohibited temporarily may be
moved by or under the direction of an officer.
§ 250-16. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
HIGHWAY — The entire width between boundary lines of every way when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
traffic.
LOCAL HIGHWAY — Every highway in the Town of Portsmouth other than a
state highway or private road or driveway.
§ 250-17. Removal or towing of vehicles.
§ 250-18. Violations and penalties.
A. Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this article, except those
specifically exempt by this article and except those specifically exempt
by other laws, shall be removed to a convenient place under the
direction of an officer of the Police Department, and the owner of the
vehicle so removed or towed away shall be liable for the cost of towing,
storage and other incidental expenses in connection with said towing.
B. The moving or towing of any vehicle under the provisions of this article
shall be by and at the direction of the Chief of Police or such other
officer of the rank of Sergeant or higher as he/she may, from time to
time, designate.
C. The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles towed or
removed under the provisions of this article.
D. The contractor shall be liable to the owner for any damage arising out
of negligence caused to a vehicle in the course of removal and storage.
A. Violation of § 250-15 of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $15.
Said fine shall be payable by mail within 10 days of the date of violation.
Said fine may be mailed to the Chief of Police, Portsmouth Police
Department, Portsmouth, Rhode Island, and said fine may be paid in
cash, by check or money order.
§ 250-15 CHARTER § 250-18
C:311
B. Violation tags. Notice of violation of this article shall be affixed to the
motor vehicle, and said notice shall state the specific violation charged,
the fine for said violation, the time within which the privilege of paying
said fine by mail may be exercised and the place to which such fine may
be mailed.
§ 250-18 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 250-18
C:312
ARTICLE VII
One-Way Streets
[Adopted 12-12-1977 by Ord. No. 121]
§ 250-19. One-way streets designated.
Upon the following streets and parts of streets, vehicular traffic shall move
only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic
are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Location
Island Avenue North Park Avenue to Liberty
Street
§ 250-20. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished by a
fine of $10 for the first violation and $15 for each violation thereafter.
§ 250-21. Signs.
Whenever by this article or any other ordinance a one-way street is
described, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to erect appropriate
signs giving notice thereof.
§ 250-19 CHARTER § 250-21
C:313

ARTICLE VIII
Repair of Vehicles
[Adopted 10-28-1985 by Ord. No. 85-10-28]
§ 250-22. Standing and parking for repairs prohibited.
No persons shall stand or park a vehicle upon any of the streets and
highways within the limits of the Town for the purpose of greasing,
changing the oil, or making any repairs to such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
§ 250-22 CHARTER § 250-22
C:315

ARTICLE IX
Time-Limit Parking
[Adopted 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-10-25]
§ 250-23. Parking restricted on certain streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park any motor vehicle during
any weekday (Monday through Friday, inclusive) for a period of more than
two consecutive hours, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., on the
following streets in the Town of Portsmouth:
§ 250-24. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to:
A. Potomac Road;
B. Village Way;
C. Dexter Street;
D. Canonchet Drive;
E. Seneca Road;
F. Wentworth Terrace;
G. Tucker Court;
H. Butts Street;
I. Lowell Drive;
J. Child Street;
K. Hillside Road;
L. Michael Drive;
M. Lisa Terrace;
N. Ferreira Terrace;
O. Jesse Drive;
P. Brown Terrace; and
Q. Chardon Drive.
A. Commercial vehicles actively engaged in delivery of goods to properties
abutting said streets;
B. Construction vehicles actively engaged in construction or demolition
services on properties abutting said streets;
§ 250-23 CHARTER § 250-24
C:317
§ 250-25. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $25.
§ 250-26. Notice of violation.
Notice of violation of this article shall be affixed to the motor vehicle,
and such notice shall state the specific violation charged, the fine for said
violation, the time within which the privilege for paying said fine by mail
may be exercised and the place where such fine may be paid or mailed.
C. Public service and/or public utility vehicles in the course of their normal
activities;
D. The vehicle of any physician or other emergency medical person
engaged in a call at a property abutting said street;
E. Vehicles parked on said streets during the period beginning July 1 and
ending August 31 of any year;
F. Any vehicles displaying a valid parking permit issued to the vehicle by
the Chief of Police pursuant to regulations approved by the Town
Council.
§ 250-24 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 250-26
C:318
ARTICLE X
Obstruction of Mailboxes
[Adopted 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08-14]
§ 250-27. Obstruction prohibited.
No person shall stop, set or park any vehicle in any location which obstructs
vehicular access to any mailbox or mail receptacle by any representative
of the United States Postal Service engaged in the delivery or pickup of
mail during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, exclusive of legal holidays.
§ 250-28. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article shall be punishable as follows:
§ 250-29. Removal of vehicles.
Vehicles cited for a fourth or subsequent offense shall be removed from
the location under the direction of an officer of the Portsmouth Police
Department, and the owner of the vehicle so removed or towed shall be
liable for the costs of towing, storage and other incidental expenses
connected with such removal.
A. First offense: written warning.
B. Second and third offenses: fine of $50.
C. Fourth and subsequent offenses: fine of $50 and removal of vehicle.
§ 250-27 CHARTER § 250-29
C:319
Chapter 257
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 83. Nuisances — See Ch. 260.
§ 257-1. Findings; declaration of policy.
The Portsmouth Town Council hereby finds and declares that:
§ 257-2. Purpose; title; applicability.
A. Excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare and
the quality of life.
B. A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive
noise can be substantially abated without serious inconvenience to the
public.
C. Certain of the noise-producing equipment in this community is essential
to the quality of life herein and should be allowed to continue at
reasonable levels with moderate regulation.
D. Each person has a right to an environment reasonably free from noise
which jeopardizes health or welfare or unnecessarily degrades the
quality of life.
E. It is declared policy of the Town to promote an environment free from
excessive noise, otherwise properly called "noise pollution," which
unnecessarily jeopardizes the health and welfare and degrades the
quality of the lives of the residents of this community, without unduly
prohibiting, limiting or otherwise regulating the function of certain
noise-producing equipment which is not amenable to such controls and
yet is essential to the quality of life in the community.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the control of
noise pollution in the Town by setting maximum permissible sound
levels for various activities to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare.
B. This chapter may be cited as the "Noise Abatement Ordinance" of the
Town.
C. This chapter shall apply to the control of all noise originating within the
limits of the Town or originating from properties lying outside the limits
of the Town owned or controlled by the Town, except where either:
(1) A state or federal agency has adopted a different standard or rule
than that prescribed in this chapter and has so preempted the
§ 250-29 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 257-2
C:320
§ 257-3. Measurement of sound.
§ 257-4. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
given. Definitions of technical terms used in this chapter, which are not
herein defined, shall be obtained from publications of acoustical
terminology issued by ANSI or its successor body.
AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL — The noise associated with a given
environment, exclusive of a particular noise being tested, being usually a
composite of sounds from many sources near and far, exclusive of intruding
noises from isolated identifiable sources.
ANSI — The American National Standards Institute or its successor body.
A-SCALE (dBA) — The sound level in decibels measured using the Aweighted
network as specified in ANSI Standard 1.4-1971 for sound-level
meters. The level is designated dB(A) or dBA.
CONSTRUCTION — Any and all activity necessary or incidental to the
erection, assembly, alteration, installation, repair or equipment of buildings,
roadways or utilities, including land clearing, grading, excavating and
filling.
DECIBEL (DB) — A logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often
used in describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm
regulation of noise from a particular source as to render this
chapter inapplicable thereto; or
(2) The Council has determined that, by reason of public acceptance of
the activity producing a particular noise, such noise is deemed
acceptable to the residents of the Town.
A. If the measurements of sound are made with a sound-level meter, it
shall be an instrument in good operating condition and meeting the
requirements of a Type I or Type II meter, as specified by ANSI
Standard 1.4-1971. For purposes of this chapter, a sound-level meter
shall contain at least an A-weighted scale and both fast and slow meter
response capability.
B. If the measurements are made with other instruments, the procedure
shall be carried out in such a manner that the overall accuracy is at
least that called for in ANSI Standard 1.4-1971 for Type II instruments.
C. When the location or distance prescribed in this chapter for
measurement of sound is impractical or would provide misleading or
inaccurate results, measurements may be taken at other locations or
distances using appropriate correction factors specified in this chapter.
D. Procedures and tests required by this chapter and not specified herein
shall be placed on file with the Town Clerk.
§ 257-2 CHARTER § 257-4
C:321
to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the
reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square
meter).
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof regularly used for
residential occupancy.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities or work
required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Sound of short duration, usually less than one
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of
impulsive sound include explosions, drop-forge impacts and the discharge
of firearms.
LOT — Any area, tract or parcel of land owned by or under the lawful
control of one distinct ownership. Abutting platted lots under the same
ownership shall be considered a lot. The lot line or boundary is an imaginary
line at ground level which separates a lot and its vertical extension owned
by one person from that owned by another.
MOTORBOAT — See "watercraft."
MOTORCYCLE — Any motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground. The term shall include motorized bicycles, motor scooters,
mopeds and the like.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor-operated vehicle licensed for use on the
public highways, but not including a motorcycle.
NARROW BAND SOUND — Sound characterized by normal listeners as
having a predominant pitch or series of pitches; sound described by such
listeners as "whine," "hiss," "toot" or "wail"; or a sound whose frequencies
occupy an octave band or less.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which exceeds the dBA level for such
sound set out in this chapter; the making, creation or permitting of any
unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise; or the making, creating
or permitting of any noise of such character, intensity or duration as to
be detrimental to the life, health or welfare of any individual, or which
either steadily or intermittently annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, peace or safety of any individual.
OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, including road
vehicles, but excepting watercraft, used off public roads for recreational
purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation,
including any officer, department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of the
§ 257-4 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 257-4
C:322
United States, a state or any political subdivision of a state, including the
Town.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SOUND — The steady, impulsive or
narrow band property of a sound, the level of the sound and the extent to
which it exceeds the background sound level.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound for which the information content is
unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as, but not limited to,
understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised
or normal or comprehensible rhythms.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE — Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or
landborne model plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry
persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or
rocket.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, highway, boulevard, alley,
easement or public space which is owned by or controlled by a public
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property, including any structure thereon, which
is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
PURE TONE — Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or
set of single pitches.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — An imaginary line along the ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned
by one person from that owned by another person, but not including
intrabuilding real property divisions.
RECEIVING LAND USE — The use or occupancy of the property which
receives the transmission of sound.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property on which is located a building or
structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that
causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of
sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration,
intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound-pressure level obtained by the use
of a sound-level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B
or C, as specified in ANSI specifications for sound-level meters (ANSI
Standard 1.4-1971, or the latest approved revision thereof). If the frequency
weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output or display
meter, and weighting networks, used to measure sound-pressure levels,
which complies with ANSI Standard 1.4-1971.
§ 257-4 CHARTER § 257-4
C:323
SOUND PRESSURE — The instantaneous difference between the actual
pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space,
as produced by sound energy.
SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — Twenty times the logarithm to the base 10
of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20
micronewtons per square meter (20 x 10-6N/M2). The sound-pressure level
is denoted "Lp" or "SPL" and is expressed in decibels.
STEADY SOUND — A sound whose level remains essentially constant (+/-2
dBa) during the period of the sound-level meter.
TOWN — The Town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island, or the area within the
territorial limits of the Town, and such territory outside of the Town over
which the Town has jurisdiction or control by virtue or ownership or any
constitutional or Charter provision or any law.
USED AND OCCUPIED — Include the words "intended, designed or
arranged to be" (used or occupied).
WATERCRAFT — Any contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a
means of transportation or recreation on water.
ZONING DISTRICTS — Those districts established in the Zoning Ordinance
and indicated on the Official Zoning Map or in the Zoning Ordinance.92
§ 257-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency;
B. The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work;
C. Noncommercial pubic speaking and public assembly activities
conducted on any private property, public space or public right-of-way,
except those activities controlled by § 257-11;
D. The unamplified human voice, except those activities controlled by
§ 257-9;
E. Agricultural activities, exclusive of those involving the ownership or
possession of animals or birds;
F. The emission of sound in the performance of military operations,
exclusive of travel by individuals to or from military duty;
G. The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons between 6:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.;
H. The emission of sound in the discharge of fireworks displays licensed by
the Town between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. only, except
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 257-4 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 257-5
C:324
§ 257-6. Noise disturbances prohibited.
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, except
as permitted, any noise or sound which constitutes a noise disturbance, as
defined in this chapter.
§ 257-7. Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use.
with special permission granted by the Town Council; [Amended
7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-07-09]
I. The emission of sound in the operation of snow removal equipment;
J. The emission of sound relative to permitted construction and
demolition activities, provided that such activities do not occur between
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and
K. The emission of sound relative to the operation of yard or lawn
maintenance equipment or machinery, provided such activities do not
occur between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
A. With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized or
allowed in this chapter, the following are the maximum permissible
sound levels allowed at or within the real property boundary of a
receiving land use:
Table I
Maximum Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use
Location of Receiving
Land Use Time
Sound Limit
(dBA)
Zoning district:
Residential and Open
Space
7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
65
55
Commercial and
Waterfront
At all times 75
Light and Heavy
Industrial
At all times 75
Other:
Public water At all times 75
B. For any source of sound which emits a pure tone, the maximum soundlevel
limits set forth hereinabove shall be reduced by five dBA.
C. Exceptions to Table I are activities covered by the following sections:
§§ 257-8, 257-11, 257-12, 257-14 and 257-18.
§ 257-5 CHARTER § 257-8
C:325
§ 257-8. Emergency signaling devices.
§ 257-9. Specific activities prohibited.
§ 257-10. Musical instruments and similar devices.
No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any
drum, musical instrument or similar device which produces sound in such a
manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary.
§ 257-11. Sound-amplifying equipment.
Except for activities open to the public and for which a permit and a noise
variance have been issued by the Town, no person shall operate, play or
A. No person shall operate or permit the intentional sounding outdoors of
any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar
stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes
or for testing, as provided in Subsection B hereof.
B. Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall occur at the
same time of day each time the test is performed or at such other time
as may be permitted by the Police Department or Fire Department, but
not before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Any such testing shall use only
the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall the test time exceed 60
seconds.
A. Sales by hawking or barking. No person shall create a noise
disturbance by offering for sale or selling anything by shouting or
outcry across a real property boundary.
B. Vehicle or motorboat repairs or testing. No person shall create a noise
disturbance by repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor
vehicle, motorcycle or motorized watercraft.
C. Powered model vehicles. No person shall create a noise disturbance by
operating or permitting the operation of a powered model vehicle in a
public or private space out of doors between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
D. Revelry. No person shall yell, shout, hoot, whistle, sing or make or cause
to be made any other noise on the public streets between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, or at any other time or
place, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any
person in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of
any person in the vicinity.
E. Fireworks. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 257-5H, no person shall
create a noise disturbance by the emission of sound in the discharge of
fireworks, unless said person shall be duly licensed by the appropriate
state and local authority.
§ 257-8 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 257-11
C:326
permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph or
other sound-amplifying equipment so as to create a noise disturbance.
§ 257-12. Motorized vehicles.
A. No person shall operate the engine providing motive power, or any
auxiliary engine, of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more for a consecutive period longer
than 20 minutes while such vehicle is standing and located within 150
feet of property zoned and used for residential purposes, except where
such vehicle is standing within a completely enclosed structure. This
section shall not apply to delivery or pickup vehicles that require the
operation of the engine to unload or load their vending loads.
B. No person shall operate, within the speed limits specified in this
section, either a motor vehicle or a combination of vehicles of a type
subject to registration at any time or under any condition of grade, load,
acceleration or deceleration in such a manner as to exceed the noise
limit listed in Table II for the category of motor vehicle, based on the
legal speed limit, posted or not, of the road or way on which such
vehicle or vehicles are operated. Such noise shall be measured at a
distance of not more than 50 feet from the center line of travel under
test procedures established by Subsection C hereof. If the distance of
the measuring instrument from the center line of travel is less than 50
feet, such listed noise limits shall be corrected to reflect the equivalent
noise limits for the actual distance.
Table II
Noise Limit in Relation to Legal Speed Limit
Type of Vehicle 35 mph or Less
[db(A)]
Over 35 mph
[db(A)]
(1) Any motor vehicle
with a
manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight rating
of 10,000 pounds or
more and any
combination of
vehicles towed by
such motor vehicle
88 92
(2) Any motorcycle 82 86
(3) Any other motor
vehicle and any
combination of
motor vehicles
towed by such motor
vehicle
76 82
§ 257-11 CHARTER § 257-12
C:327
§ 257-13. Construction noise.
This section applies to the total noise from a vehicle or combination
of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the
enforcement of any other provision of any laws relating to motor
vehicle muffler or noise control.
C. The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound-level
meter meeting the standards prescribed by ANSI. The instrument shall
be maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration
check shall be made of the system at the time of any noise
measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a
prior representation of the noise source. The microphone during
measurements shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural
enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for
the microphone shall be used when required. Traffic, aircraft and other
transportation noise sources shall be noted and adjustments made so
that these and other background noise do not interfere with the primary
noise being measured.
D. Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall at all times be equipped with
a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent
noise which exceeds the dBA levels set forth in Table II. No person shall
use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a
highway.
E. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle or
motorcycle by installation of a muffler or bypass, and no person shall
operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle which has been so modified.
F. No person shall operate a recreational vehicle or permit the operation
of one or more recreational vehicles, individually or in a group or in an
organized racing event, on public or private property, in such a manner
as to create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary.
G. Motorized watercraft shall be governed by the sound levels set forth in
Table I. Every motorized watercraft shall be equipped with a muffler in
good working order and constant operation to prevent noise which
exceeds the dBA level set forth in Table I for public water.
A. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any tool or
equipment in construction, drilling or demolition work, or in preventive
maintenance work for public service utilities, which creates a noise
disturbance across a residential real property boundary.
B. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Emergency work or repair work performed by and for
governmental entities or public service utilities; or
(2) Work for which a variance has been obtained from Council.
§ 257-12 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 257-13
C:328
§ 257-14. Stationary nonemergency signaling devices.
§ 257-15. Animals and birds.
The owner, possessor or keeper of any animal or bird shall be deemed
to have violated this chapter if such animal or bird frequently or for a
continued duration emits sound that is natural to the species, which sound
exceeds the dBA level set forth in Table I.
§ 257-16. Implementation, administration and enforcement.
C. The use of domestic power tools or equipment is subject to the noise
levels set forth in Table I.
D. Properly permitted construction and/or demolition activities are
allowed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. each day.
A. No person shall operate or permit the sounding of any stationary bell,
chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for
nonemergency purposes, from any place, for more than one minute in
any one hour.
B. Devices used in conjunction with places of religious worship shall be
exempt from the operation of this section.
C. Exemptions for sound sources covered by this section, but not
exempted under § 257-13B, may be granted by Council under the
procedure set forth in § 257-18.
A. This chapter shall be implemented, administered and enforced by the
Police Department.
B. The provisions of this chapter which prohibit a person from making or
continuing noise disturbances, or causing the same to be made or
continued, across a real property boundary or within a noise sensitive
area shall be enforced by the Police Department.
C. To implement and enforce this chapter, the Police Department shall
have the power to:
(1) Conduct research, monitoring and other studies related to sound;
(2) Conduct programs of public education regarding the causes,
effects and general methods of abatement and control of noise, as
well as the actions prohibited by this chapter and the procedures
for reporting violations;
(3) Coordinate the noise control activities of all Town departments;
(4) Review public and private projects, including those subject to
mandatory review or approval by other departments, for
compliance with this chapter, if these projects are likely to cause
sound in violation of this chapter;
§ 257-13 CHARTER § 257-16
C:329
§ 257-17. Department actions.
All departments and agencies of the Town shall carry out their programs in
furtherance of the policies set forth in this chapter.
§ 257-18. Sound variances.
(5) Issue sound variances granted pursuant to § 257-18.
D. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs and two or more persons
are present in or on the lot from which the sound emanates, and it is
impossible to determine which of such persons is the violator, the owner
of the lot, if present, shall be presumed responsible for the violation. In
the absence of such owner, the tenant or tenants of such lot or any
person present with the direct consent of the owner shall be held
responsible for the violation.
E. In the case of continuing violations, the Town Solicitor may institute an
action for injunctive relief against the owner and/or tenant of the lot.
A. Council shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to grant
sound variances from this chapter after public hearing.
B. Any person seeking a sound variance under this section shall file an
application with Council. The application shall contain information
which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for
which the sound variance is sought into compliance with this chapter
would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the
community or on other persons.
C. All applications shall be subject to an application fee of $100 and an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of advertising and notification to all
residents and property owners within 100 feet of the noise source.
Advertisement shall be made at least once, seven days prior to the
public hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
Notification shall be by regular mail at least seven days prior to the
public hearing. [Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07-11]
D. In determining whether to grant or deny an application, or revoke a
variance previously granted, Council shall balance the hardship to the
applicant, the community and other persons, if the sound variance is
not allowed, against the adverse impact on the health, safety and
welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected,
and any other adverse impact, if the sound variance is allowed.
Applicants for sound variances and persons contesting sound variances
may be required to submit any information that Council may reasonably
require. In granting or denying an application or in revoking a sound
variance previously granted, Council shall place on public file a copy of
the decision and the reasons for granting, denying or revoking the
sound variance.
§ 257-16 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 257-18
C:330
§ 257-19. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 260
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 257.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 288.
Junked or abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 382.
E. Sound variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing
all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity.
The sound variance shall not become effective until all conditions are
agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the
sound variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to
those provisions of this chapter regulating the source of sound or
activity for which the sound variance was granted.
F. Determination of modification of a granted variance shall be made in
accordance with the rules and procedures set forth in the section for
original applications.
A. Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$100 and/or imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
B. Holders of alcoholic beverage licenses.
(1) In addition to any other penalty set forth herein, any holder of a
Class A, B, B Ltd., C or D liquor license who shall be cited for
violation of the provisions of this chapter twice within a period of
six months shall, upon complaint by the Police Department to the
Town Council sitting as a Board of License Commissioners, be
summoned to appear before the Board to show cause why
disciplinary action should not be taken against said license holder
for violation of state or local laws, ordinances or regulations.
(2) The license holder shall be served with a notice of the date, time
and place of any such hearing.
(3) The license holder has the right to be present at any such hearing,
to be represented by counsel if he/she so chooses, to cross-examine
witnesses and to present sworn testimony on his or her own behalf.
(4) After hearing, the Board may, if it finds that a violation has
occurred, take disciplinary action against the license holder,
including, but not limited to, suspension and/or revocation of the
license.
§ 257-18 CHARTER § 257-19
C:331

ARTICLE I
Abatement of Nuisances
[Adopted 3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03-09]
§ 260-1. Prohibited accumulations and growth.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit the accumulation of
any filth or solid wastes, including garbage, rubbish, dead animals, trash,
litter, junked automobiles or parts or accessories thereof, scrap metal,
broken and unused lawn furniture and furnishings, mattresses, bedding,
cardboard, empty boxes and cartons, construction debris (except during
the course of construction), tin cans, bottles, papers, rags, refuse of any
description, or any stagnant or standing water, or other material upon
premises owned or occupied by him or to permit a dense growth of vines,
weeds, hedges, grass or other underbrush to develop upon such premises so
as to encourage the breeding or collection of rats, flies and/or mosquitoes
or to create a fire hazard or to constitute a menace to life, property or the
public health, safety or welfare. Such accumulations and growth are hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
§ 260-2. Notice to abate.
If the Building Official or his designee finds the existence upon any premises
of one or more of the conditions described in § 260-1 of this article, the
Building Official or his designee shall notify the occupant, owner or agent of
the owner of such premises, in writing, of the existence upon those premises
of any nuisance as above described and order him or her to abate and
remove such nuisance forthwith.
§ 260-3. Service of notice to abate.
The notice referred to in § 260-2 of this article shall be in writing and signed
by the Building Official or his designee and Town Clerk and shall be served
upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require, and
shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon
such occupant, if a copy thereof is:
A. Served upon him personally; or
B. Left at his dwelling or usual place of abode with some person of suitable
age or discretion residing therein or delivered to an agent authorized
by appointment or by law to receive this notice; or
C. Upon a person for whom a guardian or conservator has been appointed,
served upon the guardian or conservator; or
D. Upon a public or private corporation, domestic or foreign, delivered to
an officer, a managing or general agent, or left at the office of the
corporation with a person employed there or delivered to an agent
authorized by appointment or by law to receive service of process; or
§ 260-1 CHARTER § 260-3
C:333
§ 260-4. Show cause hearing.
Within 10 days after the service of the notice described in § 260-3 of this
article, the owner of such property shall have the right to request a hearing
before the Town Council to show that the condition does not exist, or
to show why such condition should not be remedied by the Town at the
expense of the owner of such property. Such hearing shall be held as soon
as practicable after the hearing has been requested, and the Town and the
property owner may introduce such evidence as deemed necessary by the
Council in hearing the matter.
§ 260-5. Abatement by Town; costs.
If the condition described in the notice prescribed by this article has not
been remedied within 10 days after service thereof or, in the event there
is a hearing as provided in § 260-4 of this article, after notice to the
property owner of the decision of the Council sustaining the order of
the Building Official, the Town Administrator shall cause the condition to
be remedied by the Town at the expense of the owner of the property.
After causing the condition to be remedied, the Town Administrator shall
certify to the Director of Finance the expense incurred in remedying the
condition, together with a statement as to the condition of the property
which necessitated incurring such expense and a copy of the notice
mentioned above with proof of service thereof and a copy of the decision of
the hearing before the Council, if any. All expenses incurred in remedying
the condition shall be paid by the owner, occupant or person who caused
or permitted such condition to exist, and if the expense is not paid within a
reasonable time, then the expense may be recovered in an action brought
in the name of the Town, including placing a lien on the property for all
expenses incurred by the municipality. Any expenses not paid within 30 days
of notice served as set forth in § 260-3 shall be a lien against the property.
The lien shall be recorded in the records of land evidence of the Town and
shall bear legal interest from date of recording. The costs incurred by the
Town, plus the interest, shall be added to the amount of taxes due on said
real estate, if any. The Tax Collector shall have the same powers and shall
be subject to the same duties with respect to this claim as in the case of
the annual taxes upon said real estate, and the provisions of law relative to
the collection of any annual taxes and the redemption of this sold and taken
land shall apply to this claim; provided, however, that such action shall not
be deemed to preclude the Town from collecting said sums by other lawful
means.
E. Mailed to an individual or corporation by regular and registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested; or
F. Posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises; or
G. Served by any other method authorized or required under the laws of
this state.
§ 260-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 260-6
C:334
§ 260-6. Owner's right to appeal costs.
Any property owner shall have a right to have a hearing before the Council
to show cause, if any, why the expenses and charges should not be collected
against him, provided that the finding by the Building Official that the
condition described in § 260-1 exists shall be final, unless an appeal is taken
to the Council as provided in this article, in which case the finding of the
Council with reference to such property shall be final and conclusive.
§ 260-7. Records; collection of unpaid expenses.
The Finance Director shall keep a complete set of files and records relating
to all expenses incurred by the Town in the enforcement of this article, and
after notice to the owners of the property involved of the amounts due, and
if the same are not paid as provided elsewhere herein, within a reasonable
time, he shall refer the statement of expense to the Town Solicitor for
collection. The Town Solicitor may bring suit to collect the amounts owed to
the Town.
§ 260-8. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or occupant who neglects to remove, at his own expense, any
nuisance, refuse, filth or solid waste as set forth in § 260-1 of this article
within the time set forth in the notice sent pursuant to § 260-3 shall be
in violation hereof and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50 for
every day during which he or she knowingly permits the nuisance, solid
waste, refuse, filth or source of filth to remain after the time prescribed for
removal.
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-8
C:335

ARTICLE II
Maintenance of Trees Overhanging Public Streets
[Adopted 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-07-14]
§ 260-9. Pruning of trees and vegetation causing obstructions;
minimum clearance.
It shall be the duty of any person(s) owning real property bordering on any
public street or thoroughfare, upon which property there may be trees or
other woody vegetation, to prune such trees and vegetation in a manner
that it will not obstruct the passage of public pedestrians or vehicular
travel, or obstruct or impair the view of any street or intersection or the
view of any traffic signs or signals, so as to pose a threat to pedestrian or
vehicular safety. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion of such
trees or vegetation shall be eight feet (2.44 meters) over all sidewalks or
road shoulders and 14 feet (4.27 meters) over all streets and thoroughfares,
or as otherwise determined at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.
§ 260-10. Pruning or removal of trees in unsafe condition.
It shall further be the duty of any person(s) owning real property bordering
on any public street or thoroughfare to prune or remove any tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature,
poses a threat to public property, pedestrian or vehicular safety, or
otherwise constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 260-11. Notice to abate nuisances.
The failure of any person(s) owning real property bordering on any public
street to prune or remove trees or vegetation as provided in this article is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The Director of Public Works shall
have the authority to issue a notice to abate such nuisance in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Ordinance No. 200903-09 (Nuisances), as
codified in Chapter 260, Article I, of the Portsmouth Code of Ordinances.
§ 260-12. Approval of Tree Warden.
Prior to issuing an order to remove a private tree, the Director of Public
Works shall consult with and receive approval from the Tree Warden.
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-12
C:337
Chapter 268
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and hunting — See Ch. 177. Noise — See Ch. 257.
§ 260-12 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 260-12
C:338
ARTICLE I
Keeping and Storing of Explosives
[Adopted 6-14-1915 by Ord. No. 36 (§ 15-7 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 268-1. License required. [Amended 9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-5]
No person shall store, keep or have in his possession, for sale or his use, any
dynamite, nitroglycerine, lyddite, chlorate of potash, sodium or picric acid
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Chief of Police.
§ 268-1 CHARTER § 268-1
C:339
Chapter 274
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 230. Yard sales — See Ch. 397.
§ 268-1 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 268-1
C:340
ARTICLE I
Hawkers and Peddlers
[Adopted 8-10-1936 by Ord. No. 53 (§§ 13-18 to 13-24 of the 1976
Code); amended in its entirety 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12-09]
§ 274-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
HAWKER — Any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, or
merchandise on any public street, highway, or public right-of-way in the
Town of Portsmouth from a stationary location.
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Registered pursuant to Title 5,
Chapter 11.1 of the General Laws and any regulations promulgated
thereunder, or permitted pursuant to Article IV of this chapter, are not
hawkers or peddlers and are explicitly exempted from this article.
PEDDLER — Any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares,
or merchandise from a vehicle, cart, or any other conveyance that is not
stationary.
§ 274-2. License required.
No person shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise as a
hawker or peddler without first obtaining a hawker or peddler license from
the Town Council, unless specifically exempted pursuant to Title 5, Chapter
11, Section 18 of the General Laws of the state, or any amendment thereof
or addition thereto.
§ 274-3. Application for license.
All hawkers and peddlers shall make application for a license to the Town
Council. Upon approval of such application by the Town Council, the Town
Clerk shall issue a license accordingly to such applicant to sell the goods,
wares, or merchandise hereinbefore mentioned in such manner as shall be
specified in such license for the period and from the date of such license.
§ 274-4. Fees.
Every person to whom a license shall be granted by the Town Council,
before receiving such license, shall pay to the Town Clerk a fee of $50.
§ 274-5. License term; revocation.
Each license shall expire on December 1 next after date of issuance, but
may be revoked at any time at the pleasure of the Town Council.
§ 274-1 CHARTER § 274-6
C:341
§ 274-6. Transfer of license.
No license shall authorize any person other than the one named therein
to act thereunder, and no license shall be transferable except by express
authorization of the Town Council.
§ 274-7. Display of license.
Any person who shall neglect or refuse, for the space of 10 minutes after
demand by any police officer, to exhibit to such officer his license shall be
deemed for the purpose of this article to be unlicensed and to have violated
the provisions thereof.
§ 274-7.1. Special event peddler's license.
A. Any special event, as recognized and approved by the Town Council,
may utilize any vendor that is duly licensed by this chapter.
B. A special event peddler's license may be issued to hawkers or peddlers
not currently licensed by the Town Council. Application for said license
shall be submitted to the Town Clerk or his or her designee along with a
fee of $50 per event. Application must include the nature of items for
sale, the special event title, location and date(s), a copy of the state tax
permit. Said license will be issued administratively by the Town Clerk.
Said license shall be displayed conspicuously at all times. All sales
under this special event peddler's license will be limited only to the
hours of the special event and shall be conducted where the special
event is being held. Any person who has had his or her license revoked
by the Town Council shall not be eligible for a special event peddler's
license by the Town Clerk.
§ 274-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 274-7.1
C:342
ARTICLE II
Door-to-Door Canvassers and Salesmen
[Adopted 6-2-1958 by Ord. No. 88]
§ 274-8. Statutory authority; purpose.
In pursuance of the powers conferred upon the Town Council of the Town
of Portsmouth by Title 45, Chapter 6, Section 1, of the General Laws of
Rhode Island, A.D. 1956, and of all other powers conferred upon the same
or the Town of Portsmouth by general and special laws hereunto enabling,
and in order to preserve and promote the public safety, health, morale,
comfort, and general welfare, the following regulations and laws are hereby
made and established respecting the following matters and things within
the Town of Portsmouth.
§ 274-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOOR-TO-DOOR CANVASSERS OR SALESMEN — Applies to those
persons, whether they be principals or agents of any persons, firms or
corporations, who do not have a regularly established place of business
in the Town of Portsmouth, whose business is transient in nature,
necessitating door-to-door calls without prior appointment, and whose calls
are infrequent in time and unscheduled. Persons making door-to-door calls
as duly licensed peddlers or vendors are excluded from the terms of this
article.
§ 274-10. Written authorization required; application.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make door-to-door calls as either a
canvasser or salesman in the Town of Portsmouth without first receiving
written authorization from the Portsmouth Police Department. The
Portsmouth Police Department shall ascertain from each applicant, prior to
issuance of said authorization, the applicant's name, address, company or
other bona fide authorization and make such other inquiry of the applicant
as the Police Department shall deem expedient.
§ 274-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any regulation as defined in this article shall be fined
not exceeding $10 for each violation.
§ 274-8 CHARTER § 274-11
C:343

ARTICLE III
Door-to-Door Soliciting
[Adopted 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. 84-2]
§ 274-12. Title; excluded activities.
This article may be cited as the "Door-to-Door Soliciting and Canvassing
Ordinance." The following activities are expressly excluded from the
operation and effect of this article:
§ 274-13. Permit required.
No person shall engage in door-to-door soliciting or canvassing within the
Town of Portsmouth without first having obtained a solicitor's permit from
the Town Chief of Police in accordance herewith.
§ 274-14. Display of permit.
Any person issued a solicitor's permit hereunder shall carry said permit
upon his or her person at all times while engaged in the activity permitted;
such persons shall produce said permit upon the demand of any law
enforcement official of the state or Town and upon the demand of any
person then being solicited or canvassed by the permit holder.
§ 274-15. Application procedure.
Each person desiring to engage in door-to-door canvassing or soliciting
within the Town of Portsmouth shall apply for a permit by providing the
Chief of Police with the following information upon a form to be supplied by
the Chief of Police:
A. Otherwise lawful parades.
B. Otherwise lawful assemblies or demonstrations upon public lands or
places.
C. Any otherwise lawful activity by or on behalf of a legitimate candidate
for public office organized and conducted according to Title 17 of the
General Laws of Rhode Island, 1956 (as amended), entitled
"Elections."93
D. Lawful activities of religious groups, charitable organizations or
political action groups.94
A. Name of solicitor or canvasser;
B. Residence address of solicitor or canvasser;
C. Date of birth and social security number of solicitor or canvasser;
93.Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 17-1-1 et seq.
94.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 274-12 CHARTER § 274-15
C:345
§ 274-16. Issuance of application.
D. Name of organization or entity being represented by the solicitor or
canvasser, if any;
E. Address, telephone number and name of the Town, county or statewide
head of the organization or entity being represented by the solicitor or
canvasser, if any;
F. A brief statement of the nature of the organization or entity being
represented by the solicitor or canvasser, if any;
G. Make, model and license plate number of automobile(s) to be used
while soliciting, if any;
H. A statement detailing the past record for convictions of any crime by
the person applying, excluding violations and nonmoving traffic
offenses, to include the date and place of conviction and the crime for
which said person was convicted;
I. A statement authorizing the Chief of Police to make inquiry into the
veracity of all information provided upon the application form;
J. A statement acknowledging that the applicant has carefully read the
completed application form, that the information provided is true and
correct to the best of his or her knowledge, and acknowledging that any
statement proven later to have been falsely made will constitute
grounds for denial or revocation of the permit;
K. Customarily acceptable proof of the applicant's identity;
L. The dated signature of the applicant; and
M. A statement of the applicant's appellate rights hereunder.
A. Upon receipt of each application for a permit hereunder, the Chief of
Police shall issue a solicitor's and canvasser's permit within the three
business days next following the date of application, exclusive of
Sundays and legal holidays, unless he/she shall find any one of the
following:
(1) The applicant has provided false information upon the application;
or
(2) The applicant has been adjudicated guilty of having violated any
provision of this article within the 12 months next preceding the
application date; or
(3) The applicant has been adjudicated guilty of a crime of violence,
theft, moral turpitude, or violation of the criminal gambling or
weapons provisions of Rhode Island law within the five years next
preceding the application date.
§ 274-15 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 274-16
C:346
§ 274-17. Filing of appeal.
Any person denied a permit hereunder may, within 10 business days of its
denial, excluding Sundays and legal holidays, file a simple written statement
with the Town Clerk claiming an appeal. Failure to file within the time stated
shall constitute a forfeiture of an applicant's appellate rights hereunder.
§ 274-18. Docketing of appeals.
Upon receipt of each claim of appeal, the Town Clerk shall place the written
claim upon the agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Town
Council and notify the appellant in writing of the date, time and place of said
meeting. Appeals hereunder shall be given first priority upon said agenda,
and if more than one such appeal is received, said appeals shall be ordered
upon said agenda according to the date and time of their receipt.
§ 274-19. Appellate procedure.
The Town Council shall provide a complete and impartial hearing upon
each appeal. The appellant may produce evidence tending to show by clear
and convincing evidence that either the permit was unlawfully denied or
that special circumstances exist which, notwithstanding the provisions of
this article, merit granting of the permit in the applicant's case. The Town
Council, after hearing the evidence, shall render its decision at the same
meeting at which the evidence was offered, unless there exists good cause
for the delay or unless the applicant consents to a delay.
§ 274-20. Appellate decision.
The Town Council shall reverse the decision of the Chief of Police and
order him/her in writing to grant the permit as applied for within 24
hours or grant the permit with special conditions reasonably related to
the circumstances shown at the hearing; otherwise, the Town Council shall
uphold the decision of the Chief of Police by affirming the denial of the
permit.
§ 274-21. Observance of signs.
No person issued a permit hereunder shall enter upon any private premises
whereon there is conspicuously posted a sign or other artifice clearly
purporting to prohibit trespassers, solicitors or canvassers.
§ 274-22. Time, place and manner restrictions.
B. If the Chief of Police shall find that any one or more of the above
conditions obtains, he/she shall endorse the application with the word
"denied" over his dated signature across its face and append thereto a
brief statement of his reasons therefor.
§ 274-16 CHARTER § 274-22
C:347
§ 274-23. Destruction of permit prohibited.
No person shall destroy or cause to be destroyed any permit issued
hereunder while it remains valid.
§ 274-24. Duration of permit.
Permits issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of six months from the
date of issue.
§ 274-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person adjudicated guilty of violating any provision of this article by a
court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to revocation of his or her
active permit and a fine of up to $100 for each violation.
A. No door-to-door canvassing or soliciting activities shall be engaged in
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. within the Town of
Portsmouth.
B. Solicitors and canvassers shall not engage in soliciting or canvassing
upon property or within buildings owned by the Town and used for
Town business during the hours of Town use and operation.
C. Solicitors and canvassers shall not block or cause to be blocked any
highway, street or public access within the Town.
§ 274-22 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 274-25
C:348
ARTICLE IV
Mobile Food Establishments
[Adopted 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12-09]
§ 274-26. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT EVENT — An event where an individual
has ordered or commissioned the operation of one or more MFE at a private
or public gathering.
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or MFE — A food service operation that
is operated from a movable motor driven or propelled vehicle, portable
structure, or watercraft that can change location. Mobile food
establishments specifically includes but is not limited to, food trucks, food
carts, ice-cream trucks/carts, and lemonade trucks/carts.
§ 274-27. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the registration process for MFEs
consistent with the provisions of Chapter 5-11.1 of the Rhode Island General
Laws.
§ 274-28. Application for Town permit; fee.
A. No mobile food establishment shall operate within the Town without
first obtaining a registration from the department pursuant to Rhode
Island General Laws Chapter 5-11.1 and a Town permit issued by the
Town Council pursuant to this article. The MFE operator shall provide
with its application for a Town permit a complete copy of a current and
valid state MFE registration.
B. The Town shall accept applications for municipal MFE permits by email
or other electronic means.
C. The Town MFE permit shall expire on the same date that the state MFE
registration expires.
D. The fee for each Town MFE permit shall be no more than $75 per year
or any part of a year, or such other fee that shall not exceed the
maximum fee set by the department.
E. The permit fee for each MFE event or for each temporary mass
gathering shall be no more than $300, or such other fee that shall not
exceed the maximum fee set by the Department.
F. Any person or entity desiring to hold a MFE event within the Town shall
obtain a separate MFE event permit or temporary mass gathering
permit, as applicable, prior to holding the event, and pay the applicable
fee.
§ 274-26 CHARTER § 274-29
C:349
§ 274-29. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
The Town Council may deny, suspend or revoke a permit that the Town has
issued if the operation of the registrant within the Town violates the Town's
land use regulations, zoning, or other ordinances in relation to the operation
of a MFE.
§ 274-30. Display of permit.
The Town MFE permit shall be affixed to the mobile food establishment in a
conspicuous place.
§ 274-31. Special event mobile food establishment permit.
A. Any special event, as recognized and approved by the Town Council,
may utilize any MFE that is duly registered by the Department and
permitted by the Town Council pursuant to this chapter.
B. A special event MFE permit may be issued to an MFE not currently
permitted by the Town Council. Application for said permit shall be
submitted to the Town Clerk or his or her designee along with a fee of
up to $75 per event. Application must include a complete copy of a valid
and current state MFE registration. Said permit will be issued
administratively by the Town Clerk. Said permit shall be displayed
conspicuously at all times. All sales under this special event MFE
permit will be limited only to the hours of the special event and shall be
conducted where the special event is being held. Any person who has
had his or her MFE permit revoked by the Town Council shall not be
eligible for a special event MFE permit by the Town Clerk.
§ 274-29 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 274-31
C:350
Chapter 288
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 260. Solid waste — See Ch. 326.
§ 274-31 CHARTER § 274-31
C:351

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 288-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground but
having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Building Official appointed by the Town
Council, or his authorized representatives.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and
having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING — Any building, including hotels and rooming houses, which is
wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human
occupants, provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not
be regarded as a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit, with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Building Official.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
INFESTATION — The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects
or other pests.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than one dwelling
unit.
OCCUPANT — Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OR ANY PART THEREOF (after certain words) — Whenever the words
"dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" and "premises"
§ 288-1 CHARTER § 288-1
C:353
are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof."
ORDINARY MINIMUM WINTER CONDITIONS — The temperature 0° F.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PLUMBING — All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste
pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs,
shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins, drains,
vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections
to water, sewer or gas lines.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator
to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter,
mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the
owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer, camp or other structure used
for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
§ 288-2. Conflicting provisions.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health regulations of the
Town, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any
case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of this Code or other ordinance of the Town which establishes a
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
A.
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as
owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing
the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the
same extent as if he/she were the owner.
B.
§ 288-1 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 288-2
C:354
lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and
such other provisions are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
§ 288-2 CHARTER § 288-2
C:355

ARTICLE II
Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants
§ 288-3. Owner responsibilities.
Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
§ 288-4. Occupant responsibilities.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises
thereof which he/she occupies and controls.
§ 288-5. Rubbish disposal.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers
required by § 288-24.
§ 288-6. Garbage disposal.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage
and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, in a
clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities
or garbage storage containers required by § 288-25. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or containers for all
dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than four dwelling units and
for all dwelling units located on premises where more than four dwelling
units share the same premises. In all other cases, it shall be the
responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
§ 288-7. Screens.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
hanging all screens or double or storm doors and windows whenever the
same are required under the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where the owner has agreed to
supply such service.
§ 288-8. Extermination of pests.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
§ 288-3 CHARTER § 288-8
C:357
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of
the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
§ 288-9. Maintenance of plumbing.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in
a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
§ 288-10. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 288-11. Foundations, floors, walls, ceilings and roofs.
Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof, shall be capable of affording
privacy and shall be kept in good repair.
§ 288-12. Windows and doors.
Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and shall be kept in sound
working condition and good repair.
§ 288-13. Stairways and porches.
Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance thereto
shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the
load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
§ 288-14. Plumbing fixtures.
Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed
and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks
and obstructions.
§ 288-15. Water closet and bathroom floors.
Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to
water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
§ 288-8 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 288-16
C:358
§ 288-16. Construction and installation standards.
Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function
safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working
condition.
§ 288-17. Discontinuance of services, facilities, equipment or
utilities.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility which is required under this chapter to be moved from or shut off
from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him/her,
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies when
discontinuance of service is approved by the State Department of Health or
its representative.
§ 288-18. Standard for occupancy.
No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit
unless it is clean, sanitary, and fit for human occupancy.
§ 288-16 CHARTER § 288-18
C:359

ARTICLE III
Sanitary Equipment
§ 288-19. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein, which does not comply with the requirements of this article.
§ 288-20. Kitchen sink.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition
and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the
Building Official.
§ 288-21. Flush toilet and lavatory.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person
within such room and which is equipped with a flush water closet and a
lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected to a water
and sewer system approved by the Building Official.
§ 288-22. Bathtub or shower bath.
Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to
a person within such, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the Building
Official.
§ 288-23. Hot and cold water.
Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required under
the provisions of §§ 288-19 to 288-22 shall be properly connected with both
hot and cold waterlines.
§ 288-24. Rubbish storage facilities.
Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
facilities, the type and location of which are approved by the Building
Official.
§ 288-25. Garbage disposal facilities.
Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers, the type and location of which are approved by
the Building Official.
§ 288-26. Water-heating facilities.
Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are
§ 288-19 CHARTER § 288-26
C:361
properly connected with the hot waterlines required under the provisions
of § 288-23, and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to
permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen
sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than
120° F. Such supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting
the requirements of this section when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating
facilities required under the provisions of § 288-33 are not in operation.
§ 288-27. Means of egress.
Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading
to safe and open space at ground level, as required by laws of the state and
the Town.
§ 288-26 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 288-27
C:362
ARTICLE IV
Lighting, Ventilation and Heating
§ 288-28. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the requirements of this article.
§ 288-29. Window areas.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of
such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of
any such room and such light obstruction structures are located less than
three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling
of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum
total window area.
§ 288-30. Openable windows or skylights.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which
can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the
room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall
be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size, as required
in § 288-29, except where there is supplied some other device affording
adequate ventilation and approved by the Building Official.
§ 288-31. Bathroom lighting and ventilation.
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light
and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in this article,
except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated
bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with a ventilation
system which is kept in continuous operation and approved by the Building
Official.
§ 288-32. Electrical fixtures.
Where there is electric service available from power lines which are not
more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every habitable room of such
dwelling shall contain at least two separate floor or wall-type electric
convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one supplied
ceiling-type electric light fixture, and every water closet compartment,
bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hall shall contain at least
one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet
and fixture shall be property installed, shall be maintained in good and safe
working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power
§ 288-28 CHARTER § 288-32
C:363
in a safe manner. Fuses and fuse holders and boxes shall conform to safety
standards approved by the electrical inspector.
§ 288-33. Heating facilities.
Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are
maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of safely
and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of
at least 70° F. at a distance three feet above floor level, during an outside
temperature of 0° F. winter conditions.
§ 288-34. Lighting of public spaces.
Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five
or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every
public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy
and containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with
conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system
which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting.
§ 288-35. Screening.
A. Proper screening for windows and doors shall be provided wherever it
is found necessary by the Building Official.
B. Basement or cellar windows or openings shall be supplied with screens
or other devices which will effectively prevent the entrance of rodents
or other vermin.
§ 288-32 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 288-35
C:364
ARTICLE V
Use and Location of Dwelling Space
§ 288-36. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the requirements of this article.
§ 288-37. Floor space.
Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for
the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor
space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated
on the basis of total habitable room area.
§ 288-38. Sleeping space.
In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each
occupant thereof.
§ 288-39. Access to bathroom.
No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall
have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping
room can be had only by going through another sleeping room, nor shall
room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had
only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet
compartment.
§ 288-40. Ceiling height.
At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling
height of at least seven feet, and the floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
§ 288-41. Cellar or basement occupancy.
No cellar or basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling
unit unless:
A. The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;
B. The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum
window area sizes as required in § 288-29;
§ 288-36 CHARTER § 288-41
C:365
C. Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and
D. The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum as required under § 288-30, except where there is supplied
some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the
Building Official.
§ 288-41 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 288-41
C:366
ARTICLE VI
Rooming Houses
§ 288-42. Compliance required.
No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance
with the provisions of every section of this chapter, except the provisions of
Articles II and III.
§ 288-43. Permit requirements.
No person shall operate a rooming house unless he/she holds a valid
rooming house permit issued by the Building Official, in the name of the
operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall
apply to the Building Official for such permit, which shall be issued by
the Building Official upon compliance by the operator with the applicable
provisions of this chapter and of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto. This permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
rooming house at all times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every
person holding such a permit shall give notice in writing to the Building
Official within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or
otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or control of any rooming
house. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership or control of such rooming house. Every
rooming house permit shall expire at the end of one year following its date
of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided.
§ 288-44. Hearing after denial of permit.
Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house has
been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Building Official, under the procedure provided by Article VIII of
this chapter.
§ 288-45. Permit suspension.
Whenever, upon inspection of any rooming house, the Building Official finds
that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision
of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto,
the Building Official shall give notice in writing to the operator of such
rooming house that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within
a reasonable period, to be determined by the Building Official, the
operator's rooming house permit will be suspended. At the end of such
period, the Building Official shall reinspect such rooming house, and if he/
she finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he/
she shall give notice in writing to the operator that the latter's permit has
been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such operator shall
immediately cease operation of such rooming house, and no person shall
occupy, for sleeping or living purposes, any rooming unit therein.
§ 288-42 CHARTER § 288-46
C:367
§ 288-46. Request for hearing with Building Official.
Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been suspended,
or who has received notice from the Building Official that his permit is to be
suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his rooming house are
corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before
the Building Official, under the procedure provided by Article VIII of this
chapter, provided that if no petition for such hearing is filed within 10 days
following the day on which such permit was suspended, such permit shall
be deemed to have been automatically revoked.
§ 288-47. Sanitation facilities.
At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the Building
Official and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight
persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including
members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of such
facilities, provided that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to
males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than 1/2 the required
number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the
dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway
to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied with adequate hot water at all times. No such
facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval of the
Building Official.
§ 288-48. Linens and towels.
The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and
towels therein at least once each week and prior to the letting of any room
to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
§ 288-49. Sleeping space.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at
least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of
floor space for each occupant thereof.
§ 288-50. Means of egress.
Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading
to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of the state
and the Town.
§ 288-51. Maintenance of sanitary conditions.
The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for maintenance of a
§ 288-46 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 288-51
C:368
sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house, and he/she shall
be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises
where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
§ 288-52. Hotels.
Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also
apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be found in
conflict with the laws of the state or with the lawful regulations of any state
board or agency.
§ 288-51 CHARTER § 288-52
C:369

ARTICLE VII
Condemnation of Unfit Dwellings
§ 288-53. Condemnable defects.
Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and
shall be so designated and placarded by the Building Official:
§ 288-54. Vacation.
Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, and
so designated and placarded by the Building Official, shall be vacated within
a reasonable time as ordered by the Building Official.
§ 288-55. Reoccupation.
No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded
as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation
until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the
Building Official. The Building Official shall remove such placard whenever
the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action
were based have been eliminated.
§ 288-56. Removal of placards.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling
unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and
placarded as such except as provided in § 288-55.
§ 288-57. Hearing.
Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning and
placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Building
Official, under the procedure set forth in Article VIII of this chapter.
A. One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety
of the public.
B. One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
C. One which, because of its general condition or location, is unsanitary, or
otherwise dangerous, to the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
§ 288-53 CHARTER § 288-58
C:371
§ 288-58. Disposition of condemned dwelling.
The owner of any dwelling which has been found by the Building Official
to be unfit for human habitation in accordance with the provisions of
this article shall not sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose
thereof until the conditions causing the dwelling to be unfit for human
habitation have been corrected or until such owner has furnished the
intended grantee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of the order or notice
and has notified the Building Official in writing of his intent to transfer,
sell, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling. A transferee,
mortgagee or lessee who has received actual notice or constructive notice
shall be bound by such order or notice on the date of such transfer,
mortgage or lease without service of further notice upon him/her by the
Building Official.
§ 288-58 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 288-58
C:372
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 288-59. Rules and regulations.
§ 288-60. Inspections.
The Building Official, his agent or the Building Inspector is hereby
authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises located within the
Town, in order that he/she may perform his/her duty of safeguarding the
health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public.
For the purpose of making such inspections, the Building Official, or any of
his/her authorized representatives, is hereby authorized to enter, examine
and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units and premises. When making such inspections, he/she shall wear such
badge or insignia as the Town Council may direct and shall exhibit such
clearly. The owner or occupant of every dwelling or dwelling unit, or the
person in charge thereof, shall give the Building Official or his authorized
representative free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit
and its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such
dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises, at all reasonable times, for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 288-61. Referral of violation to appropriate municipal authority.
Whenever the Building Official or his agent determines that the condition
of a dwelling or dwelling premises or any part thereof is in violation of any
zoning, building, fire or health regulation not part of this chapter, he/she
shall refer such violations to the appropriate municipal authority.
A. The Building Official may from time to time adopt such written rules
and regulations as are necessary for the proper enforcement of this
chapter. Such rules shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. These rules and regulations shall not be effective until they have been
approved, with or without additions or amendments, by the Town
Council after a public hearing.
C. After approval by the Town Council, these rules and regulations shall
have the same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter, and the
penalty for violation thereof shall be the same as the penalty for
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 288-59 CHARTER § 288-62
C:373
§ 288-62. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Building Official or his agent determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, he/she shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person
responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
§ 288-63. Request for hearing.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Building Official, provided that such person shall
file in the office of the Building Official a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within
10 days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition,
the Building Official shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall
give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice
should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later
than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that,
upon application of the petitioner, the Building Official may postpone the
date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period if, in
his judgement, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for
such postponement.
§ 288-64. Disposition of notice.
After such hearing, the Building Official, or his agent, shall sustain, modify
or withdraw the notice, depending upon his finding as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with. If the Building Official sustains or
A. Be put in writing;
B. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
D. Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy
thereof is served upon him/her personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by
registered mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice;
or if he/she is served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required under the laws of the state;
E. Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 288-62 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 288-64
C:374
modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served
pursuant to § 288-62 shall automatically become an order if a written
petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Building Official within
10 days after such notice is served. After a hearing in the case of any
notice suspending any permit required by this chapter or by any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, when such notice has been sustained
by the Building Official, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked.
Any such permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to
be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of
the Building Official within 10 days after such notice is served.
§ 288-65. Records.
§ 288-66. Emergencies.
Whenever the Building Official or his agent finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he/she may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he/she deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but, upon
petition to the Building Official, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
possible. After such hearing, depending upon his finding as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with, the Building Official shall either continue
such order in effect, modify or revoke it.
§ 288-67. Reinspection of dwelling.
At the end of the time period specified in the compliance order or any
extension thereof, it shall be the duty of the Building Official to make
a reinspection of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or dwelling
premises, and if the order has not been complied with, the Building Official
shall institute proper legal action or make such further orders as the case
may require.
§ 288-68. Repairs made by Building Official.
Whenever a compliance order to repair, alter or secure a dwelling found
by the Building Official to be unfit for human habitation and continued
occupancy has not been complied with, the Building Official may, at the
A. The proceedings at hearings held pursuant to § 288-63, including the
findings and decision of the Building Official, shall be summarized,
reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in his office.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter.
B. All notices and orders of the Building Official under this chapter may be
recorded in the same manner as the recording of lis pendens notices.
§ 288-64 CHARTER § 288-68
C:375
expense of the person responsible for alleviating the violation, take such
direct action as is necessary to alleviate the violation, if the cost of such
action is reasonably related to the value of the dwelling. For the purposes
of this section, any repair, alteration or securing that is determined by the
Building Official to cost 50% or less of the assessed valuation of the dwelling
shall be deemed to be reasonable. The power of the Building Official to
repair or alter shall be limited to the alleviation of conditions which affect
occupied dwellings or dwelling units.
§ 288-69. Demolition of dwelling by Building Official.
Whenever a compliance order issued to the provisions of this chapter and
providing for the demolition of a dwelling has not been complied with, and
the cost of repair has been determined by the Building Official to be more
than 50% of the assessed valuation of the dwelling, the Building Official may
demolish the dwelling at the expense of the owner. Nothing in this section
shall in any way impair powers or duties currently exercised by the Town
pursuant to Chapter 1755 of the Public Laws of 1946.
§ 288-70. Costs to become lien; recovery of expenses.
Whenever the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, improve
or demolish a dwelling which has been determined to be unfit for human
habitation and continued occupancy, and the Building Official has taken
direct action pursuant to the provisions of § 288-68 or 288-69, the costs
incurred by him/her in such action shall be a lien against the real property,
and such lien shall be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by
law for the enforcement of common law liens on personal property. Such
lien shall be recorded. If the dwelling is demolished by the Building Official,
he/she may sell the materials of such dwelling, and the net cost of the
demolition shall be charged to the owner, and if any balance remains, it
shall be held for the owner or any other parties entitled thereto, and in
every case, the cost of direct action shall be the costs necessary to perform
the required work as expeditiously as possible, together with a ten-percent
service charge in addition thereto.
§ 288-71. Certificate of compliance.
When the Building Official shall have determined that any dwelling or
dwelling unit or rooming house under the terms of this chapter is in
compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter, he/she shall issue
a certificate of compliance to the owner of such dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming house, a copy of which shall be a public record on file in the Town
hall. Such certificate shall be subject to periodic review.
§ 288-72. Court proceedings.
The Supreme Court and the Superior Court or any Justice of either of such
Courts in vacation shall, upon due proceedings instituted in the name of
any of the several cities or towns, have power to issue any extraordinary
§ 288-68 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 288-72
C:376
writ or to proceed according to equity, or both, to restrain, prevent, enjoin,
abate or correct a violation or to order the repair, vacation or demolition
of any dwelling existing in violation of the provisions of any ordinance
passed or to otherwise compel compliance with all of the provisions of any
ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this chapter. When, under
the provisions of any ordinance passed pursuant to the authority of this
chapter, any work is done or material furnished by any enforcing official or
by his order at the expense of the owner or other persons interested, the
value of such work and material may be recovered in an action of the case
brought against such owner or other interested person or persons, and if
any such work or materials shall have been done or furnished at the cost
of the city or Town, such enforcing official shall cause such action to be
brought in the name of the city or Town. Upon the entry of any case or
proceeding brought under the provisions of this chapter, the Court shall, at
the request of either party, advance the case so that it may be heard and
determined with as little delay as possible.
§ 288-73. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any provision
of any rule or regulation adopted by the Building Official pursuant to
authority granted by ordinance, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine of not more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days,
and each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 288-72 CHARTER § 288-73
C:377

ARTICLE IX
Board of Review
§ 288-74. Establishment; members; officers; hearings.
There is hereby established a Board of Review consisting of five members
to be appointed by the Town Council, for staggered terms of one to five
years, and to be known as the "Housing Board of Review." The Chairman,
or, in his absence, the Vice Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All hearings of such Board shall be open to the
public.
§ 288-75. Records; notice of decisions.
The Housing Board of Review shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote upon each question, and shall keep records of its decisions
and findings and the reasons therefor and of its examinations and other
official acts, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the
Building Inspector of the Town and shall be a public record.
§ 288-76. Appeals procedure.
Appeals to the Housing Board of Review may be taken by any person upon
whom a decision or compliance order has been issued by the Building
Official. Such appeal must be filed with the Secretary of the Board within
10 days from the issuance of such order or decision appealed from. Such
appeal shall specify the grounds thereof. The Board shall immediately
transmit a copy of the appeal to the Building Official. Upon receipt by the
Building Official of the appeal, he/she shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all papers constituting the record upon which the decision or compliance
order was based.
§ 288-77. Effect of appeal on proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Building Official from whom the appeal is taken certifies
to the Housing Board of Review, after notice of the appeal has been
transmitted to him/her, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would, in his opinion, cause a serious hazard or immediate peril to the
health or safety of the occupants of a dwelling or of the public. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which
may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction on appeals therefor and
upon notice to the Building Official from whose order the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
§ 288-78. Time for hearing; notice of hearing; appearance at
hearing.
The Board of Review shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, give due notice thereof to the party making the appeal and to the
§ 288-74 CHARTER § 288-78
C:379
Building Official and decide such appeal within a reasonable time. At the
hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
§ 288-79. Authority of Board.
The Housing Board of Review shall have the power to hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Building Official in the enforcement
of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the authority
hereof.
§ 288-80. Variances.
Where, by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional condition or situation
unique to the property involved, the strict application of this chapter, rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to the authority hereof would result in peculiar
and exceptional difficulties to, or exceptional or undue hardship upon, the
person upon whom a compliance order has been issued, the Housing Board
of Review shall have the power to vary from such strict application to the
least extent necessary to relieve such difficulties or hardship, provided such
relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare and without substantial impairment of
the intent and purpose of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant to the authority granted herein.
§ 288-81. Quorum; voting requirements.
In order to hear an appeal, a quorum of three members of the Board of
Review must be present. A concurring vote of a majority of the members of
the Board of Review present at the hearing shall be necessary to reverse
or modify any order or decision of the Building Official and to authorize a
variance or modification in the application of any provisions of this chapter,
rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the authority hereof. In the event of a
tie vote, the order of the enforcing official shall be deemed to be sustained.
§ 288-82. Powers of Board.
In exercising its powers, the Board of Review may, in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Official
and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought
to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Building Official
from whom the appeal was taken.
§ 288-83. Court review.
A. Any person, including the enforcing official, aggrieved by any decision
of the Board of Review may present to the Supreme Court a petition
duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part
and specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall be presented
to the Court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of
§ 288-78 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 288-83
C:380
the Board of Review. Upon presentation of such petition, the Court may
allow a writ of certiorari directed to the Board of Review to review such
decision of the Board of Review and shall prescribe therein the time
within which a return thereto must be made, which shall not be less
than 10 days and may be extended by the Court. The allowance of the
writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but
the Court may, on application, upon notice to the Board of Review and
on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. The Board of Review
shall not be required to return the original papers acted on by it, but
it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or such
portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall
concisely set forth other facts as may be pertinent and material to show
the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified.
B. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the Court that testimony is
necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence
or appoint a master to take such evidence as it may direct and report
such evidence to the Court with his findings of fact and conclusions of
law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the
determination of the Court shall be made. The Court may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for
review.
§ 288-83 CHARTER § 288-83
C:381
Chapter 299
RESIDENTIAL GROWTH MANAGEMENT
§ 299-1. Purpose.
The purpose of growth management is to equitably allocate a limited
number of new residential building permits over time, so as to minimize the
burden on existing facilities and resources, whose adequacy is essential to
the public health, safety and welfare, and in a manner which is consistent
with the Portsmouth Comprehensive Community Plan. It is the intent of this
chapter to allow controlled growth in relation to the existing and future
capacity of Town facilities and the School District.
§ 299-2. Findings.
The Town Council, Planning Board, Town staff and consultants have
conducted a study to develop a growth management program as called
for in the Comprehensive Community Plan. The study is entitled "Town of
Portsmouth, Rhode Island, Growth Management Program" and was adopted
by the Town Council on June 4, 2001. The Town Council finds that this study,
together with the footnotes and sources, establishes the basis for the Town's
Growth Management Program and is incorporated herein by reference.
§ 299-3. Issuance of residential building permits. [Amended
12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12-20]
Issuance of building permits authorizing creation of one or more dwelling
units, as defined by the Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance,95 through new
construction or change of use shall be allowed only under the procedures
and requirements set forth herein. A permit is equivalent to a dwelling
unit. Applicants for such residential building permits shall be authorized
to proceed in the manner specified herein and in accordance with the
priority assigned to them. The total number of dwelling units authorized
to begin construction in any quarter shall not exceed the calculated quota
as established in § 299-4 of this chapter; provided, however, that
notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, for the last quarter of
the calendar year 2001 (October 1 to December 31), the Building Official
may issue 23 permits, provided that there shall be an offsetting reduction in
the permits available to be issued in the first quarter of calendar year 2002
(January 1 to March 31). The quota for the first quarter of 2002 shall be six
less than would otherwise be allowed by the quota guidelines established
herein.
§ 299-4. Calculated quota.
There shall be a finite number of residential building permits for each
quarter of each year. A "quarter" is defined as a three-month period that
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 288-83 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 299-4
C:382
begins on the first day of January, April, July or October. From the date of
adoption by the Town Council of this chapter to December 31, 2001, the
total number of such permits shall be the sum of 68 minus the number
of permits already issued from January 1, 2001, to the date of adoption.
Thereafter, the number of residential permits to be issued shall be limited
in accordance with the following formula:
Total permits per quarter = the currently available seats within the
Portsmouth School District, plus any increase of seats that the Town of
Portsmouth may provide for through new construction of school facilities
over the next 10 years, commencing with January 1, 2001 ÷ (divided by)
0.6239 ÷ (divided by) 40.
§ 299-5. Initial quota.
§ 299-6. Subsequent quotas.
Following the method established in § 299-5, the calculation of the formula
for the third and all subsequent quarters shall be performed by the Building
Official (or Alternate Building Official) and shall be submitted to the Town
Council, the Planning Board and posted in the office of the Town Clerk not
less than 30 days prior to the commencement of the quarter for which the
quota is to be applied. To assist the Building Official in his/her calculation,
the Building Official shall request, in writing, that the Superintendent of
Schools supply him/her the number of available seats in the School District
based on the current capacity less the actual enrollment as of October 1
of the school calendar year, and the increase in seat capacity, projected
from January 1, 2001, to December 31, 2011, based upon any adopted
plan of the School Department. The Building Official shall monitor the
School Department's overall capacity by checking with the Superintendent
of Schools every first day of February, March, August, and November to
determine if there are any changes in available seats. If there are no
changes, the Building Official shall notify the Town Clerk that the number
of permits to be issued the next quarter will be the same as the previous
A. Initially, it has been determined by the Town Council, based upon
studies conducted pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan and studies
cited in § 299-2, along with data supplied by the Portsmouth School
Department, the Town's present capacity for additional dwelling units is
based on the following:
1999 total capacity 3,331
2000/2001 enrollment 2,917
Existing excess capacity 414
Divided by 0.6239 663 dwellings
Divided by 40 quarters 17 permits (rounded up)
B. No more than 17 permits shall be issued as of the first two quarters
following the adoption of this chapter.
§ 299-4 CHARTER § 299-6
C:383
quarter. If there are changes in seats, the Building Official shall recalculate
the quota and notify the Town Clerk of the new number of permits to be
issued the next quarter. Notwithstanding any changes, the quota shall not
change in the middle of any given quarter.
§ 299-7. When effective.
For the purposes of this chapter, the effective date shall be the date of
its enactment. Any application for a building permit creating one or more
additional dwelling units submitted after the effective date of this chapter
shall be subject to the review procedures set forth herein. Permit
applications submitted before the effective date of this chapter shall not be
subject to any of the quota limitations of this chapter. This chapter shall
supersede any and all ordinances inconsistent herewith.
§ 299-8. Exemptions from quota.
A. The following types of dwellings shall not be subject to the provisions of
this chapter with regard to the calculated quota. These dwellings have
been determined to have no or minimal impact upon the Town's
capacity or provide positive benefits to the Town which are consistent
with the Comprehensive Community Plan.
B. The Building Official shall accept applications for construction of the
dwellings listed below and shall act upon them without regard to the
quotas, priority determination and procedures as set forth in this
chapter. All such permits issued shall be considered to be issued in
addition to the calculated quota provisions of this chapter. Complete
applications for construction of dwelling units so authorized shall be
granted permits within the time limits prescribed in the Rhode Island
State Building Code, regardless of the availability of permits within the
quota.
(1) Vested rights. An application to construct a dwelling is not subject
to this chapter if allowed pursuant to vested rights provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance (Article XV, Section F).96
(2) Elderly housing: dwellings which would contribute to meeting the
year-round housing needs of elderly and disabled citizens through
enforceable restrictions limiting occupancy to households whose
members are 62 years of age or older.
(3) Retired adult communities: planned developments for retired
citizens, with amenities, established through publicly enforceable
restrictions limiting occupancy to residents whose members are 55
years of age or older.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 299-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 299-8
C:384
§ 299-9. Priority issuance.
Building permits shall be issued by the Building Official up to the maximum
number permitted by the applicable calculated quota, in the order of
priority assigned below. In the event of a tie, priority shall go to the
application with the earlier date and time of the submission of a complete
application.
(4) Multifamily dwellings: multifamily dwellings having zero-bedroom
(studio) or one-bedroom units and which do not exceed a total of
800 square feet of floor area per dwelling unit.
(5) Accessory family dwelling units, as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance.97
(6) Community residences: any community residence as defined by
R.I.G.L. § 45-24-31.
(7) Hog Island. Any buildings on Hog Island are exempt from this
chapter.
(8) Exempt by Town Council action. The Town Council may, upon
application, grant an exemption for individual mixed-use
developments which it determines will have a positive net financial
impact on the Town. Such developments must be in the Enterprise
Zone. Town Council may impose conditions on such exemptions as
needed to help ensure a positive net financial impact on the Town.
[Added 8-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-08-12]
A. The first priority shall be given to applications for construction of lowand
moderate-income housing. "Low- or moderate-income housing"
means any housing subsidized by the federal or state government under
any program to assist the construction or rehabilitation of low- or
moderate-income housing, as defined in the applicable federal or state
statute, whether built or operated by any public agency or any nonprofit
organization or by any limited equity housing cooperative or any private
developer. Entities eligible are any public agency, nonprofit
organization or limited equity housing cooperative proposing to build or
rehabilitate low- or moderate-income housing or any private developer
proposing low- or moderate-income rental housing which will remain as
low- and moderate-income housing for a period of not less than 30 years
from initial occupancy. Projects are eligible if sponsored by an eligible
entity and are eligible and approved for a subsidy from the state or
federal government under any program to assist the construction or
rehabilitation of low- and moderate-income housing and have at least
the minimum number of units reserved for low- or moderate-income
housing as defined by the program providing the subsidy or 25% of the
total number of units reserved for low- or moderate-income housing,
whichever is greater.
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 299-8 CHARTER § 299-9
C:385
§ 299-10. Procedure for issuance of building permits.
B. The second priority shall be given to any single-family residence
containing amenities built into the structure of the home as set forth in
Rhode Island State Building Code Section 14, which are necessary to
accommodate the physical disability of the owner or member of the
owner's immediate family residing therein. In order to quality for this
priority, the applicant or property owner must submit a sworn
statement attesting that the premises will be occupied by a person with
physical disabilities and a deed restriction, in recordable form,
restricting the property from being sold or transferred for a period of
two years next subsequent to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. [Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12-20]
C. The third priority shall be given to applications for construction of a
new single-family detached dwelling, provided that the applicant owned
the lot to be built before the effective date of this chapter; or the lot to
be built upon was subdivided from a larger parcel before the effective
date of this chapter. This priority level shall not apply: [Amended
12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12-20]
(1) If the applicant has previously received a permit for a new singlefamily
detached dwelling in Portsmouth; or
(2) The lot to be built upon was under common ownership with a lot or
parcel that has previously received a building permit for a new
single-family detached dwelling in Portsmouth within two years
prior to the date of application.
D. The fourth priority shall be given to applicants whose application for
construction of a dwelling has been denied for four consecutive
quarters because of the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12-20]
E. The fifth priority shall be given to applicants whose property is under
the jurisdiction of the Coastal Zone Management Council (CRMC).
[Amended 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12-20]
F. The remainder of the quota shall be issued to any other applications in
the order of complete applications received.
A. Applications for building permits for construction of one or more
dwelling units shall be submitted to the Building Official, who shall
adhere to the following procedure in reviewing and issuing permits:
(1) Completeness. The Building Official shall, upon receipt of an
application submitted, examine the application, plans and all
materials for completeness, which shall include all plans and
materials required for a building permit under the applicable
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance98 and the Rhode Island State
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 299-9 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 299-10
C:386
Building Code. If said application, plans and materials are
complete, the Building Official shall stamp it, indicating the date
and time of official receipt by the Town.
(2) Incomplete applications. If the application is incomplete and does
not contain all plans and materials as required by the Zoning
Ordinance99 and the Rhode Island State Building Code, the
application, plans and materials shall be returned to the applicant,
within 15 days, who will be informed by the Building Official what
is missing from the submission in order to qualify as a complete
application.
(3) When a permit is ready to be issued, the Building Official shall
notify the applicant by certified mail, return receipt required, and
the applicant shall have 60 days from receipt of said notice in which
to pay any fees due and obtain the building permit. Any applicant
that does not pay for and obtain said building permit within such
sixty-day period shall forfeit his/her/its position on the quota list
and shall be required to complete a new application, which shall be
placed on the bottom of the quota list at such time as the new
application is complete. [Added 12-20-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-12-20]
B. The Building Official shall not issue permits for any dwelling units in
excess of the quota, unless such units are exempt as provided in
§ 299-8. The Building Official shall keep track of all permits issued plus
complete applications submitted during the most recent quarter,
beginning with the effective date of this chapter. If, within any quarter,
the number exceeds the quota, additional building permits shall no
longer be issued. Applications for additional permits shall be
accumulated for action at the beginning of the next quarter and shall be
prioritized and issued under the ensuing quarter.
C. At the beginning of the next quarter, the Building Official shall add the
total number of complete applications on file to the total number of
permits issued during the previous three quarters. In the event that the
resulting sum (current quarter applications plus the previous three
quarters' accumulation) is fewer than the annual quota as defined
herein, accumulated permits shall be issued up to the quarterly quota
limit, and new applications may be processed to such limit. In the event
that the resulting sum exceeds the annual quota, the accumulated
permits shall not be issued, and no further permits shall be issued for
that quarter.
D. The accumulation of applications may continue from one quarter to the
next and permits issued within the limitations described in Subsection
C above. Under no circumstances shall the number of building permits,
other than those exempt dwellings, exceed the annual quota.
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 299-10 CHARTER § 299-10
C:387
§ 299-11. Limitation on permits issued.
§ 299-12. Appeals.
Any decision by the Building Official to carry out the purposes of this
chapter may be taken by an aggrieved party to the Zoning Board of Review.
The appeal shall be taken within 20 days following an action by the Building
Official to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall specify the
grounds for such appeal. The Building Official shall forthwith transmit to
the Zoning Board of Review all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken. Notice of the appeal shall also be
transmitted to the Planning Board. The procedure for any appeal, including
a public hearing, shall be in accordance with Article XIV of the Zoning
Ordinance.100
§ 299-13. Expiration date.
This chapter shall expire on December 31, 2011, and shall be reviewed for
applicability by the Planning Board no later than December 31, 2006.
Chapter 314
E. In the event that the number of building permits issued in any one year
does not reach the annual quota, there shall be no carryover of permits
to the following year.
A. In order to assure that permits for residential building construction are
equitably distributed among all qualified applicants, no more than five
building permits for dwelling units shall be granted to either any single
applicant (including any related entity as defined below) or to any
owner (including any related entity) of any single subdivision or land
development project within any quarter if doing so would result in
denial of a permit for any other applicant.
B. "Related entity" means, with respect to a specific person, group of
people, or corporation ("party"):
(1) Such party's spouse or parents, children, grandparents,
grandchildren or siblings (blood or adopted);
(2) A trustee of a trust for the benefit of such party, or for the benefit of
any person identified in Subsection B(1) above;
(3) A corporation, partnership, firm, business or entity of which 15% or
more of the voting interest is owned by such party, or any person
identified in either Subsection B(1) or (2) above; or
(4) A person who is an officer, director, trustee, employee or partner of
any entity referred to in Subsection B(2) or (3) above.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 299-10 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 299-13
C:388
SHORT-TERM RENTAL OF RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 257. Zoning — See Ch. 405.
§ 314-1. Findings.
§ 314-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all rental dwelling units within
the Town of Portsmouth except hotels, motels, community residences, and
the rental of rooms in an owner-occupied dwelling unit.
§ 314-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
A. The Constitution of the State of Rhode Island, Article XIII, Section 2,
grants to the Town of Portsmouth the power to enact and amend local
laws relating to its property, affairs and government as long as such
local laws are consistent with the Constitution and laws enacted by the
General Assembly. This delegation of power includes the police power
to enact reasonable legislation to regulate and supervise rental
dwellings in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Residential rentals in Portsmouth, including short-term rentals in
residential neighborhoods, have been the source of noise, congestion,
pollution, and disorderly behavior involving tenants and other persons
on and near the premises, as well as violations of Town ordinances,
including the Zoning and Noise Ordinances101 and violations of various
Rhode Island statutes.
C. These conditions have disturbed the peace of the neighborhoods in
which they have occurred; they have violated the repose, comfort and
quiet enjoyment of persons in their homes; they have produced
unreasonable disturbances of the peace, and they are inconsistent with
the public health and safety and general welfare of the people.
D. The Town of Portsmouth finds that, by application of the regulatory
framework contained herein, the short-term rental of dwelling units can
have a positive effect on the health, safety and welfare of the
community by providing a flexible housing stock that allows travelers
safe accommodations while contributing to the local economy and
providing homeowners an opportunity to hold property in difficult
economic circumstances or as an investment.
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning, and Ch. 257, Noise.
§ 299-13 CHARTER § 314-3
C:389
BEDROOM — Any room in a residential structure which is greater than 70
square feet in area, which is susceptible to present or future use as a private
sleeping area, which has at least one window and one interior method of
entry and egress but excluding closets and bathrooms.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or portion thereof providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, and
containing a separate means of ingress and egress.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE — A person designated on a registration form
filed under this chapter as the person authorized to receive any process,
notice or demand required or permitted to be served upon the owner of the
premises. A local representative may, but need not, also serve as property
manager.
REGISTRAR — The Portsmouth Town Clerk.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — The rental, lease or other contractual
arrangement for the occupation of a dwelling unit by a tenant for residential
and/or dwelling purposes, for any period of less than 31 consecutive days.
§ 314-4. Registration and inspection required; permit.
§ 314-5. Registration form.
The rental registration form shall indicate the Tax Assessor's plat and lot
number, address of the rental dwelling unit, the number of rental dwelling
units therein, the name, permanent mailing address and telephone number
of the record owner and of his or her registered agent, broker, agent,
manager or other representative, and the usual period of occupancy by
tenants (monthly, weekly or other). Copies of the registration form, with
contact information for the local representative, will be held on file by the
Portsmouth Police and Fire Departments.
A. All dwelling units which are let, leased, or otherwise occupied, in whole
or in part, by a tenant for any period of less than 31 consecutive days
for residential and/or dwelling purposes, shall be registered by the
record property owner thereof with the Registrar before any tenant
occupies the premises.
B. At the time of registration, the dwelling unit shall be subject to
inspection by the Building Official or his/her designee and the Fire
Marshal. The purpose of the inspection is to determine the occupancy
limit of the unit pursuant to § 314-8 of this chapter, to determine if
smoke and CO2 detectors are installed in compliance with the State
Fire Code for dwelling units and to determine the number of off-street
and on-street parking spaces available. The Building Official or his/her
designee shall issue a short-term rental permit stating the maximum
occupancy for the dwelling unit.
§ 314-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 314-6
C:390
§ 314-6. Filing date; term.
On or before December 31 of each year, the record owner of the rental
dwelling unit shall file the completed rental registration form with the
Registrar, which registration shall be valid for a one-year period from
January 1 to December 31 of the following year. If the property is registered
during the calendar year, the registration shall be valid until December 31
of that same year.
§ 314-7. Registration fee.
There shall be a registration fee of $100 for each dwelling unit covered
under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 314-8. Occupancy limits and parking requirements.
§ 314-9. Owner's obligations.
A. The maximum occupancy for the dwelling unit shall be two persons per
bedroom. The number of bedrooms shall not exceed the number of
bedrooms supported by the design load of the property's septic system
(on-site wastewater treatment system, or "OWTS"). The owner shall
provide records and/or information that the Building Official or his/her
designee deems reasonably sufficient to determine the number of
bedrooms for which the OWTS is rated. The maximum occupancy may
be further limited by the requirements of Subsection B below. For the
purpose of establishing occupancy, a person is defined as an individual
at least 12 years of age.
B. One off-street parking space shall be provided on the same lot on which
the short-term rental is located for each bedroom as determined by the
Building Official. Each required parking space shall be not less than 10
feet in width and 20 feet in length exclusive of drives and maneuvering
space. Where the required number of off-street parking spaces cannot
be provided on said lot, then legal on-street parking spaces along the
frontage of said lot (one space per 20 feet of frontage) may be utilized to
meet the parking requirement. Where the total number of parking
spaces required by this section cannot be met, the permitted occupancy
of the dwelling shall be reduced to conform to the available amount of
off-street and on-street parking spaces.
A. All short-term rental agreements shall have as an attachment a copy of
the applicable short-term rental registration and permit for the
premises. The rental agreement shall state that the renter may be held
legally responsible for any violations of law committed by the renter or
by other occupants or guests while at the premises, including violations
of the laws and ordinances pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct,
disturbance of the peace, keeping dogs on a leash, parking, trash
maintenance and disposal, and dwelling occupancy limits.
§ 314-6 CHARTER § 314-9
C:391
§ 314-10. Posting of notice by owner.
The record owner shall post in plain view, in a conspicuous place within the
rental dwelling unit, a notice containing the ordinances of the Town with
regard to the Noise Ordinance,102 dog leash law, dwelling occupancy limits,
and any other pertinent ordinance or law which the Town Council may deem
appropriate from time to time. Such notices shall be available at the office
of the Registrar. The record owner or any person in control or possession of
said rental dwelling unit subject to the provisions of this chapter shall cause
a copy of the current short-term rental agreement with the printed names of
all renters, and the registration form and permit required by this chapter to
be posted or affixed to the inside of the primary access door to said dwelling
unit so as to allow the lease and registration form to be readily available for
inspection by police, zoning, building, or minimum housing officials of the
Town of Portsmouth.
§ 314-11. Local representative.
B. The owner and/or local representative shall obtain accurate and up-todate
information, including the names, home addresses and phone
numbers of the renters, the date of the rental period and the model,
year, color and vehicle registration of all motor vehicles registered to or
used by such renters. The owner and/or local representative shall
maintain this information throughout the term of the short-term rental
agreement and for 90 days thereafter; and shall make this information
available to Town officials who are lawfully investigating or prosecuting
any offense reasonably believed to involve one or more of the renters.
Failure of the record owner and/or local representative to maintain or
provide this required information shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
A. The record owner shall designate on the registration form an individual
who permanently resides in Newport County, or a property manager
with a physically staffed office within 10 vehicular miles of Newport
County, as the record owner's local representative, who shall be
authorized to receive any process, notice or demand required or
permitted to be served upon the owner of the premises. The record
owner may be designated as the local representative, if he or she
resides in Newport County.
B. The local representatives must be authorized by the record owner to
respond to tenant and neighborhood questions or concerns. The local
representative shall serve as the initial contact person if there are
questions or complaints regarding the use of the dwelling for shortterm
rentals. The local representative shall respond to those complaints
to ensure that the use of the dwelling complies with the requirements of
this chapter, as well as all other applicable Town ordinances pertaining
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 257, Noise.
§ 314-9 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 314-11
C:392
§ 314-12. Enforcement; penalty for violation; revocation of permit.
§ 314-13. Implementation.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage, provided, however, that
enforcement of violations shall be stayed until December 31, 2018.
Chapter 320
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 155.
Land development and subdivision
regulations — See Ch. 236.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 336.
to parking, noise, disturbances, or nuisances, as well as state law
pertaining to the consumption of alcohol and/or the use of illegal drugs.
C. The failure of the local representative to respond to Portsmouth Police
Department inquiries more than twice during the term of the annual
permit shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
D. The record owner may change the designation of the local
representative from time to time by filing an amended permit
application including the name, address and telephone number of the
new local representative. Failure to notify the Town of any change in the
local representative shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
A. Violations of this chapter shall be enforceable through issuance of a
summons by any zoning enforcement official of the Town. Violations and
citations shall be heard and adjudicated by the Portsmouth Municipal
Court.
B. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $100 per day for a first violation, $250 per day for a
second violation, and $500 per day for a third and each subsequent
violation, and such fines may be imposed for each day the violation
continues.
C. The Zoning Enforcement Official may revoke a short-term rental permit
issued under this chapter if it is determined, by a violator's admission or
a municipal court finding of a violation, that three or more violations of
this chapter have occurred for the same property within a twelve-month
period, and no new permit shall be issued to the property owner for the
same property for a period of 12 months following the revocation. Any
revocation of a short-term rental permit may be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Review as an administrative appeal pursuant to the provisions
of Article XIV of the Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance.
§ 314-11 CHARTER § 314-13
C:393
§ 320-1. Findings; purpose.
§ 320-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to any situation involving any disturbance
to the terrain, topsoil or vegetative ground cover upon any property within
the Town of Portsmouth, after determination of applicability by the Building
Official based upon criteria set forth in § 320-3A below. Compliance with
the requirements as described herein shall not be construed to relieve
the owner/applicant of any obligations to obtain necessary state or federal
permits.
§ 320-3. Determination of applicability; exceptions.
A. The Portsmouth Town Council hereby finds that excessive quantities of
soil are eroding from certain areas that are undergoing development
for nonagricultural uses such as housing developments, industrial
areas, recreational facilities and roads. This erosion makes necessary
costly repairs to gullies, washed-out fills, roads, and embankments. The
resulting sediment clogs the storm sewers and road ditches and
muddies streams, leaves deposits of silt in ponds and reservoirs and is
considered a major water pollutant. Construction debris, litter and
spills also clog the stormwater management system and contaminate
surface water and groundwater.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation
from occurring as a result of nonagricultural development within the
Town by requiring proper provisions for water disposal, construction
waste management and the protection of soil surfaces during and after
construction, in order to promote the safety, public health and general
welfare of the Town.
A. Determination of applicability.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any existing
vegetation, grades, and contours of land in a manner that may
affect the quality of stormwater discharges associated with
construction activity without first applying for a determination of
applicability from the Building Official, except that the following
activities shall be determined to be subject to the requirements of
this chapter: all activities disturbing a total area equal to or greater
than one acre, including disturbances less than one acre if part of a
larger common plan; and any activity that requires permit approval
by either the RIDEM or CRMC. The application for determination of
applicability shall describe the location, nature, character, and time
schedule of the proposed land-disturbing activity in sufficient detail
to allow the Building Official to determine the potential for soil
erosion and sedimentation resulting from the proposed project. In
determining the applicability of this chapter to a particular land-
§ 314-13 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 320-3
C:394
disturbing activity, the Building Official shall consider site
topography, drainage patterns, soils, proximity to watercourses,
and any other such information the Building Official deems
appropriate. Where less than one acre is disturbed, a particular
land-disturbing activity shall not be subject to the requirements
of this chapter if the Building Official finds that erosion resulting
from the land-disturbing activity is insignificant and represents no
threat to adjacent properties or to the quality of any coastal feature
or watercourse, as defined herein. The current "Rhode Island Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," prepared by the United
States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation
Service, Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management,
and Rhode Island State Conservation Committee shall be consulted
in making this determination. In making this determination, the
Building Official will also take into consideration the sensitivity
of the water body to which the site drains. A water body and its
watershed will be considered sensitive if a total maximum daily
load (TMDL) or special area management plan (SAMP) is written
or under development for it or it is included on RIDEM's 303(d)
list or is included on RIDEM's list of special resource protection
waters (Appendix D of the RIDEM Water Quality Regulations) or
has been noted by the municipality to be of special concern. Upon
determination of applicability, the owner/applicant shall submit a
soil erosion and sediment control plan for approval by the Building
Official, as provided in § 320-4.
(2) This chapter shall not apply to existing quarrying operations
actively engaged in excavating rock but shall apply to sand and
gravel extraction operations.
B. Exceptions. No determination of applicability shall be required for the
following:
(1) Construction, alteration or use of any additions to existing singlefamily
or duplex homes or related structures, provided the grounds
coverage of such addition is less than 1,000 square feet, and such
construction, alteration and use does not occur within 100 feet of
any watercourse or coastal feature, and the slopes at the site of
land disturbance do not exceed 10%.
(2) Use of a home garden in association with on-site residential use.
(3) Accepted agricultural management practices such as seasonal
tilling and harvest activities associated with property utilized for
private and/or commercial agricultural or silvicultural purpose.
(4) Excavations for improvements, other than those described in
Subsection B(1) above, which exhibit all of the following
characteristics:
(a) Does not result in a total displacement of more than 50 cubic
yards of material;
§ 320-3 CHARTER § 320-3
C:395
§ 320-4. Plan requirements; procedures.
(b) Has no slopes steeper than 10 feet vertical in 100 feet
horizontal or approximately 10%; and
(c) Has all disturbed surface areas promptly and effectively
protected, as determined by the Building Official, to prevent
soil erosion and sedimentation.
(5) Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping purposes
on existing developed land parcels or lots, provided that all bare
surface is immediately seeded, sodded or otherwise protected from
erosive actions and all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The aggregate of areas of such activity does not exceed 2,000
square feet;
(b) The change of elevation does not exceed two feet at any point;
and
(c) The grading does not involve a quantity of fill greater than 18
cubic yards, except where fill is excavated from another
portion of the same parcel and the quantity does not exceed 50
cubic yards, also known as "borrowed material."
(6) Grading, filling, removal, or excavation activities and operations
undertaken by the Town under the direction and supervision of the
Director of Public Works for work on streets, roads, or rights-of-way
dedicated to public use; provided, however, that adequate and
acceptable erosion and sediment controls and controls for other
construction wastes are incorporated in engineering plans and
specifications and employed. Appropriate controls shall apply
during construction, as well as after completion of these activities.
All such work shall be undertaken in accordance with the
performance principles provided for in § 320-5C and such
standards and definitions as may be adopted to implement said
performance principles.
A. Plan.
(1) To obtain approval for a land-disturbing activity as found applicable
by the Building Official under § 320-3, an applicant with a site of
less than one acre shall file an erosion and sediment control plan. If
the site is a total of one acre or greater in size, including
disturbances less than one acre if part of a larger common plan,
they shall submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP).
Both types of plans shall be signed by the owner of the property, or
authorized agent, on which the work subject to approval is to be
performed. The plan or drawings, as described in § 320-5 of this
chapter, shall include proposed erosion and sediment control and
waste management measures to be employed by the applicant or
the applicant's agent.
§ 320-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 320-4
C:396
(2) Rhode Island freshwater wetlands permit. Where any portion of a
proposed development requires approval under any provision of
the General Laws of Rhode Island approved by the General
Assembly or where the approval contains provisions for soil erosion
and sediment controls, that approved plan shall be a component of
the overall erosion and sediment control plan or SWPPP required
hereunder for the development.
(3) In those cases where a SWPPP is submitted, a copy of the notice of
intent (NOI) required by RIDEM shall be submitted to and kept on
file by the Portsmouth Building Official.
B. The Town shall impose a soil erosion and sediment control bond, which
is a cash bond, when approval of a soil erosion and sediment control
plan is required. The bond must be reviewed and approved by the Town
Solicitor.103
C. Plan review.
(1) Within five working days of the receipt of a completed plan, the
Building Official shall send a copy of the plan to the review
authorities, which may include the Public Works Department, the
Planning Board, Planning Department, and Conservation
Commission, for the purpose of review and comment. The Building
Official may also, within the above time frame, submit copies of the
plan to other local departments or agencies, including the
conservation district that services their county, in order to better
achieve the purpose of this chapter. Failure of the aforementioned
review authorities to respond within 21 days of their receipt of the
plan shall be deemed as no objection to the plan as submitted. A
twenty-one-day review period waiver may be signed with the
Planning Board and/or the Conservation Commission so that review
can be made at the next scheduled meeting.
(2) The time allowed for plan review shall be commensurate with the
proposed development project and shall be done simultaneously
with other reviews. The submittal of plans for review shall amount
to acknowledgement and authorization from the applicant for
municipal officials to enter upon and inspect private property
where work is proposed for the purpose of reviewing site
conditions as they relate to soil erosion, surface water runoff, and
sediment control.
D. Plan approval.
(1) The Building Official shall take action, in writing, either approving
or disapproving the plan with reasons stated within 10 days after
the Building Official has received the written opinion of the
aforementioned review authorities.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 320-4 CHARTER § 320-4
C:397
§ 320-5. Plan preparation; plan contents; performance principles;
existing uses and facilities.
(2) In approving a plan, the Building Official may attach such
conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the aforementioned
review authorities to further the purposes of this chapter. The
conditions pertaining to erosion and sediment control measures
and/or devices may include, but are not limited to, the erection of
walls, drains, dams, and structures, planting vegetation, trees and
shrubs, furnishings, necessary easements, and specifying a method
of performing various kinds of work and the sequence or timing
thereof. The applicant/owner shall notify the Building Official in
advance of his or her intent to begin clearing and construction
work described in the erosion and sediment control plan or SWPPP.
The applicant shall have the erosion and sediment control plan or
SWPPP on the site during grading and construction.
E. Appeals.
(1) Administrative procedures.
(a) If the ruling made by the Building Official is unsatisfactory to
the applicant/owner, the applicant/owner may file a written
appeal. The appeal of plans for soil erosion and sediment
control shall be to the Planning Board.
(b) Appeals must be filed within 20 days of receipt of the written
opinion of the Building Official. The Planning Board shall adopt
rules and regulations for such appeals.
(c) During the period in which the request for appeal is filed, and
until such time as a final decision is rendered on the appeal,
the decision of the Building Official shall remain in effect.
(2) Expert opinion. The Building Official or the Planning Board may
seek technical assistance on any soil erosion and sediment control
plan. The expert opinion must be made available in the office of the
Building Official as a public record five working days prior to the
appeals hearing.
A. Plan preparation. The soil erosion and sediment control plan or
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or landscape architect or a CPESC, Inc., certified
erosion and sediment control specialist, and six copies of the plan shall
be submitted to the Building Official.
B. Plan contents.
(1) The erosion and sediment control plan or SWPPP shall include
sufficient information about the proposed activities and land
parcel(s) to form a clear basis for discussion and review and to
assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter.
§ 320-4 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 320-5
C:398
For proposed activities disturbing a total of one acre or greater,
including disturbances less than one acre if part of a larger
common plan, a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)
shall be prepared in conformance with the requirements as
provided in the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management's general permit for stormwater discharge associated
with construction activity. For sites disturbing less than one acre,
the plan shall be consistent with the data collection, data analysis,
and plan preparation guidelines in the current "Rhode Island Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," prepared by the United
States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation
Service, Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management
and Rhode Island State Conservation Committee, and, at a
minimum, shall contain:
(a) A brief narrative describing the proposed land-disturbing
activity and the soil erosion and sediment control measures,
waste management measures and stormwater management
measures to be installed to control erosion that could result
from the proposed activity. Supporting documentation, such as
a drainage area, existing site, and soil maps shall be provided
as required by the Building Official.
(b) Construction drawings in detail commensurate with the size of
the project, sensitivity of the potentially impacted water body
and distance to water and/or storm sewer system. These
drawings will illustrate, in detail, existing and proposed
contours, drainage features, and vegetation; limits of clearing
and grading, the location of soil erosion and sediment control
and stormwater management measures, detail drawings of
measures; stockpiles and borrow areas; waste collection and
burial areas; concrete truck washout sites; sequence and
staging of land-disturbing activities; and other such
information needed for construction.
(c) A schedule showing the sequence of construction, inspection
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control and waste
control measures.
(d) All applicants shall provide other information or construction
plans and details as deemed necessary by the Building Official
for thorough review of the plan prior to action being taken as
prescribed in this chapter. Withholding or delay of such
information may be reason for the Building Official to judge the
application as incomplete and grounds for disapproval of the
application.
(2) The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared on
standard-size plan sheets at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet. A
key sheet shall be included if a plan consists of more than two
§ 320-5 CHARTER § 320-5
C:399
sheets. Scale such as one inch equals 10 feet or one inch equals 20
feet may be used in order to portray greater clarity.
(3) This information may be drafted on the plans or submitted as
attachments and shall consist of the following:
(a) Locus plan;
(b) The name and address of the owner of the site and, if different
from the applicant, the designer and the developer;
(c) The location, extent, and type of all proposed work to be
performed, including all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, utilities, sewers, water mains, and storm drains on
the site, driveways and parking areas;
(d) Topographic mapping with elevations keyed to the municipal
base of mean sea level showing existing contours at intervals of
not more than two feet and contours at two-foot intervals of the
finished grade of all disturbed land area(s) at the conclusion of
the construction and/or land-disturbance activities;
(e) A description of the general topographic and soil conditions at
the project site, including all significant limitations such as
rock outcrops, existing alterations to natural drainage, and any
other site characteristics pertinent to the work to be
performed;
(f) The location and size of all parking and loading areas and
driveways, both public and private;
(g) The location and names, if applicable, of any streams,
wetlands, water bodies, coastline (mean high water), drainage
swales, watercourses and areas subject to periodic flooding,
both on and within 100 feet of the site on which the work is to
be performed. Included shall be a delineation of any areas
designated as flood hazards by the Federal Insurance
Administration or other appropriate state or federal agency;
(h) The names and addresses of all owners of abutting parcels and
the location of all adjoining lot boundaries according to the
latest Assessor's information;
(i) The approximate total quantity of earthwork involved in the
proposed work, with appropriate breakdown as to cut and fill;
(j) The location and extent of the removal of existing topsoil,
trees, and other vegetative quantities and the location of any
soil to be removed from site;
(k) The estimated time of exposure for all disturbed land area(s)
on the site prior to the completion of effective temporary and/
or permanent erosion and sediment control measures and
§ 320-5 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 320-5
C:400
facilities. This shall include planting and seeding dates and
application rates and the phasing plan indicating the
anticipated starting and completion dates of all phases of the
proposed site work;
(l) Details of all proposed drainage provisions to be employed on
the site, including the location and type of all proposed erosion
and sediment control measures and stormwater runoff controls
of both a permanent and temporary nature, and specifications
for the maintenance of same;
(m) The type, location and extent of all proposed temporary and
permanent vegetation and mulching that will be used to
protect exposed areas of the project site;
(n) Prompt submittal of such other information or construction
plans and details as deemed necessary by the Building Official
for a thorough review of the plan prior to action being taken as
prescribed in this chapter. Withholding or delay of this
information may be reason for the Building Official to judge the
application as incomplete and grounds for disapproval.
C. Performance principles. The contents of the erosion and sediment
control plan or SWPPP shall clearly demonstrate how the principles,
outlined below, have been met in the design and are to be accomplished
by the proposed development project.
(1) The site selected shall show due regard for natural drainage
characteristics and topography.
(2) To the extent possible, steep slopes shall be avoided.
(3) The grade of slopes created shall be minimized.
(4) Post-development runoff rates should not exceed predevelopment
rates, consistent with other stormwater requirements which may
be in effect. Any increase in storm runoff shall be retained and
recharged as close as feasible to its place of origin by means of
detention ponds or basins, subsurface drains, porous paving, or
similar technique.
(5) Original boundaries, alignment, and slopes of watercourses within
the project locus shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible.
(6) In general, drainage shall be directed away from structures
intended for human occupancy, municipal or utility use, or similar
structures.
(7) All drainage provisions shall be of such a design and capacity so as
to adequately handle stormwater runoff, including runoff from
tributary upstream areas which may be outside the locus of the
project.
§ 320-5 CHARTER § 320-5
C:401
(8) Drainage facilities shall be installed as early as feasible during
construction, prior to site clearance, if possible.
(9) Fill located adjacent to watercourses shall be suitably protected
from erosion by means of riprap, gabions, retaining walls,
vegetative stabilization, or similar measures.
(10) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
bare areas and stockpiles from erosion during construction; the
smallest areas feasible shall be exposed at any one time; disturbed
areas shall be protected during the nongrowing months, November
through March.
(11) Permanent vegetation shall be placed immediately following fine
grading.
(12) Trees and other existing vegetation shall be retained whenever
feasible; the area within the dripline shall be fenced or roped off to
protect trees from construction equipment.
(13) All areas damaged during construction shall be resodded,
reseeded, or otherwise restored. Where soil compaction has
occurred through storage of materials or use of equipment, soil
infiltration shall be restored through use of soil amendments or
other means. Monitoring and maintenance schedules, where
required, shall be predetermined.
(14) To reduce the potential for surface water or groundwater
contamination, all construction wastes shall be secured from
movement by stormwater runoff or other weather effects.
(15) The use of material containing asphalt, concrete, construction
debris or stumps as fill, even if determined to be nonhazardous, is
prohibited.
D. Existing uses and facilities.
(1) The Building Official shall accept plans for existing uses and
facilities which, by their nature, may cause erosion and
sedimentation, such as excavation and quarrying operations;
provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to
§ 320-3A(1). Plans or satisfactory evidence to demonstrate that the
existing operations accomplish the objectives of this section shall
be submitted to the Building Official within 120 days from the date
of the determination of applicability. Implementation of the plan
shall be initiated upon approval of the plan.
(2) When the preexisting use is a gravel extraction operation, the
property owner shall conduct the operation in a manner so as not to
devalue abutting properties; so as to protect abutting property
from wind erosion and soil erosion due to increased runoff,
sedimentation of reservoirs, and drainage systems; and so as to
§ 320-5 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 320-5
C:402
§ 320-6. Performance bond requirements.
limit the depth of extraction so as not to interfere with the existing
nearby water table.
A. Performance bond.
(1) Before approving an erosion sediment control plan or SWPPP, the
Building Official may require the applicant/owner to file a surety
company performance bond, deposit of money, negotiable
securities or other method of surety, as specified by the Building
Official. When any land-disturbing activity is to take place within
100 feet of any watercourse or coastal feature or within an
identified flood hazard district or on slopes in excess of 10%, the
filing of a performance bond shall be required. The amount of the
bond, as determined by the Public Works Department, or, in its
absence, the Building Official, shall be sufficient to cover the cost of
implementing all erosion and sediment control measures as shown
on the plan.
(2) The bond or negotiable security filed by the applicant shall be
subject to approval of the form, content, amount, and manner of
execution by the Public Works Director and Town Solicitor.
(3) A performance bond for an erosion and sediment control plan for a
subdivision may be included in the performance bond of the
subdivision. The posting of the bond as part of the subdivision
performance bond does not, however, relieve the owner of any
requirement(s) of this chapter.
B. Notice of default on performance bond.
(1) Whenever the Building Official shall find that a default has
occurred in the performance of any term(s) or condition(s) of the
bond or in the implementation of measures secured by the bond,
written notice thereof shall be made to the applicant and to the
surety of the bond by the Town Solicitor. The notice shall state the
nature of default, work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and
the period of time deemed by the Building Official to be reasonably
necessary for the completion of the work.
(2) Failure of the applicant to acknowledge and comply with the
provisions and deadlines outlined in such notice of default shall
mean the institution, by the Town Solicitor, without further notice
of proceedings whatsoever, of appropriate measures to utilize the
performance bond to cause the required work to be completed by
the Town, by contract or by other appropriate means as determined
by the Town Solicitor.
C. Release from performance bond conditions. The performance bonding
requirements shall remain in full force and effect for 12 months
§ 320-5 CHARTER § 320-6
C:403
§ 320-7. Expiration of approval; time extensions.
§ 320-8. Maintenance requirements.
Maintenance of all erosion and sediment control devices under this chapter
shall be the responsibility of the owner. The erosion and sediment control
devices shall be maintained in good condition and working order on a
continuing basis. Watercourses originating and located completely on
private property shall be the responsibility of the owner to their point of
open discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within
the property.
§ 320-9. Liability of applicant.
Neither approval of an erosion and sediment control plan nor compliance
with any conditions of this chapter shall relieve the owner/applicant from
any responsibility for damage to persons or property, nor impose any
liability upon the Town for damages to persons or property, such as road
beams, curbs, catch basins, pedestals, bonds, road improvements, etc.
§ 320-10. Inspections.
following completion of the project, or longer if deemed necessary by
the Building Official. [See § 320-10(B)(2) below.]
A. Every approval granted herein shall expire at the end of the time period
set forth in the conditions. The developer shall fully perform and
complete all of the work required within the specified time period.
B. If the developer is unable to complete the work within the designated
time period, he or she shall, at least 30 days prior to the expiration date,
submit a written request for an extension of time to the Building
Official, setting forth the reasons underlying the requested time
extension. If the extension is warranted, the Building Official may grant
an extension of time up to a maximum of one year from the date of the
original deadline. Subsequent extensions under the same conditions
may be granted at the discretion of the Building Official.
A. Periodic inspections.
(1) The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced
by the Building Official. All work shall be subject to periodic
inspections by the Building Official. All work shall be performed in
accordance with an inspection and construction control schedule
approved by the Building Official, who shall maintain a permanent
file on all of his/her inspections.
(2) The owner or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of all
control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule
outlined on the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The
purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall
§ 320-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 320-10
C:404
§ 320-11. Noncompliance.
If, at any stage, the work in progress and/or completed under the terms
of an approved erosion and sediment control plan does not conform to
the plan, a written notice from the Building Official to comply shall be
transmitted by certified mail to the owner. The notice shall set forth the
nature of the temporary and permanent corrections required and the time
limit within which corrections shall be completed as set forth in § 320-12B.
Failure to comply with the required corrections within the specified time
limit shall be considered in violation of this chapter, in which case the
performance bond or cash or negotiable securities deposit shall be subject
to notice of default, in accordance with § 320-6B and C of this chapter.
§ 320-12. Violations and penalties.
effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control
measures. Documentation of all inspections in written form shall be
kept on site and submitted to the Building Official, if requested.
(3) The Building Official will perform a minimum of two inspections,
one during construction and one after final stabilization of the site.
The developer or owner shall notify the Building Official of the
installation of erosion and sediment control measures, in order for
an inspection to be performed during the construction phase of the
project. The Building Official will confirm that wastes are
controlled and that the erosion and sediment control practices are
installed as planned, meet the needs of the site and conform with
the Rhode Island Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook.
(4) Upon completion of all work, the developer or owner(s) shall notify
the Building Official that all grading, drainage, erosion and
sediment control measures and devices and vegetation and ground
cover planting have been completed in conformance with the
approval, all attached plans, specifications, conditions, and other
applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. Final inspection.
(1) Upon notification of the completion by the owner, the Building
Official shall make a final inspection of the site in question and shall
prepare a final summary inspection report of his/her findings,
which shall be retained in the Department of Public Works
permanent inspections file.
(2) The applicant/owner may request the release of his/her
performance bond sooner than 12 months after the final inspection,
at the discretion of the Building Official.
A. Revocation or suspension of approval. The approval of an erosion and
sediment control plan under this chapter may be revoked or suspended
by the Building Official, and all work on the project halted for an
§ 320-10 CHARTER § 320-12
C:405
§ 320-13. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any persons, corporation, or public or private organization
proposing a development which would involve disturbance to the natural
terrain as herein defined.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
indefinite time period by the Building Official, after written notification
is transmitted by the Building Official to the developer for one or more
of the following reasons:
(1) Violation of any condition of the approved plan or specifications
pertaining thereto;
(2) Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation related to the work or site of
work; and
(3) The existence of any condition or the performance of any act
constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangerment to
human life or the property of others or contrary to the spirit or
intent of this chapter.
B. Other penalties. In addition thereto, whenever there is a failure to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, the Town shall have the right
to notify the applicant/owner that he has five days from the receipt of
notice to temporarily correct the violations and 30 days from receipt of
notice to permanently correct the violations. Should the applicant/
owner fail to take the temporary corrective measures within the fiveday
period and the permanent corrective measures within the thirtyday
period, the Town shall then have the right to take whatever actions
it deems necessary to correct the violations and to assert a lien on the
subject property in an amount equal to the costs of remedial actions.
The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by law
for the enforcement of common law liens on personal property. The lien
shall be recorded with the records of land evidence of the Town, and the
lien shall incur legal interest from the date of recording. The imposition
of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, including revocation of the performance
bond or assessment of a lien on the property by the Town.
C. Fines. In addition to other penalties provided in this section, the
Building Inspector may assess a fine of up to $250 for failure to submit
plans on or before the date on which plans must be submitted, as set
forth in the determination of applicability. Each day that the plan is not
submitted shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 320-12 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 320-13
C:406
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control solid waste disposal, site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, and drainage from raw material
storage.
BORROWED MATERIAL — A quantity of fill excavated from another portion
of the same parcel.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — When used herein, the term "Building Official"
shall mean and include the Portsmouth Building Official, the Portsmouth
Alternate Building Official, or his or her designee.
COASTAL FEATURE — Coastal beaches and dunes, barrier beaches, coastal
wetlands, coastal cliffs, and banks, rocky shores, and man-made shorelines,
as defined in the "State of Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management
Program," as amended June 28, 1983.
CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Solid and/or liquid wastes generated from
the construction and/or site development process. This includes but is not
limited to discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals,
litter, sanitary wastes, and fill material containing any of the above.
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade; also, the
material removed in excavation.
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Any construction, reconstruction, demolition,
or removal of structures, roadways, parking, or other paved areas, utilities,
or other similar facilities, including any action requiring a building permit
by the Town.
DISTURBED AREA — An area in which the natural vegetative soil cover has
been removed or altered and, therefore, susceptible to erosion.
EROSION — The removal of mineral and/or organic matter by the action of
wind, water and/or gravity.
EXCAVATE — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, or other material is placed or moved
to a new location above ground. The fill is also the difference in elevation
between a point of existing undisturbed ground and a designated point of
higher elevation of the final grade.
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY — Any physical land development activity
which includes such actions as clearance of vegetation, moving or filling
of land, removal or excavation of soil or mineral resources, or similar
activities.
LIMIT OF DISTURBANCE — The line delineating the boundary of the area
to be disturbed during a development or redevelopment project. The area
outside this boundary shall not be touched.
§ 320-13 CHARTER § 320-13
C:407
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow and including seepage flows that do
not enter the soil but run off the surface of the land; also, that portion of
water that is not absorbed by the soil, but runs off the land surface.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and/or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by wind, water, and/or gravity as a product of erosion.
SOIL AMENDMENT — Any material, such as compost, lime, animal
manures, crop residues, etc., that is worked into the soil; generally pertains
to materials other than fertilizers.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — The approved
document required before any person may cause disturbance to the natural
terrain within the Town as therein regulated; also herein referred to as
"erosion and sediment control plan" and "approved plan."
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — An erosion and
sediment control plan prepared in conformance with the requirements as
provided in the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management's
general permit for stormwater discharge associated with construction
activity and designed to address two components of stormwater pollution:
WATERCOURSE — Any tidewater or coastal wetland at its mean high-water
level and any freshwater wetland at its seasonal high-water level, including
but not limited to any river, stream, brook, pond, lake, swamp, marsh, bog,
fen, wet meadow, or any other standing or flowing body of water. The edge
of the watercourse as herein defined shall be used for delineation purposes.
Chapter 326
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 243. Property maintenance — See Ch. 288.
Pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation during and after
construction; and
A.
Stormwater pollution caused by use of the site after construction is
completed, including, but not limited to, parking lots, roadways,
impervious surfaces, and maintenance of grassed areas.
B.
§ 320-13 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 320-13
C:408
ARTICLE I
Offal, Swill and Fish Permits
[Adopted 12-14-1931 by Ord. No. 51 (Ch. 11 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 326-1. Permit for carrying offal and swill into Town.
No person shall bring into the Town or carry through the Town any house
offal or swill without first obtaining a permit from the Board of Health.
§ 326-2. Permit for bringing fish into Town.
No person shall bring any fish into the Town to be spread upon the land
without first obtaining a permit from the Board of Health.
§ 326-1 CHARTER § 326-2
C:409

ARTICLE II
Garbage Disposal
[Adopted 4-1-1953 by Ord. No. 73 (§§ 10-1, 10-2, 10-4 to 10-10 of
the 1976 Code)]
§ 326-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMBUSTIBLE WASTE — All waste substances that are easily ignited and
burned, such as paper, excelsior, wood and the like.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE WASTE — All waste substances that cannot be easily
ignited and burned, such as garbage, offal, metals, glass, earthenware,
ashes and the like, and also discarded articles, the greater part of which
cannot be burned.
WASTE — All trash, rubbish, garbage, offal and other refuse or discarded
matter.
§ 326-4. Maintenance of premises.
All owners or tenants of real estate in the Town shall keep such real estate
free from accumulation of waste that, because of its nature, condition or
improper storage, may invite the breeding or collecting of flies, mosquitoes
or rodents or that may in any other manner be prejudicial to the public
health.
§ 326-5. Site of disposal facility; appointment of superintendent.
The Town Council shall designate an area in the Town as the Town waste
disposal facility and shall appoint a person as superintendent of such
facility.
§ 326-6. Transportation and disposition of waste.
A. All waste shall be transported to the Town waste disposal facility at the
expense of the owner thereof. For disposal purposes, all combustible
and noncombustible waste shall be separated, and the waste so
separated shall be left at the Town waste disposal facility at such places
as shall be designated by the superintendent of the waste disposal
facility or as are indicated on signs that may be placed at the Town
waste disposal facility at the direction of the Town Council and in
accordance with the rules and regulations that may from time to time
be adopted by the Town Council for the proper control of the facility and
that shall be posted at the facility.
B. All noncombustible waste shall be covered with dirt or fill at the close of
each day of disposal.
§ 326-3 CHARTER § 326-6
C:411
§ 326-7. Prohibited disposal.
No waste shall be disposed of or left on any private property, on any road or
highway or property of the Town other than the Town waste disposal facility.
§ 326-8. Household garbage.
All household garbage, before being deposited at the Town waste disposal
facility, shall be drained of moisture and wrapped in paper and tied so that
the garbage will not break out from the wrapper.
§ 326-9. Disposition of animal carcasses.
No carcass of an animal shall be deposited at the Town waste disposal
facility. Such carcass shall be buried by the owner of the animal or by the
person on whose property the carcass may be found.
§ 326-10. Facility for use of residents only.
No person other than a resident of the Town shall deposit waste at the Town
waste disposal facility or make any use of the facility.
§ 326-11. Waste disposal facility hours; rules and regulations.
The Town Council shall designate the hours during which the Town waste
disposal facility shall be open, with an attendant present during the open
period, and shall make such other rules and regulations as it may from time
to time deem necessary for the proper management and control of the Town
waste disposal facility. No person shall deposit any material at the Town
waste disposal facility in violation of such rules and regulations.
C. All combustible matter shall be burned at the discretion of the
superintendent. No fires will burn before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.,
with exceptions to be made by authority of the Fire Department. No
burning shall be done on Sunday.
§ 326-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 326-11
C:412
ARTICLE III
Fees for Nonresidential Waste Disposal
[Adopted 9-10-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5]
§ 326-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NONRESIDENTIAL SOURCE — A place of business at which commercial,
industrial or professional activity takes place and which produces or
discards solid waste and refuse material.
SOLID WASTE AND REFUSE MATERIAL — Any discarded solid objects
which, by their nature, are acceptable for deposit and/or compaction within
the transfer facility.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — Any vessel designed and/or used for the
temporary storage of nonresidential solid waste and refuse material having
a capacity of one cubic yard or greater.
TRANSFER FACILITY — The solid waste collection and compaction station
owned by the Town of Portsmouth and situated on Hedly Street within said
Town.
USER — Any person, firm or corporation in the business of transporting the
contents of solid waste containers to the transfer facility.
§ 326-13. User fee imposed.
Every user who delivers solid waste or refuse material from a nonresidential
source to the transfer facility shall pay a user fee to the Town of Portsmouth.
§ 326-14. Rate of user fee. [Amended 5-14-1991 by Ord. No.
91-5-14B]
The user fee imposed herein shall be an amount in the sum of $2 multiplied
by the total number of cubic yards of the solid waste container serviced by
the user in a calendar month; provided, however, that said fee shall increase
on July 1, 1992, and on the first day of July each year thereafter, in an
amount equal to the consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U)
for the United States city average for the previous December.
§ 326-15. Payment of user fee.
Each user shall tender the properly computed user fee to the Finance
Director of the Town of Portsmouth within 10 days, exclusive of Sundays and
postal holidays, of the last business day of each calendar month, together
with a written report containing the following information:
A. The name, business address and telephone number of the user.
§ 326-12 CHARTER § 326-15
C:413
§ 326-16. Identification of waste containers.
Every solid waste container from which solid waste or refuse material is
obtained or collected for deposit at the Portsmouth compaction and transfer
station shall have the name, business address and business telephone
number of the owner or lessor prominently and conspicuously displayed
thereon.
§ 326-17. Notarized reports.
Written reports submitted in accordance with this article shall be
subscribed and sworn before a notary public licensed by the State of Rhode
Island and, upon submission thereof, shall be subject to verification by the
Town of Portsmouth from time to time as deemed necessary by the Finance
Director.
§ 326-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who provides or causes to be provided false, misleading or
deceptive information in any report required hereunder or who fails to
timely pay any user fee imposed hereunder or otherwise violates any
provision of this article, if found guilty thereof in a state judicial court of
competent jurisdiction, shall be fined not more than $100 for each such
violation.
§ 326-19. Administrative sanctions.
In addition to any and all other penalties for a violation of the provisions
of this article, the Town Administrator may summarily prohibit further use
of the transfer facility by any person subject to this article who provides
or causes to be provided false, misleading or deceptive information in
any report required hereunder or who fails to timely pay any user fee
imposed hereunder, and such persons shall not thereafter be permitted to
use the transfer facility, unless and until the Town Council shall reverse the
decision of the Town Administrator after a hearing thereon requested by the
aggrieved user within 10 days of the date of said decision.
B. The name, business address and telephone number of the customer of
the user of each solid waste container serviced by the user during the
reporting period, together with a complete description of the length,
breadth, height, capacity in cubic yards and location address of each
such solid waste container.
§ 326-15 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 326-19
C:414
ARTICLE IV
Storage and Transportation
[Adopted 11-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-6]
§ 326-20. Title.
This article may be known and cited as the "Portsmouth Solid Waste Storage
and Transportation Ordinance."
§ 326-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLID WASTE AND REFUSE CONTAINER — Any vessel into which any
solid waste or refuse material is placed for temporary storage outside of any
building.
VEHICLE — Any self-propelled means of transportation, such as
automobiles, pickup trucks, etc., and also extends to trailers or any other
instrumentality into which solid waste and refuse material is placed for
transportation to a refuse disposal site or facility.
§ 326-22. Covering of containers.
Each solid waste container kept and maintained by any person within the
Town of Portsmouth shall be covered by a covering sufficient to prevent
the uncontrolled dispersal of solid waste and refuse material therefrom and
to prevent the uncontrolled escape of noxious odors emanating from said
solid waste and to prevent insects, vermin and other animals from entering
into said solid waste containers. Those containers, commonly referred to
as "dumpsters," and more specifically known as Burtman Iron Works
manufactured gauged steel containers with lids, or their equivalent, shall
be deemed to comply with the requirements of this article, provided that
the lids are closed.
§ 326-23. Noise restrictions. [Added 9-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-09-10]
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person to make, cause, conduct, suffer or permit to be made or caused or
conducted the emptying or dumping of a trash container and/or a dumpster
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to
be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or
vehicle in which or near which such trash container and/or dumpster is
located and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
§ 326-24. Parking of vehicles containing solid waste.
No person shall allow, permit or cause any vehicle containing any solid
waste material to be parked in any open space within 100 feet of any
§ 326-20 CHARTER § 326-24
C:415
residence for a period exceeding one hour without reasonable cause to do
so; provided, however, that commercial vehicles used in the transportation
of solid waste and refuse material may be parked for periods exceeding one
hour within 100 feet of a residence, providing that such vehicles have been
rendered free of all solid waste and refuse materials, have been treated with
a disinfectant solution sufficient to destroy or render harmless any microbes
or organisms harmful to human health, and providing that no noxious odors
emanate from such vehicles and providing that insects, vermin and other
animals are prevented from entering or exiting such vehicle.
§ 326-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-09-10]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty
of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not exceeding
$100. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate violation and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 326-24 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 326-25
C:416
ARTICLE V
Recycling
[Adopted 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 95-1-3A]
§ 326-26. Mandatory recycling program.
A mandatory recycling program is hereby implemented in the Town of
Portsmouth pursuant to R.I.G.L. §§ 23-18.8-1 et seq., 23-18.9-1 et seq. and
23-19-1 et seq. and the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management Municipal Recycling Regulations, as amended.
§ 326-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MIXED RECYCLABLES — Those materials required to be removed from
municipal solid waste at the source and delivered directly to the Town
recycling facility or placed in or on top of the set out container provided
by the Solid Waste Management Corporation for collection by a privately
contracted hauler.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those separated from municipal solid waste
for processing for reuse as specified by the Director of the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management and listed in this article. The
materials to be included may change from time to time depending upon
new technologies, economic conditions, waste stream characteristics,
environmental effects or mutual agreement between the state and
municipalities.
RESIDENT — Anyone (including any business entity, regardless of
organizational form) residing in the Town of Portsmouth for any period
of time who generates solid waste for which the Town accepts disposal
responsibility.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials
generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and
agricultural sources, but not including solids or dissolved material in
domestic sewage or septage, nor hazardous waste as defined in the
Hazardous Waste Management Act, R.I.G.L. § 23-19.1-1 et seq.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The removal by the generator of recyclable
materials, including mixed recyclables, from all other solid waste generated
by the resident and conveyance of the recyclable materials to the Town
recycling facility or to the curbside for collection by a private hauler.
§ 326-28. Residential recycling.
A. All residents are required to separate recyclable materials from
residential solid waste and to deliver those materials directly to the
Town recycling facility or to have them delivered to a Town or state
recycling facility by a private hauler. This article does not, however, bar
§ 326-26 CHARTER § 326-28
C:417
any residents from giving recyclable materials to a nonprofit
organization.
B. The following materials are required to be separated from residential
solid waste and delivered to a Town or state recycling facility:104
(1) Plastic containers, including but not limited to:
(a) Jars (peanut butter, mayo).
(b) Jugs (milk, juice, detergent).
(c) Tubs (ice cream, margarine).
(d) Bottles (soda, shampoo).
(e) Plastic takeout containers.
(f) Iced coffee cups.
(g) Yogurt containers.
(h) Plastic egg cartons.
(2) Glass containers, including but not limited to:
(a) Jars (sauce, jelly, baby food).
(b) Bottles (soda, wine, beer).
(3) Metal cans and foil, including but not limited to:
(a) Aluminum (cans, foil).
(b) Empty aerosol cans (hairspray, air freshener).
(c) Tin cans (soup, pet food).
(4) Paper and cardboard, including but not limited to:
(a) Newspaper.
(b) Phone books.
(c) Envelopes.
(d) Flattened boxes.
(e) Junk mail.
(f) Office paper.
(g) Spiral notebooks.
(h) Paperback books.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 326-28 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 326-28
C:418
§ 326-29. Licensed haulers.
(i) Wrapping and tissue paper.
(j) Paper bags and gift bags.
(k) Magazines.
(l) Paper towel tubes.
(5) Cartons, including but not limited to:
(a) Milk and juice cartons.
(b) Soy milk cartons.
(c) Soup and broth cartons.
(d) Juice boxes.
(6) Other materials determined by the Department of Environmental
Management to be recyclable in its Municipal Recycling
Regulations, Section 4-1.
C. All separated materials are to be delivered to a Town, state or statedesignated
recycling facility in a processable condition, i.e., at a
minimum:
(1) All glass, plastic, steel/tin and aluminum containers shall be empty
and rinsed;
(2) Aluminum foil shall be clean;
(3) Webbing shall be removed from aluminum furniture;
(4) No noncontainer glass shall be mixed with the recyclables;
(5) Newspapers shall be placed in a brown paper bag or tied in bundles
with a string; and
(6) Any other requirements in DEM's Municipal Recycling Regulations,
Appendix A, shall be met.
A. All qualified persons engaged in the business of collecting and hauling
refuse and operating transfer stations for refuse generated within the
boundaries of the Town of Portsmouth shall be licensed by the Town of
Portsmouth, pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 23-18.9-1(b)(1).
B. Licensed haulers shall collect only that residential solid waste that is
source-separated by the resident into the recyclable and nonrecyclable
components.
C. Licensed haulers shall keep recyclable materials separate from
nonrecyclable resident solid waste.
§ 326-28 CHARTER § 326-29
C:419
§ 326-30. Public events.
The separation of recyclables from solid waste shall be a condition of
licensing or authorization of any public event, the conduct of which
generates solid waste for which the Town of Portsmouth accepts disposal
responsibility.
§ 326-31. Authorized collectors.
No person shall solicit the commercial collection of any recyclable material
as defined this article within the Town of Portsmouth for personal gain,
except as specifically authorized by the Town. The Town may issue permits
to charitable organizations to collect recyclable materials on the condition
that a report is filed by said organization detailing the weight of each
material collected in compliance with the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management reporting requirements and provided that the
Town determines that said collection does not conflict with the Town's
recycling program.
§ 326-32. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
D. Licensed haulers shall maintain any separated recyclable materials that
are delivered to either a Town or state recycling facility in processable
condition.
E. Licensed haulers shall keep individual household recyclable materials
separate from recyclables collected from commercial accounts.
F. Licensed haulers who deliver recyclables to a Town or state recycling
facility shall deliver to said facility only recyclables generated by the
Town of Portsmouth.
G. Licensed haulers shall deliver all recyclables designated to go to a Town
or state recycling facility to said facility.
H. Licensed haulers shall file reports with the Town detailing the weight of
each recyclable material collected in compliance with the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management reporting program.
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police of the Town of Portsmouth to
enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Penalties for violation of this article shall be as follows:
(1) Residents violating § 326-28:
(a) First offense: written warning.
(b) Second offense: $25.
(c) Subsequent offense: $50.
(2) Haulers violating § 326-29:
§ 326-29 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 326-32
C:420
(a) First offense: written warning.
(b) Second offense: $200.
(c) Subsequent offense: loss of license.
§ 326-32 CHARTER § 326-32
C:421

ARTICLE VI
Plastic Bags
[Adopted 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03-12105]
§ 326-33. Legislative findings and intent.
§ 326-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to improve the environment in and around
the Town and the health, safety, and welfare of its residents by reducing
the number of plastic and paper bags being used, encouraging the use and
sale of reusable checkout bags and banning the use of plastic bags for retail
checkout of goods.
§ 326-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial enterprise that provides
carryout bags to its customers, including sole proprietorships, joint
ventures, partnerships, corporations, or any other legal entity and includes
all employees of the business and any independent contractors associated
with the business. "Business establishment" does not include sales of goods
at yard sales, tag sales, other sales by residents at their homes, and sales
by nonprofit organizations.
A. The Town Council has the authority under Article 13 of the Rhode
Island Constitution and the Portsmouth Town Charter to regulate issues
of solid waste, litter and pollution as a local concern.
B. The production, use and disposal of plastic checkout bags, which are
commonly not recycled, has been shown to have significant detrimental
impacts on the environment, including but not limited to contributing to
pollution of the terrestrial and coastal environment, clogging
stormwater drainage systems, and contributing to the injury and death
of terrestrial and marine life through ingestion and entanglement.
C. The manufacture, transport and recycling of plastic checkout bags
requires substantial energy consumption and contributes to
greenhouse gases.
D. Plastic checkout bags create a burden to solid waste collection and
recycling facilities.
E. Prohibiting the use of plastic checkout bags is necessary to protect the
environment and the public health, safety, and welfare of all residents
and visitors.
105. Editor's Note: This ordinance stated that it shall take effect upon passage, provided,
however, that enforcement of violations shall be stayed until 9-1-2018.
§ 326-33 CHARTER § 326-35
C:423
CARRYOUT BAG — A bag provided by a business establishment to a
customer, typically at the point of sale, for the purpose of transporting
purchases.
DOUBLE-OPENING PLASTIC BAG — Any thin plastic bag with a double
opening (top and bottom) to protect clothing or other items for transport.
PLASTIC BARRIER BAG — Any thin plastic bag with a single opening used
to:
PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG — Any plastic carry-out bag that is provided by a
business establishment to a customer, typically at the point of sale, for the
purpose of transporting purchases. "Plastic carryout bag" does not include
plastic barrier bags or double-opening plastic bags, as defined herein, or
plastic bags measuring larger than 28 inches by 36 inches.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag that is fully recyclable overall and
contains a minimum of 40% post-consumer recycled content and contains
no old growth fiber. The bag should display the words "reusable" and
"recyclable" or the universal recycling logo on the outside of the bag.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag with handles that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse and is made primarily of cloth or other
nonwoven textile or durable plastic with a minimum thickness of four mils.
Any straps must be stitched and not heat fused.
§ 326-36. Prohibited acts.
Transport fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, small hardware items, or other
items selected by customers at the point of sale;
A.
Contain or wrap fresh or frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether
prepackaged or not;
B.
Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where damage
to a good or contamination of other goods placed together in the same
bag may be a problem; or
C.
D. Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods.
A. No business establishment shall provide or make available any plastic
carryout bag (either complementary or for a fee) for any sales
transaction or other use to members of the public, that does not comply
with the definition of a "reusable bag" under § 326-35 of this article.
B. All business establishment that provide plastic barrier bags or doubleopening
bags shall offer a recycling opportunity on site for the recycling
of any plastic bags or clean plastic bag film as defined by the Rhode
Island Resource Recovery Corporation RESTORE program.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude business establishments from
making reusable bags or recycling paper bags, as defined under
§ 326-35 of this article, available to customers, by sale or otherwise.
§ 326-35 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 326-37
C:424
§ 326-37. Exemptions.
This article does not apply to:
§ 326-38. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, or any other Town
department designated by the Town Administrator. Any business
establishment who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
A. Laundry dry-cleaning bags, door-hanger bags, newspaper bags, or
packages of multiple bags intended for use as garbage, pet waste, or
yard waste;
B. Bags provided by pharmacists or veterinarians to contain prescription
drugs or other medical necessities, provided that the bags are
recyclable within the state's recycling program; and
C. Plastic barrier bags, double-opening plastic bags used by a consumer
inside a business establishment to:
(1) Contain bulk items, such as produce, nuts, grains, candy, or small
hardware items;
(2) Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether or not
prepackaged;
(3) Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items to prevent
moisture damage to other purchases;
(4) Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods; or
(5) Bags used by a non-profit corporation or other hunger relief charity
to distribute food, grocery products, clothing, or other household
items.
A. For a first offense, the business establishment charged with a violation
of this article shall be served with a warning letter by delivering it to
the business establishment personally, or by posting a copy upon a
conspicuous portion of the retail sales establishment and sending a
copy of the same by certified mail to the business establishment to
whom the notice is directed. The warning letter shall inform the
business establishment charged of the nature of the violation and that it
must be corrected within 14 days of the date of the letter, and shall
include a copy of this article.
B. For a second offense, more than 14 days after service of a warning
letter, a fine of $150 shall be assessed and imposed. The business
establishment charged shall be given the opportunity to pay the fine
assessed by mail, which shall be indicated on the summons issued by
the charging officer. Should the alleged violator elect not to pay the fine
§ 326-37 CHARTER § 326-38
C:425
§ 326-39. Hardship variance.
§ 326-40. Effective date.
This article shall take effect upon passage, provided, however, that
enforcement shall be stayed until September 1, 2018.
assessed by mail, the violation shall be heard and adjudicated by the
Municipal Court.
C. For a third or subsequent offense, a fine of $300 shall be assessed, and
the violation shall be heard and adjudicated by the Municipal Court.
D. Each occurrence of a violation more than 14 days after service of a
warning letter, and each day that such violation continues, shall
constitute a separate violation and cited as such.
A. The Town Council may grant a variance from the requirements of this
article only after determining that: 1) application of this article would
cause undue hardship based upon unique circumstances; or 2)
application of this article would deprive a person or business of a legally
protected right.
B. The requested variance shall be submitted on the Town's prescribed
forms.
C. Any variance granted under this section must be the minimum variance
necessary to address the hardship.
§ 326-38 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 326-40
C:426
Chapter 333
STONE WALL PRESERVATION
§ 333-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Stone Wall
Preservation Ordinance of the Town of Portsmouth." The short title is
"Portsmouth Stone Wall Ordinance."
§ 333-2. Purpose; applicability.
§ 333-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
HISTORIC STONE WALL — A vertical structure of aligned natural stone,
originally constructed in the 17th, 18th, 19th and 20th Centuries, to
designate a property boundary between farmsteads or to segregate
agricultural activities within a single farmstead.
§ 333-4. Regulations and standards.
A. It is the intent of this chapter to protect one of the Town's important
cultural resources, historic stone walls, saving one of the beautiful
features of the Town for the people of tomorrow and preserving the
rural character of the Town. It is not the intent of this chapter to deprive
a citizen use of their property, detract from that property's value or
cause financial hardship.
B. Provisions of this chapter will apply to stone walls flanking or abutting
Town and state roads and public ways within the Town and provide a
working process to identify and provide for the protection and
preservation of the Town's stone walls of historic, aesthetic and cultural
merit.
A. Alteration or removal of stone walls flanking or abutting Town and state
roads within the Town shall require prior approval of the Building
Inspector.
B. Alteration or demolition of a stone wall as part of any construction or
subdivision project must have approval of the Planning Board. Such
approval shall be a condition of any subdivision approval.
C. Stone walls in disrepair or neglected condition shall not be removed
from their present location but must be repaired or left as is.
D. When relocation of a stone wall is necessary, any reconstruction shall
match that of the original wall; for example, drywall or hidden cement
construction.
§ 326-40 CHARTER § 333-4
C:427
§ 333-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense.
§ 333-6. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict, amend, repeal, or
otherwise limit the application or enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.106
Chapter 336
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development and subdivision
regulations — See Ch. 236.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
320.
Wastewater management districts — See Ch.
392.
Zoning — See Ch. 405.
E. New stone walls should closely approximate the appearance of the
adjoining stone walls with respect to coursing, native field stone, joint
width, construction and distribution of stones by size. The Building
Inspector shall be responsible for any such determination.
F. If any cuts are made in stone walls for driveways or roads, the ends of
the walls must be restored.
G. Any variance of these standards shall be heard by the Zoning Board of
Review based upon the standards of a special use permit.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 333-4 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 333-6
C:428
ARTICLE I
Illicit Connections and Discharges to Storm Sewers
[Adopted 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04-28]
§ 336-1. Purpose; objectives.
Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff is a major cause of
impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers,
wetlands and groundwater; contamination of drinking water supplies;
alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding. The
purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of Portsmouth through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the municipal storm drainage system (MS4)
to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. The
objectives of this article are:
§ 336-2. Legislative authority.
This article is promulgated pursuant to and consistent with the Federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), the Rhode Island Department
of Environmental Management's (RIDEM) General Permit - Rhode Island
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Discharge from Small
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems and from Industrial Activity at
Eligible Facilities Operated by Regulated Small MS4s, and in accordance
with the Administrative Procedures Act, R.I.G.L. § 42-35-1 et seq.
§ 336-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLOWABLE NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Discharges not
comprised of stormwater are allowed under the MS4 general permit but
are limited to the following, provided these are not deemed significant
contributors of pollutants to the MS4 by the DPW Director: discharges
which result from the washdown of vehicles at retail dealers selling new and
used automobiles where no detergents are used and individual residential
A. To prevent (or reduce to the maximum extent practicable) pollutants
entering Portsmouth's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4);
B. To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the MS4;
C. To require the physical removal of all such illicit connections and
discharges;
D. To comply with state law and federal statutes and regulations relating
to stormwater discharges; and
E. To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all
inspection, monitoring and enforcement activities necessary to ensure
compliance with this article.
§ 336-1 CHARTER § 336-3
C:429
car or boat washing; external building washdown where no detergents are
used; the use of water to control dust; fire-fighting activities; fire hydrant
flushings; natural springs; uncontaminated groundwater; dechlorinated
pool discharges; air-conditioning condensate; lawn watering; potable water
sources, including waterline flushings; irrigation drainage; pavement wash
waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not
occurred (unless all spilled materials have been removed) and where
detergents are not used; discharges from foundation or footing drains
where flows are not contaminated with process materials, such as solvents,
or contaminated by contact with soils where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have occurred; uncontaminated utility vault
dewatering; dechlorinated waterline testing water; hydrostatic test water
that does not contain any treatment chemicals and is not contaminated with
process chemicals.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Portsmouth Department of
Public Works.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — BMPs are schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices,
pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures,
and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of
pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or
stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices,
operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to RIPDES construction
permits. As of March 2003, RIPDES stormwater Phase II permits are
required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one
acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
DPW DIRECTOR — The Director of the Portsmouth Department of Public
Works or his designee.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, including any substance, waste
or combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any discharge to a municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Either of the following:
Discharges pursuant to a RIPDES permit (other than the RIPDES
permit for discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer); and
A.
B. Allowable discharges as exempted under this article.
§ 336-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 336-3
C:430
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
OPERATOR — The party or parties that, either individually or taken
together, have the day-to-day operational control over the facility activities
and the ability to make modifications to such activities.
OWNER — The party or parties that, either individually or taken together,
have legal title to any premises.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANTS — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including but not limited
to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge,
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
B.
A. Owned or operated by the Town of Portsmouth;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined in Rule 3 of the RIPDES Regulations.
D.
§ 336-3 CHARTER § 336-3
C:431
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE — A discharge of stormwater not authorized
by a RIPDES permit, or an allowable stormwater discharge found to be a
significant contributor of pollutants to the MS4.
STORMWATER APPEALS BOARD — A three-member board appointed by
the Town Council to hear appeals of the DPW Director's actions in the
administration of this article.[Amended 10-22-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-10-22]
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made surface drainage channel or
body of water (including a lake or pond) through which a water flow occurs,
either continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Surface water and groundwater within the
boundaries of the State of Rhode Island and subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 336-4. Prohibited discharges.
No person/owner/operator shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or watercourses any
pollutant (See definition in § 336-3.) or nonstormwater discharge (See
definition in § 336-3.), unless such a nonstormwater discharge is outlined
in Part I.B.3 of the MS4 general permit, also known as "allowable
nonstormwater discharges." (See definition in § 336-3.)
§ 336-5. Illicit connections prohibited.
§ 336-6. Waste disposal prohibitions.
No person/owner/operator shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or
permit to be thrown, deposited, left or maintained, in or upon any public or
private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component
of the storm drain system or waters of the state, any refuse, rubbish,
garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and
accumulations so that the same may cause or contribute to an illicit
discharge into the MS4. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste
A. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections (See definition § 336-3.) to the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes,
without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of
whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
B. A person/owner/operator is considered to be in violation of this article if
he/she constructs, uses, maintains or provides for the continued
existence of a direct connection conveying an illegal discharge (See
definition in § 336-3.) to the MS4 and must provide corrective action to
eliminate said direct connection.
§ 336-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 336-6
C:432
receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this
prohibition.
§ 336-7. Suspension of MS4 access.
§ 336-8. Regulations and requirements.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The DPW
Director may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person/owner/operator when such suspension is, as determined by the
DPW Director, necessary to stop an actual or threatened
nonstormwater discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of
persons or to the MS4 or waters of the state. The DPW Director shall
immediately notify the RIDEM Office of Compliance and Inspection of
this suspension activity. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension
order issued in an emergency, the Portsmouth Department of Public
Works may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the MS4 or waters of the state or to minimize danger to
persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person/owner/
operator discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have
their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge. The DPW Director will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
Stormwater Appeals Board for reconsideration and a hearing, per the
provisions of § 336-12 herein. A person/owner/operator commits an
offense if he/she reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this subsection without the prior written approval of the
DPW Director. [Amended 10-22-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-10-22]
A. Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges. The DPW Director, or his
designee, may require by written notice that a person responsible for
an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date not less than 30
days nor more than 90 days from the date of notice, discontinue the
discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of
the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges.
B. Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections. The
DPW Director may require by written notice that a person/owner/
operator responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system
comply with the requirements of this section to eliminate the
connection by a specified date not less than 30 days nor more than 90
days from the date of notice, regardless of whether or not the
connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to
the effective date of this article. If, subsequent to eliminating a
connection found to be in violation of this article, the responsible
person/owner/operator can demonstrate that illegal discharges will no
longer occur, said person/owner/operator may request the DPW
§ 336-6 CHARTER § 336-8
C:433
Director's approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of
the connection shall be at the responsible party's expense.
C. Requirement to remediate. Whenever the DPW Director finds that a
discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result
in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the storm drain system
(MS4) or waters of the state, the DPW Director may require by written
notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible party that the
pollution be remediated and the affected property be restored at the
owner's expense.
D. Requirement to monitor and analyze. The DPW Director may require by
written notice of requirement that any person/owner/operator engaged
in any commercial or industrial activity and/or owning or operating any
facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal
discharges, and/or nonstormwater discharges to the storm drain
system (MS4) or waters of the state shall undertake at said person's/
owner's/operator's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish
such reports to the DPW Director as deemed necessary to determine
compliance with this article.
E. Industrial and construction activity discharge. Any person/owner/
operator subject to an industrial or construction activity RIPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the DPW Director prior to the allowing of discharges to
the MS4.
F. Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants. In
an attempt to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants, any
person/owner/operator engaged in activities or operations or owning
facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering
stormwater, the storm sewer system (MS4) or waters of the state shall
implement best management practices to the extent they are
technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The
owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system (MS4)
or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained
at the owner's or operator's expense.
G. Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through which a
watercourse (See definition § 336-3.) passes shall keep and maintain
that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of
trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would
pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through
the watercourse. In addition, the owner shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner shall not remove
§ 336-8 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 336-8
C:434
§ 336-9. Right of entry for inspections.
healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for
maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to
increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property
owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion
of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect
against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or
contributed from their property. Nothing in this subsection shall
preclude any owner from compliance with relevant provisions of the
Rhode Island Fresh Water Wetlands Act, R.I.G.L. § 2-1-18 et seq., or
other applicable laws or regulations.
H. Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as
soon as any person/owner/operator responsible for a facility or
operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or
operation, has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or
pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or
waters of the state from said facility, said person/owner/operator shall
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous
material, said person shall immediately notify the Portsmouth Fire
Department of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911).
In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person/owner/
operator shall notify the DPW Director no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency
within five business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also
retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken
to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude any owner/lessee
from compliance with relevant provisions of the Rhode Island Clean
Water Act, R.I.G.L. § 46-12-1 et seq., or other applicable laws or
regulations.
A. To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owner or
other party in control of the property, the Portsmouth Department of
Public Works, its agents, officers, and employees may enter upon
privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties
under this article and may make or cause to be made such
examinations, surveys or sampling as the authorized enforcement
agency deems reasonably necessary.
B. Such entry may take place not less than seven days after written notice
of intent to enter and inspect property, provided that inspections
precedent to suspension of MS4 access, as provided in § 336-7 herein,
shall not require prior written notice.
§ 336-8 CHARTER § 336-10
C:435
§ 336-10. Inspections and monitoring.
The DPW Director, or his designee, shall be permitted, upon the
presentation of credentials and other documents as may be required by law,
to:
§ 336-11. Notice of violation; abatement.
A. Enter the dischargers premise(s) where a regulated activity is
conducted or where records must be kept as required under the
conditions of this permit;
B. Have access to and copy, at reasonable times, any records that must be
kept as required under the conditions of the permit;
C. Inspect, at reasonable times, any equipment, practices, or operations
regulated or required under this permit; and
D. Sample or monitor any substances at any location, at reasonable times,
for the purposes of assuring compliance with this article or as
otherwise authorized by Rhode Island law.
A. Whenever the DPW Director finds that any person/owner/operator has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the
Portsmouth Department of Public Works may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may
require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by the Portsmouth DPW or a
designated subcontractor, and the expense thereof shall be charged to
the violator. All notices shall be written and sent by registered mail,
return receipt requested, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 336-10 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 336-12
C:436
§ 336-12. Appeal of notice of violation. [Amended 10-22-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-10-22]
Any person/owner/operator receiving a notice of violation may appeal the
determination of the DPW Director. The notice of appeal must be received
within 15 days from the date of the receipt of the notice of violation. The
notice of appeal shall be in writing and contain a detailed basis upon which
the appeal was taken. Hearing on the appeal before the Stormwater Appeals
Board shall take place within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of appeal.
The procedure for said appeal shall be in conformity with the Administrative
Procedures Act, R.I.G.L. § 42-35-1 et seq.
§ 336-13. Settlement of appeal of notice of violation.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by
this article, the DPW Director may enter into a negotiated settlement to
resolve the appeal of the notice of violation. Such settlement may impose
upon a violator alternative compensatory action, such as storm drain
stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 336-14. Failure to comply; abatement by Town. [Amended
10-22-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-10-22]
If no timely appeal of a notice of violation has been taken and the violation
has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice
of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days of the decision of
the Stormwater Appeals Board upholding the decision of the DPW Director,
representatives of the Portsmouth Department of Public Works shall
undertake all necessary actions, including requesting injunctive relief
through the Superior Court, to enter upon the subject private property and
take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property.
§ 336-15. Abatement costs.
A. If abatement activities are required and undertaken by the Town, within
60 days after abatement of the violation by the Town, the DPW Director
shall notify the property owner of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest
objecting to the amount of the assessment with the Town Clerk within
15 days. The Town Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the
Town Council. The decision of the Town Council shall be set forth by
resolution and shall be final.
B. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days of the decision of the Town
Council or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under
this section, the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of
the assessment, plus accrued interest, to be paid upon satisfaction of
said lien. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the Tax
Assessor so that the auditor may enter the amounts of the assessment
§ 336-12 CHARTER § 336-15
C:437
§ 336-16. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person/owner/operator to violate any provision
or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person/
owner/operator has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
article, the DPW Director may petition for a temporary, preliminary or
permanent injunction restraining the person/owner/operator from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person/owner/
operator to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 336-17. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, is declared and
deemed a nuisance by the Town, and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 336-18. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
against the parcel as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the
Tax Collector shall include the amount of the assessment on the bill for
taxes levied against the parcel of land.
A. It shall be the duty of the Town Solicitor, on authorization by the Town
Council whenever a violation of this article is brought to its attention by
the DPW Director, to institute due legal proceedings to compel
compliance with this article and to prohibit any illegal discharge to the
MS4 or maintenance of any illicit connection to the MS4 in violation of
the provisions of this article.
B. The Town may also cause suit to be brought in the Supreme or Superior
Court, or any Municipal Court, in the name of the Town, to restrain the
violation of, or to compel compliance with, the provisions of this article.
The Town may consolidate an action for injunctive relief and/or fines
under this article in the Superior Court and may recover all attorneys'
fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of
this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
C. Any person/owner/operator who shall violate or assist in the violation or
fail to comply with the requirements of any provision of this article, or
for a violation of any terms or conditions of any action imposed by the
DPW Director or any other agency or officer charged in this article with
enforcement of any of its provisions, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and each
day of the existence of any such violation shall be deemed a separate
offense, and all such fines shall inure to the benefit of the Town.
§ 336-15 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 336-19
C:438
§ 336-19. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the Town of Portsmouth to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 336-19 CHARTER § 336-19
C:439
Chapter 339
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 118.
Earth removal — See Ch. 155.
Littering in streets — See Ch. 243.
Motor vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 250.
§ 336-19 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 336-19
C:440
ARTICLE I
Street Acceptances
[Adopted 12-8-1952 by Ord. No. 71; amended in its entirety
7-12-1954 by Ord. No. 81 (§ 19-9 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 339-1. Acceptance of private road into public highway system.
The Town shall not accept as a public highway, or incorporate as part of the
public highway system of the Town, any private way or road that may, after
the date of the enactment of this article, be laid out or marked out on the
land, or that may be indicated on any plat or survey of land, unless:
A. The road or way is at least 40 feet in width, not less than 20 feet of
which has been paved as provided in Subsection B, provided that the
minimum of 20 feet of paved surface may be increased at the discretion
of the Town Council on proposed roads where the anticipated volume of
traffic shall require.
B. Such proposed road or roads shall have been brought to a uniform
grade and surface, with a base of at least 12 inches of stone or coarse
gravel, properly drained, to which has been applied a first penetration
of MC 2 asphalt, or equal, at the rate of not less than 1/2 gallon per
square yard; also a second penetration of MC 3 asphalt, or equal, at the
rate of not less than 1/3 gallon per square yard, the second penetration
to be covered with fine pea stone as soon as applied.
§ 339-1 CHARTER § 339-1
C:441

ARTICLE II
Facility Installation Under Streets
[Adopted 6-10-1957 by Ord. No. 86 (§§ 19-15 and 19-16 of the 1976
Code)]
§ 339-2. Installation; notification of Town Clerk.
Whenever any person seeks to install any facility upon, along or under
any accepted street or thoroughfare, or any thoroughfare for which Town
acceptance may be sought at any future date, and such installation will
require excavation of such street or thoroughfare or any deviation of the
normal flow of traffic, the person installing or causing such facility to be
installed shall first notify the Town Clerk in writing of the fact and shall set
forth the location, types and mode of the facility, and such notification shall
include a plan showing same.
§ 339-3. Conformity with plans; safety requirements; refilling.
Upon due notice to the Town Clerk and receipt of his approval, such location
and installation shall be made pursuant to the plans filed with the Clerk,
provided that any excavation by such person shall be clearly marked by
appropriate signs, sawhorses and lights, and that any such excavations are
to be refilled as soon as practicable.
§ 339-2 CHARTER § 339-3
C:443

ARTICLE III
Road Excavations
[Adopted 2-13-1967 by Ord. No. 93B (§§ 19-10 to 19-14 of the 1976
Code)]
§ 339-4. Permit requirements; fees; bond; exemptions; notice
requirements.
A. No person shall excavate trenches alongside Town roads, within the
paved surfaces of Town roads, or cause crossing cuts on Town roads
without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the Town Public
Works Director.
B. The person must set forth on the form supplied by the Director of Public
Works the location and purpose of the work, the length of time the work
will be in progress, and any other information that may be required by
the Town.
C. All work shall be performed in such manner that damage to existing
construction is avoided. Should damage occur, work in the area shall be
halted immediately. All damage shall be repaired forthwith. The local
authority's approval of repairs must be obtained before resuming
excavation of allied work.
D. Any person seeking an excavation permit as provided herein shall pay
to the Town a fee of $5. Said sum shall be collected by the Public Works
Director or his designee. [Added 10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-10-15]
E. Every person making application for an excavation permit shall also be
required to file in the office of the Public Works Director a performance
bond in the sum of $2,000 conditioned upon the applicant's doing the
work for which he/she has applied in a first-class and workmanlike
manner and restoring the sidewalk, curb or pavement in accordance
with the specifications prescribed by this article and with the
understanding that if, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, the
work or restoration is not in strict accordance with said specifications,
then the Town may do the work or restore the sidewalk, curb or
pavement and charge to such person the cost thereof. [Added
10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-10-15]
F. Public utilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this article to
the extent that such exemption is required by state law. [Added
10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-10-15]
G. Any person making an excavation shall first notify the Chief of the Fire
and Police Departments of the location of the work and dates when the
work shall be performed. [Added 10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-10-15]
H. The Public Works Director may withhold a permit from any person who
has not complied with this article or who has failed to restore prior
§ 339-4 CHARTER § 339-4
C:445
§ 339-5. Backfilling; testing requirements.
§ 339-6. Excavations; trenches.
§ 339-7. Permanent pavement. [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No.
92-4-13]
excavations in accordance with the standards contained in this article.
[Added 10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-10-15]
A. Backfilling shall be of selected material free from large lumps, clods or
rocks. Should the excavated materials prove unsatisfactory for
backfilling, the contractor shall provide other suitable materials as may
be required.
B. Each layer should not exceed six inches in depth and should be
compacted by tamping with mechanical rammers or by hand tamping
with heavy iron tamper having a tamping face not exceeding 144
square inches in area. This method of filling and compacting shall be
continued to a depth of 12 inches below road surface.
C. The remainder shall be of 10 inches of bank gravel. It shall contain not
less than 40% stone (no stone shall exceed two inches in any
dimension), by volume, with a temporary surface consisting of cold
patch not less than two inches thick. This temporary surface shall be
maintained in conditions satisfactory until permanent pavement repairs
are completed. No trench should be left open.
D. Compact fills and backfills shall conform to the following minimum
densities, expressed as percentages of maximum densities as
determined by either ASTM D698, Method D, or AASHO T-99, Method
D:
(1) Fills or backfills under surfaced areas, gutters, curbs, parking
areas, etc.: 95%.
(2) Top two feet of fills or backfills under roadways: 100%; remainder
of such fills or backfills: 95%.
(3) Fills or backfills under lawns and plated areas: 85%.
E. The contractor shall provide and pay for all testing as deemed
necessary by the local authority. All tests will be made by a recognized
and approved laboratory or professional engineer.
A. "Excavation" shall consist of the removal and satisfactory disposal of all
materials taken from within the limits of the work. It shall also include
the shaping and cleaning of all slopes and shoulders.
B. The trenches may be excavated by hand or by approved machinery. The
width of a trench shall not be greater than is necessary to permit
satisfactory working conditions. Cross-trenches shall be cut or sawed.
§ 339-4 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 339-7
C:446
§ 339-8. Conduct of work; safety requirements.
A. Permanent pavement consists of removal of cold patch and dressing
with crushed gravel, rolling and compacting pavement. Patch shall
consist of bituminous concrete Type I. Asphalted concrete shall be laid
on the prepared gravel base in one surface course layer three inches
thick after compaction or, at the option of the contractor, may be laid in
a one-and-one-half-inch-thick binder course and a one-and-one-half-inch
surface course.
B. In any case in which the Public Works Director determines that it will
not be detrimental to the public interest to do so, the permanent
pavement may be installed by leaving the existing patch in place,
placing a leveling coat of bituminous concrete over the patch and the
remaining portion of the road to be resurfaced and placing the one-andone-
half-inch surface coat over the leveling coat. Loose patches or
recently placed patches (less than one year old) shall be removed and
replaced with bituminous patches compatible with the overlayment
material. Prior to placement of the leveling course, a bituminous tack
coat shall be placed over existing pavement and/or patches.
A. The contractor shall conduct the work at all times in such a manner as
to insure the least possible obstruction to traffic. The convenience of
the general public and of the residents along and adjacent to the work
shall be provided for in an adequate and satisfactory manner. No
section of road shall be closed to traffic except at the direction of the
Public Works Department.
B. The contractor shall place and maintain as directed any barricades or
warning signs required by the Director of Public Works. These signs or
barricades shall be placed where work is being done on or adjacent to
any public road.
§ 339-7 CHARTER § 339-8
C:447

ARTICLE IV
Discharge of Water on Public Streets
[Adopted 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 95-5-22B]
§ 339-9. Discharge prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged upon the public streets
surface or other water, either by collecting the same upon his premises and
discharging it upon a public street or by changing the grade or surface
of his premises so as to increase the amount or rate of the discharge
upon a public street, at such times or in such quantities that the water so
discharged may freeze on the public street so as to cause a hazard to travel
in the public way as determined by the Director of Public Works.
§ 339-10. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the continued natural
flow of surface water.
§ 339-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article may be fined an amount
not exceeding $500 for the use of the Town. In addition, in cases involving
property damage or personal injury, the person violating this article may
be ordered to pay any person who is so injured or whose property is so
damaged an amount not to exceed $2,500.
§ 339-9 CHARTER § 339-11
C:449

ARTICLE V
Excavations and Curb Cuts
[Adopted 2-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2-20A]
§ 339-12. Approval required.
Any person owning or leasing land abutting any public street or sidewalk
in the Town of Portsmouth who desires to have an entrance, curb cut or
driveway installed in such public street or sidewalk shall make application
therefor to the Director of Public Works. The applicant shall file a plat
or plan, in the manner and form prescribed by the Director, showing the
proposed location and dimensions of such entrance, curb cut or driveway.
§ 339-13. Action by Director of Public Works.
The Director shall, within 15 days of the receipt of the application,
investigate the necessity of such entrance, curb cut or driveway and, in
so doing, shall take into consideration the public welfare, traffic hazards,
danger to pedestrians and the public generally, and any and all matters
pertaining thereto, and shall act upon and approve or disapprove the
application.
§ 339-14. Notice upon disapproval; appeals.
If the Director disapproves the application, he/she shall notify the applicant
of his/her action. The applicant shall have the right to appeal from the
action of the Director within 10 days thereafter to the Town Council. After
hearing said appeal, the Council shall affirm, modify or reverse the action
of the Director.
§ 339-15. Action after approval.
If the Director approves the application, or, if the Council, upon appeal,
approves the application, the Director shall notify the applicant of such
approval, and the applicant shall hire a suitable contractor to do the work
required, which work shall be done only under the supervision of the
Director or his designee, and the applicant shall pay all costs of such work.
§ 339-16. Fee for curb cuts.
The fee for having an entrance, curb cut or driveway installed shall be $40,
which sum shall be paid at the time the application is made.
§ 339-17. Permit requirements for excavations. [Amended
11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-11-12; 2-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2-25A]
No person shall connect any land or premises with any main drain or
common sewer, or open any drain or sewer belonging to the Town, or
break ground or make any excavation in any of the sidewalks, streets or
public places in the Town for the purpose of making a drain or sewer
or laying or placing gas pipes or water pipes or for any other purpose,
§ 339-12 CHARTER § 339-17
C:451
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works,
who shall first ascertain the feasibility of such excavations in relation to
utilities with services in the affected areas. Such person applying for a
permit shall provide such information as the Director may require. For
such permit, the person obtaining the same shall pay the Director a fee as
set forth herein, and such person shall provide for proper traffic control
and properly light and barricade such excavation to the satisfaction of the
Director. However, in the case of any road which has been surfaced or
resurfaced, no approval shall be given by the Director of Public Works
for any excavation, except in case of necessity, for a period of 10 years
after the completion of said surfacing or resurfacing. A proposed excavation
shall not be deemed to be necessary unless it is not possible to perform
necessary work without making such excavations. In no case shall the
Director approve any excavation to take place during a period commencing
on December 1 of any year and extending through and until April 1 of the
following year, except in cases of emergency, necessitating a repair of a
gasline, water main, cable or electrical conduit, or other such purpose.
§ 339-18. Payment of fees.
All fees payable for street and sidewalk excavations shall be payable at the
time application for a permit is made. However, in case of an emergency
occurring between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. necessitating an
excavation for the purpose of making repairs to a gas main, water main,
cable or electric conduit or for any other purpose, the person required to
make such excavation shall not be first required to obtain a permit. Such
person shall, however, before making such excavation, advise the Police
Department and the Fire Department of the location where the excavation
is to be made and the nature of the emergency. Such person shall apply for
the required permit during the next business day.
§ 339-19. Fees for excavations.
The fees for all street and sidewalk excavations shall be $60 for the first 15
linear feet or part thereof of any excavation and $8 for each additional five
linear feet or part thereof. The length of the excavation shall include the
total length of mains and laterals.
§ 339-20. Notice of construction.
A. The Public Works Director shall give 90 days' advance notice to all
public utilities when a street or sidewalk is to be constructed,
reconstructed, resurfaced or sealed. This notice will afford the utility
companies an opportunity to complete any necessary work in such road
or sidewalk prior to the paving work. For two years thereafter, any
excavation associated with new mains and/or conduits, including the
maintenance of existing ones, will require pavement restoration from
curb to curb for the entire length of the excavation.
§ 339-17 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 339-20
C:452
§ 339-21. Restoration of surface; cleanup.
§ 339-22. Bond requirements.
Every person making application for excavations shall be required to file
in the office of the Director of Public Works a performance bond in the
sum of $5,000 conditioned upon the applicant's doing the work for which
he/she has applied in a first-class and workmanlike manner and restoring
the sidewalk, curb or pavement as prescribed by the Director and with the
understanding that if, in the opinion of the Director, the work or restoration
is not in strict accordance with his/her requirements, the Town may do the
work or restore the sidewalk, curb or pavement and charge to such person
the cost thereof.
§ 339-23. Insurance requirements.
Before commencing excavation work covered by this article, the person
seeking a permit shall establish that he/she has in full force and effect
a policy of comprehensive general liability insurance with a minimum
coverage of $500,000 combined single limit or a policy or policies of
$300,000 bodily injury limit/$600,000 bodily injury limit/$100,000 property
damage limit, to include broad form property damage and explosion/
collapse/underground coverage and completed operations coverage. For
sidewalk and street obstructions, the applicant must provide proof of a
comprehensive general liability policy with a minimum coverage of
$300,000. All policies must list the Town as an insured and indemnify the
Town for any liability it may incur as a result of issuing a permit under this
article.
§ 339-24. Work requirements and standards.
B. For two years following the construction, reconstruction, resurfacing or
sealing of a street, any excavator of a lateral trench shall restore the
surface by removing and replacing in kind the existing pavement
completely for a distance of 10 feet on either side of the center line of
the trench from curb to curb.
A. Every person who applies for a permit to make an excavation in a
sidewalk or street shall state the exact location of the proposed
excavation and the dimensions thereof and shall also agree to restore
the sidewalk or pavement as required by the Director of Public Works.
B. Every person making application shall further agree that if, in the
opinion of the Director, the work or restoration is not in strict
accordance with his requirements, the Town may restore the same and
charge to the person the cost thereof.
C. Thorough cleanup shall be accomplished at the end of each working
day.
§ 339-20 CHARTER § 339-24
C:453
§ 339-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the requirements of this
article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100, to be recovered
to the use of the Town, and each day any violation of this article continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Any person making any curb cut or excavation in a public way under
this article shall furnish all labor, materials, tools and equipment
necessary for protection of the excavation, traffic control, backfilling
the excavation, placing a compacted gravel foundation, temporary
pavement, and permanent pavement and shall perform all other work
necessary to restore the condition of the way. Except in case of
emergency, such person shall notify the Director of Public Works at
least 24 hours prior to doing any work under this article. All material
used shall be subject to the approval of the Public Works Director.
B. All excavations shall be protected with public safeguards and adequate
warning devices such as detour lights, barricades, lights, watchmen
and danger and warning signs, to be provided and maintained by the
permit holder. No open excavation shall be left unattended.
C. All material removed from the excavation shall be immediately removed
from the site of the work and shall not be left on any public right-of-way.
That portion of excavated material which is to be used for backfilling
the excavation may be stored on the site only with the permission of,
and in a manner approved by, the Director of Public Works.
D. No construction materials or equipment shall be stored on any Town
property or public right-of-way without the written approval of the
Director of Public Works.
E. Placement of backfill, gravel foundation, temporary pavement and
permanent pavement shall be in accordance with Town standards as
determined by Town regulations, or, in their absence, by the Director of
Public Works. Concrete used on roadways and concrete sidewalks shall
be in accordance with the same standards.
F. Permanent pavement shall be deferred for a time period designated by
the Director of Public Works at the time of the placement of the
temporary pavement. This time will depend on soil characteristics, the
depth of the excavation and the nature of the excavation. When this
time has expired, the Department of Public Works shall notify, in
writing, the permit holder to remove temporary pavement and replace
it with permanent pavement, which shall be done within a period of 10
days.
§ 339-24 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 339-25
C:454
Chapter 352
TAXATION
§ 339-25 CHARTER § 339-25
C:455

ARTICLE I
Tangible Personal Property
[Adopted 3-10-1980 by Ord. No. 80-2]
§ 352-1. Exemption granted.
The household furniture and family stores of a housekeeper in the whole,
including clothing, bedding, and other white goods, books, and all other
such tangible personal property items which are common to the normal
household, not exceeding $20,000, shall be exempt from taxation.
§ 352-1 CHARTER § 352-1
C:457

ARTICLE II
Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 80-3]
§ 352-2. Exemption granted.
Any person who is a resident of the Town of Portsmouth and who qualifies as
a veteran pursuant the provisions of R.I.G.L. § 44-3-4, as amended, shall be
entitled to an exemption of $2,000 on real property owned by said veteran
located within the Town, provided that said veteran makes application for
said exemption on forms to be prescribed for such purpose by the Tax
Assessor. This exemption shall be in addition to any exemption granted to
such veteran pursuant the provisions of the General Laws of the State of
Rhode Island.
§ 352-2 CHARTER § 352-2
C:459

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Widows of Veterans
[Adopted 6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 82-3]
§ 352-3. Exemption granted.
Every person who is a resident of the Town of Portsmouth and who qualifies
as the unmarried widow or widower of a veteran under R.I.G.L. § 44-3-4, on
proper claim being made therefor, shall be granted an additional exemption
of $2,000 on any real property owned by said unmarried widow or widower.
§ 352-4. When effective; repealer.
This article shall take effect upon passage, and § 352-3 hereof shall take
effect as of the assessment date of December 31, 1981. All ordinances and
parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith shall stand repealed.
§ 352-3 CHARTER § 352-4
C:461

ARTICLE IV
Prisoner of War Exemption
[Adopted 1-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-1-27A]
§ 352-5. Exemption granted.
Every person who is a resident of the Town of Portsmouth and who is a
veteran of the military or naval service of the United States of America who
has been or who shall be classified as, or determined to be, a prisoner of
war by the Veterans' Administration of the United States, on proper claim
being made therefor, shall be granted an additional exemption of $15,000
from local taxation on any real or personal property owned by said person.
§ 352-6. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage, and § 352-5 hereof shall take
effect as of the assessment date of December 31, 1987.
§ 352-5 CHARTER § 352-6
C:463

ARTICLE V
Exemption Due to Infirmity or Poverty
[Adopted 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6-12]
§ 352-7. Exemption granted.
There shall be an exemption, partial or total, from taxation on parcels of
real property located in the Town of Portsmouth which, as of the date of
assessment, are owned and occupied wholly or partially as dwellings by
persons who are citizens and residents of the Town and have been citizens
and residents of the Town for a period of three years and who have attained
the age of 65 years. Each such exemption shall be in the form of a credit
against the taxes assessed on such real property. The amount of the credit
with respect to each such person shall be based on the annual income
of such person, provided that "income" shall be deemed to include the
aggregate income of such person and all other persons residing with him/
her; provided, further, that "income" shall be computed on a calendar-year
basis and shall include all income of every nature and description, whether
or not taxable, and whether earned or unearned, and shall include but
not be limited to dividends, interest, gross rents, gains, gifts, pensions, all
types of compensation, and social security and veterans benefits. Only one
exemption shall be allowed with respect to any one building, provided that
such exemption shall be allowed for single- or multiple-family dwellings and
other buildings so long as such person resides therein.
§ 352-8. Application for exemption; termination.
Such exemption shall not be allowed unless the person entitled thereto
shall have presented to the Tax Assessor on or before June 13, 1989, and
thereafter by January 31 of each year for which the exemption is sought an
application for such exemption and due evidence that he or she is entitled
thereto, including, for example but not by way of limitation, certified birth
records, voter registration records, and statements of annual income sworn
or affirmed by the applicant before a person qualified to administer oaths,
such information to be kept confidential by the Tax Assessor. The exemption
shall terminate forthwith:
§ 352-9. Maximum income limits.
A. Upon the alienation of such real property;
B. In the event such person shall cease to occupy such real property as his
or her dwelling; or
C. Upon the death of such person.
A. The Town Council shall, on June 11, 1989, and thereafter during
January of each year, by ordinance duly adopted, set the maximum
income for which an exemption may be claimed and the amount of said
exemption, expressed as a percentage of assessed valuation of said
§ 352-7 CHARTER § 352-9
C:465
property, and set a maximum valuation to which said exemption shall
apply.
B. For fiscal year 2003-2004, the following shall be the income levels and
exemptions for and pursuant to this article: [Amended 1-22-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-1-22; 1-5-1999 by Ord. No. 99-1-5; 3-11-2002 by Res.
No. 2002-03-11; 2-24-2003 by Res. No. 2003-02-24A]
If Your Income Is: Your Exemption Is:
Dec. 02
CPI-U 2003-04 Fiscal Year 2003-04
2.40% $0 to $7,056 80% of assessed value
$7,057 to $8,815 70% of assessed value
$8,816 to $10,571 60% of assessed value
$10,572 to $12,343 50% of assessed value
$12,344 to $14,101 40% of assessed value
$14,102 to $15,859 30% of assessed value
$15,860 to $17,630 20% of assessed value
$17,631 to $19,387 10% of assessed value
$19,388 to $21,159 5% of assessed value
C. All exemptions shall apply to the first $150,000 of assessed valuation.
Thereafter, property shall be taxed at the regular rate without regard to
this article.
§ 352-9 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 352-9
C:466
ARTICLE VI
Farmland Exemption
[Adopted 10-23-1990 by Ord. No. 90-10-23]
§ 352-10. Exemption granted; effective date; annual review.
Owners of real property situated in the Town of Portsmouth which has been
classified as farmland (as defined by the Portsmouth Tax Assessor pursuant
to rules and regulations adopted by the Town Council) as of December 31,
1990, shall receive a twenty-five-percent exemption from taxation. The tax
relief will become effective in fiscal year July 1, 1991, to June 30, 1992. The
exemptions, rules and regulations and farm properties shall be reviewed
yearly.
§ 352-11. Application for exemption.
Any persons seeking the exemption must apply to the Tax Assessor for relief
upon forms furnished by the Tax Assessor pursuant to rules and regulations
adopted by the Tax Assessor and approved by the Council.
§ 352-12. Payback provision.
Any applicant who applies for and receives an exemption will execute an
agreement with the Town which incorporates a five-year cyclical payback
provision in the event the property ceases to be used as farmland. When
land classified as farmland has been assessed and taxed in accordance
with this article and is applied to a use other than farmland, or when that
classification is voluntarily withdrawn by the landowner, it shall be subject
to additional taxes, and the property shall be liable to the Town for the
following taxes depending on the year the use is changed or classification
withdrawn:
§ 352-13. Assessment of property.
The exemption shall be applied to the property assessment. Farmland shall
be uniformly assessed, regardless of its location. The Tax Assessor shall
distinguish between wasteland, pasture and tillable land. Any house,
together with its lot, shall be assessed at its appreciated residential value.
A. Year 1: 100% of the tax benefit as a result of the exemption.
B. Year 2: 75%.
C. Year 3: 50%.
D. Year 4: 25%.
E. Year 5: 0%.
F. After the fifth year, the cyclical payback will start over (i.e., sixth year,
100%; seventh year, 75%; eighth year, 50%; and so on with a five-year
cycle).
§ 352-10 CHARTER § 352-14
C:467
§ 352-14. Change in use; notice of payback tax; failure to pay.
In the event a change in the use occurs, the Assessor shall record in the
land evidence records a notice of the change in use, stipulating therein a
description of the property, its plat and lot number and the amount of the
payback taxes due. Similar notices shall be mailed to the present owner of
the property and to the Tax Collector. The payback tax shall constitute a
lien on the property at the time of recording the notice of land use change,
and the tax shall become due and payable in full within 90 days of the date
of recording. The lien shall continue in effect until the taxes are paid in
full. Failure by the owner to pay the taxes within the time prescribed above
will permit the Tax Collector to advertise and sell the property in the same
manner as prescribed in R.I.G.L. § 44-9-1 et seq.
§ 352-14 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 352-14
C:468
ARTICLE VII
Exemption for Totally Disabled Persons
[Adopted 12-7-1992 by Ord. No. 92-12-7]
§ 352-15. Exemption granted; eligibility.
§ 352-16. One exemption per property.
In no case shall the real residential property be entitled to more than one
five-thousand-dollar exemption, even though occupied and designated as a
domicile by more than one disabled person.
§ 352-17. Eligibility for other exemptions.
Any person who is claiming an exemption under this article shall not be
eligible for tax exemptions under any other acts or ordinances of the Town
of Portsmouth.
§ 352-18. Evidence of entitlement to exemption.
The exemption shall not be allowed unless the person entitled thereto
shall have presented to the Assessor, on or before the last day on which
sworn statements may be filed with the Assessor for the year for which the
foregoing is claimed, due evidence that he or she is so entitled.
A. Every person who is a resident of the Town of Portsmouth residing in a
dwelling house owned by him or her, upon proper claim being made
therefor, shall be granted a tax exemption, not to exceed $5,000, on the
assessed value from local taxation on real residential property owned
by him or her, provided said person meets the following three
requirements:
(1) Said person has been determined by the Social Security
Administration to be totally disabled (100%).
(2) Said person has a gross annual income of less than $15,000.
(3) Said person occupies the real property as his or her principal
domicile.
B. For purposes of this article, a person's income shall be determined
pursuant to the definition contained in R.I.G.L. § 44-3-32, entitled
"Portsmouth — Tax exemption for the elderly."
§ 352-15 CHARTER § 352-18
C:469

ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Wholesalers
[Adopted 4-6-1993 by Ord. No. 93-4-6A]
§ 352-19. Findings.
The State of Connecticut and Commonwealth of Massachusetts do not
assess a tangible property tax on wholesale inventory. At present there
are no wholesalers in the Town of Portsmouth; therefore, the Town derives
no revenue from the wholesale inventory tax. A guarantee of exemption
from wholesale inventory taxes is expected to induce businesses having
wholesale inventories to locate in Portsmouth, resulting in an increased tax
base and an increased level of employment. In order to provide such an
inducement, it is necessary to provide an exemption pursuant to R.I.G.L.
§ 44-3-29, as amended, for a period of 25 years.
§ 352-20. Exemption granted.
§ 352-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INVENTORY or STOCK-IN-TRADE — Includes the merchandise kept on
hand by a wholesaler for sale in the normal and regular course of a
wholesale business.
WHOLESALER — Includes a person, partnership, corporation or other
business entity engaged in the business of selling goods for subsequent
resale by its customers. Except as provided herein, no distinction shall be
drawn between a wholesaler, all or a portion of the sales of which are sales
to one or more customers affiliated with the wholesaler, and a wholesaler,
the sales of which are exclusively sales to customers not affiliated with such
wholesaler. A wholesaler shall be considered affiliated with customers if it
controls, is controlled by or is under common control with the customers.
§ 352-22. Apportionment.
In the event that a wholesaler sold inventory or stock-in-trade both at
wholesale and at retail in the preceding calendar year, the Tax Assessor
A. The Town Council of the Town of Portsmouth hereby grants and
establishes, subject to the provisions of this article, an exemption from
taxation of the stock-in-trade or inventory of wholesalers as herein
provided.
B. Beginning with the assessment of tangible personal property tax to be
made as of December 31, 1993, and thereafter through the assessment
to be made December 31, 2018, no tax shall be assessed with respect to
the inventory or stock-in-trade of a wholesaler, except as provided
herein.
§ 352-19 CHARTER § 352-22
C:471
shall assess on the same basis as the retailer's inventory or stock-in-trade
as of December 31 of such year, to the extent permitted by applicable
law, notwithstanding any exemption permitted hereunder, that proportion
of inventory or stock-in-trade of such wholesaler which shall be equal to the
percentage of such wholesaler's total sales during the preceding calendar
year that were at retail. For the purposes of this section, sales at retail
shall not include sales to employees of the wholesaler or to employees of its
affiliates. If retail sales are less than 1% of total sales during such year, it
shall be deemed that no sales were made at retail during such year. All sales
of a wholesaler to a customer which is an affiliated entity shall be deemed
to be retail sales for the purpose of this section if more than half of the
dollar volume of the sales of such affiliated entity is made within the Town
of Portsmouth.
§ 352-23. Application procedure.
§ 352-24. Exclusion.
The exemption provided in this article shall not be granted to any
wholesaler or commercial concern relocating from any other Rhode Island
municipality to the Town of Portsmouth, unless said municipality has an
ordinance exempting wholesale inventories from taxation.
A. Persons, partnerships, corporations and other business entities desiring
the benefits of this section shall annually file an application on the
forms to be provided by the Tax Assessor for such purpose at the time
provided for the filing of an account pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 44-5-15, as
the same may hereafter be amended, or any statute hereinafter enacted
in substitution thereof. Each application shall be sworn to by the
applicant under penalties of perjury. Such application shall contain:
(1) A statement of the applicant's name and the address at which the
inventory or stock-in-trade is located;
(2) A statement that the applicant is a wholesaler within the meaning
of this section;
(3) A statement as to whether the applicant made any retail sales
during the preceding calendar year; and
(4) If the applicant made sales of merchandise at retail in the
preceding calendar year, a statement of the percentage of the
applicant's total sales which represent sales at retail in such
calendar year.
B. The applicant also shall provide to the Tax Assessor such additional
information, certifications, records or proof as the Tax Assessor deems
necessary.
§ 352-22 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 352-25
C:472
§ 352-25. Effective date; amendments; repealer.
This article shall be effective with respect to the tax assessments to be
made as of December 31, 1993, and thereafter, and any exemption from
tax contained herein may not be repealed with respect to tax assessments
to be made prior to December 31, 2018, provided that the foregoing shall
not preclude or restrict amendments to procedural or definitional portions
of this article to take account of changes in law or circumstances or better
to carry out the intentions of the Town Council. All ordinances or portions
thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 352-25 CHARTER § 352-25
C:473

ARTICLE IX
Adjustment to Assessments for New Construction
[Adopted 8-26-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8-26]
§ 352-26. Determination of increase or decrease in assessment.
§ 352-27. Notification to Assessor by Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall notify the Tax Assessor, in writing, within 10
days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy on any new construction
or the determination that a damaged building has been satisfactorily
demolished, removed and graded.
§ 352-28. Notification of adjustment.
Within five days of adjusting an assessment because of new construction
or removal of a damaged building, the Tax Assessor shall notify the record
owner of such property and the Tax Collector of such adjustment to the
assessment.
A. Whenever any new construction of real estate is completed after an
assessment date, the Tax Assessor, within 90 days of receiving
notification from the Building Inspector of the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy or a determination by the Tax Assessor that such new
construction is being used for the purpose for which the same was
constructed, shall determine the increase in assessed value of the
property for the preceding tax year and prorate such additional amount
from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or from the
date on which such construction was first used for the purpose for
which the same was constructed, whichever is earlier, to the next
assessment date and add such additional amount to the tax roll for the
immediately preceding assessment date in accordance with R.I.G.L.
§ 44-5-13.13.
B. Whenever a building is so damaged as to require total reconstruction
before it may be used for any purpose related to its use prior to such
damage (excluding damage caused by a natural disaster), and the
owner subsequently provides for complete demolition of the building
and has all materials from the demolition removed from the property on
which the building was situated or used as fill on said property for
purposes of grading, the Tax Assessor, within 90 days of receiving
notice from the Building Inspector that said building was demolished,
removed and graded to his/her satisfaction, shall determine the
decrease in the assessed value of the property for the preceding tax
year and prorate such reduction in amount from the date of completion
of such demolition, removal and grading to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector to the next December 31 and subtract the decreased
amount from the tax roll for the immediately preceding assessment
date in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 44-5-13.14 and this article.
§ 352-26 CHARTER § 352-29
C:475
§ 352-29. Delivery of tax bill; payment.
Within 10 days of receipt of notice of an adjustment by the Tax Assessor,
the Tax Collector shall mail or hand deliver an additional or revised bill,
as the case may be, to the record owner of the property based upon the
amount prorated by the Tax Assessor. Any additional tax owed shall be due,
payable, and collectible as other municipal taxes; provided, however, such
additional tax shall be due and payable in an initial or single installment not
sooner than 30 days after the date such bill is mailed or hand delivered to
the record owner, and in any remaining, regular installments, as the same
are due and payable, and the several installments of such tax so due and
payable shall be equal.
§ 352-30. Appeals.
Any person claiming to be aggrieved by the action of the Tax Assessor under
this article may appeal the actions of the Tax Assessor to the Assessment
Board of Review within 60 days from notification of an adjustment to the
assessment or to the Superior Court as provided.
§ 352-29 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 352-30
C:476
ARTICLE X
Visiting Nurse Health Service Property Exemption
[Adopted 5-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-5-20]
§ 352-31. Exemption granted.
There is hereby exempt from local taxation certain qualified real property
located within the Town of Portsmouth owned and occupied by the Visiting
Nurse Health Services, Inc., and used in the provision of services to
Portsmouth residents, which said exemption shall be in an amount not
exceeding $834,100 of assessed valuation each year, and which shall be in
addition to any and all other exemptions from taxation to which said entity
may be entitled.
§ 352-32. Amount of exemption. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-06-17A107]
Upon application by the Visiting Nurse Health Services, Inc., the Town
Council of the Town of Portsmouth shall fix the amount, if any, of such
exemption from local taxation with respect to assessed value of any taxable
real property owned and occupied by the Visiting Nurse Health Services,
Inc., which amount, once fixed, shall remain in effect until modified by the
Town Council.
§ 352-33. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used herein, shall have the
following meanings:
NONPROFIT CORPORATION — A corporation, no part of the profits or
income of which is distributable to its members, directors or officers, except
as allowed by the Rhode Island Nonprofit Corporations Act.108
ORGANIZATIONAL SUCCESSOR — A nonprofit corporate entity which
succeeds Visiting Nurse Health Services, Inc., not only in title to the real
estate but also to its corporate purposes and which complies with the
requirements of nonprofit status. An entity not qualifying as an
organizational successor herein shall not be eligible for continued
exemption under § 352-34B hereof.[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-06-17A]
QUALIFIED PROPERTY — Real property, or any portion thereof, owned,
occupied and used exclusively by the Visiting Nurse Health Services, Inc.,
in the performance of its corporate functions of providing home nursing
care and similar services to the people of Newport County, Rhode
Island.[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-06-17A109]
107. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Section III, pertaining to application
procedures and proof of ownership, occupation, nonprofit status and continued services,
which immediately followed this section.
108. Editor's Note: The original definition of "tax exemption period," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-06-17A.
§ 352-31 CHARTER § 352-34
C:477
§ 352-34. Termination of exemption.
The exemptions granted hereunder shall terminate as follows:
§ 352-35. When effective. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-06-17A]
This article shall take effect upon passage and be applied retrospectively to
May 20, 1998.
A. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Town Council from
terminating this exemption at any time by repeal or amendment of this
article. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-06-17A]
B. The exemption shall terminate upon the transfer of the property to an
entity other than Visiting Nurse Health Services, Inc., or an
organizational successor as defined herein. In the event that any
property granted an exemption hereunder is transferred during the taxexemption
period for which the exemption is claimed, the exemption
shall be void for that portion of the tax-exemption period following the
transfer, and the buyer or the transferee shall be liable to the Town of
Portsmouth for any tax benefit received after such sale or transfer.
[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-06-17A]
C. The exemption shall terminate at such time as the Visiting Nurse Health
Services, Inc., or its organizational successor, ceases to qualify as a
nonprofit corporation under the Rhode Island Nonprofit Corporations
Act or at such time as the applicant ceases to provide home nursing
care or similar services to the residents of the Town of Portsmouth. In
the event that the applicant's nonprofit status shall change or it shall
cease to render such services to Portsmouth residents during any taxexemption
period for which the exemption is claimed, the exemption
shall be void for that portion of the tax-exemption period following the
change in nonprofit status or cessation of services, and the then owner
of the property shall be liable to the Town of Portsmouth for any tax
benefit received after the occurrence of those said events.
109. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Section V, pertaining to the deadline
for filing applications, adjudication by the Assessor and action by Council, which
immediately followed this section.
§ 352-34 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 352-35
C:478
ARTICLE XI
Adjustments of Exemption During Town-Wide Reevaluation Years
[Adopted 6-28-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6-28; amended in its entirety
5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05-08]
§ 352-36. Adjustment of exemptions.
It is hereby ordained by the Portsmouth Town Council that in any year in
which there is a property tax reevaluation in the Town of Portsmouth, the
Tax Assessor/Collector of the Town of Portsmouth is hereby authorized to,
and shall, adjust the tax exemptions of all persons entitled thereto pursuant
to Town ordinance or Title 44 of the Rhode Island General Laws. Said
adjustment shall be made to reflect the same monetary savings that existed
for the year prior to revaluation of the real property. Said adjustments
shall be made for the following exemptions: veteran; unmarried widow
of veteran; totally blind; Gold Star parent; one-hundred-percent disabled
(service-connected); one-hundred-percent disabled (not service-related);
senior citizen and prisoner of war.
§ 352-37. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and shall authorize the Tax
Assessor/Collector to adjust exemptions applicable to the assessment of
December 31, 2016.
§ 352-36 CHARTER § 352-37
C:479

ARTICLE XII
Exemption for Vehicles Adapted for Disabled Persons of Limited
Income
[Adopted 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-03-22]
§ 352-38. Exemption granted.
The Town Council of the Town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island, hereby exempts
from taxation 50% of the value of any motor vehicle that is necessary to
transport a family member with a disability in any case in which the vehicle
has been specially adapted to meet the specific needs of the person with a
disability. This exemption applies to not more than one motor vehicle owned
and registered for personal, noncommercial use.
§ 352-39. Continuation of exemption.
After the Portsmouth Tax Assessor has allowed an exemption under this
article, no further evidence of the existence of the facts required by this
article is required in any subsequent year in order to keep the exemption in
force in connection with taxes assessed by the Town of Portsmouth.
§ 352-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SPECIAL ADAPTATIONS — Includes, but is not limited to, wheelchair lifts,
wheelchair carriers, wheelchair ramps, wheelchair securements, hand
controls, steering devices, extensions, doors, or alternative signaling
devices to auditory signals.
SPECIALLY ADAPTED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle with special
adaptation, provided that the cost of the special adaptation meets or
exceeds 7% of the value of the motor vehicle.
§ 352-38 CHARTER § 352-40
C:481

ARTICLE XIII
Tax Deferral Program for Qualified Seniors and Disabled Persons
[Adopted 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-10-10]
§ 352-41. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEFERRED AMOUNT — The amount of tax that would otherwise be due
and payable if the applicant did not qualify under this program.
DISQUALIFYING EVENT — Includes any and all of the following:
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY — A person with a disability as defined
in R.I.G.L. § 42-87-1(7)(i), and who shall satisfy all of the criteria of
Subsections A through I, inclusive:
A. Sale of the property;
B. Transfer of the property to a family member without life tenancy;
The point in time when the property ceases to be the taxpayer's
principal residence;
C.
D. Written request by the applicant to be removed from the program;
Any property whose square footage living space is increased since
acceptance under this article.
E.
Whose home is a single-family home (condominium ownership not
eligible);
A.
Whose Portsmouth home is the taxpayer's principal residence and that
of the spouse (if living);
B.
Who is a resident of the State of Rhode Island for income tax purposes,
as is the spouse (if living);
C.
Who is not a registered voter of any other city, Town or political
subdivision of Rhode Island or any other state, nor is the spouse (if
living);
D.
Who has resided in the principal residence for the past seven years, as
has the spouse (if living);
E.
Whose real estate tax previously billed is not delinquent by more than
four quarters;
F.
Who would otherwise qualify but has been forced to relocate through
no fault of the taxpayer (e.g., in cases of fire, natural disaster or taking
of property by eminent domain by a state or local government);
G.
Whose real estate tax bill is more than 10% of the total income of
the taxpayer or, if living, of both spouses. "Total income" means the
H.
§ 352-41 CHARTER § 352-41
C:483
QUALIFIED SENIOR — Any person who shall satisfy the criteria in
Subsection A(1) or (2) or (3) and all of the criteria of Subsections B through
J, inclusive:
total of adjusted gross income per United States individual income tax
return, Form 1040, 1040-A (or the like), plus nontaxable income such
as nontaxed social security benefits, welfare benefits, child support
receipts, municipal bond interest receipts and other nontaxable items
of income;
Who completes the application process and who attests that the
individual meets or, if living, both spouses meet all of the qualifications
outlined above.
I.
Criteria:
(1) Who is age 65 or more if single or widowed;
If married, at least one taxpayer who has attained age 65, as long
as the taxpayer's spouse is at least 50 years of age;
(2)
Who, if widowed, is over age 50, whose spouse was at least age
65 prior to death, and either spouse was a participant under this
article prior to death;
(3)
A.
Whose home is a single-family home (condominium ownership not
eligible);
B.
Whose Portsmouth home is the taxpayer's principal residence and that
of the spouse (if living);
C.
Who is a resident of the State of Rhode Island for income tax purposes,
as is the spouse (if living);
D.
Who is not a registered voter of any other city, Town or political
subdivision of Rhode Island or any other state, nor is the spouse (if
living);
E.
Who has resided in the principal residence for the past seven years, as
has the spouse (if living);
F.
Whose real estate tax previously billed is not delinquent by more than
four quarters;
G.
Who would otherwise qualify but has been forced to relocate residence
through no fault of the taxpayer (e.g., in cases of fire, natural disaster
or taking of property by eminent domain by a state or local
government);
H.
Whose real estate tax bill is more than 10% of the total income of
the taxpayer or, if living, of both spouses. "Total income" means the
total of adjusted gross income per United States individual income tax
return, Form 1040, 1040-A (or the like), plus nontaxable income such
as nontaxed social security benefits, welfare benefits, child support
I.
§ 352-41 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 352-41
C:484
§ 352-42. Deferral.
§ 352-43. Application process.
§ 352-44. Recording of deferral; lien.
receipts, municipal bond interest receipts and other nontaxable items
of income;
Who completes the application process and who attests that the
individual meets or, if living, both spouses meet all of the qualifications
as outlined above.
J.
A. Upon proper application, approved by the Administrator or his/her
designee, the deferred amount will be deferred, with interest to be set
by the Portsmouth Town Council, until the occurrence of a disqualifying
event.
B. A deferral under this article shall not be disallowed if the owner/
applicant has only a life estate in the property or if the property is in the
name of a parent or one or more children or in a trust for the benefit of
the otherwise qualified resident and the owners submit an affidavit that
the qualified resident is the principal owner or present beneficiary and
title is held in that manner for estate planning purposes only.
C. A deferral is not allowed for any improvement for outbuildings, such as
garages or storage sheds, attached or not, to the principal residence
once application and acceptance to the tax deferral program occurs.
A. The taxpayer shall initially apply for eligibility in the tax deferment
program between the dates of November 1 through December 31 for
taxes assessed December 31 of that year. After initial approval, the
taxpayer must sign each year thereafter a statement attesting to the
fact that the taxpayer and spouse continue to qualify under the
provisions of this article.
B. Participation is optional, at the taxpayer's option.
C. Failure to file subsequent statements of eligibility, or the occurrence of
a disqualifying event of a temporary nature, or the elimination of a
disqualifying event that no longer applies, shall require reentry into the
program and full reapplication and recertification and shall nullify any
deferral for the tax year in which the disqualifying event occurred, and
past deferred amounts shall be due under § 352-45. In such case, the
tax shall be calculated as of the year of reentry into the program.
A. All properties subject to the deferral program will have a notice of tax
deferral registered and recorded with the Portsmouth Town Clerk.
Normal recording fees will apply.
§ 352-41 CHARTER § 352-44
C:485
§ 352-45. Payment of deferral; violations and penalties.
§ 352-46. Appeals.
Appeals of all decisions as to the application, administration, eligibility or
other matter relating to this article shall be made in writing according to
law.110
B. All taxes deferred and interest thereon shall constitute a lien on the real
estate for which the deferment was granted until paid in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
A. All deferrals must be paid in full within six months of a disqualifying
event in the case of a death of the legal owner of the property, at the
closing and conveyance in the event of a sale and within three months
of any other disqualifying event.
B. Failure to report the disqualifying event and/or to pay the deferral tax
when due will carry a maximum penalty of $100 per month, or portion
thereof, and applicable interest on the currently assessed tax. Interest
will be assessed and due in the same manner as other past due tax
receivables and will apply to all amounts previously deferred, as well as
the current amounts due.
110. Editor's Note: Original § 3, Sunset provision, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-09-22. This ordinance also provided that this article
is extended indefinitely.
§ 352-44 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 352-46
C:486
Chapter 358
TENT LICENSING
§ 358-1. License required for certain tents.
No tent exceeding 120 square feet in area shall be erected, maintained,
operated or used in the Town of Portsmouth except under a license issued
by the Portsmouth Town Council sitting as a Board of License
Commissioners. (For statutory requirement, see R.I.G.L. § 23-28.19-1, as
amended.)
§ 358-2. Application for license.
The license application form shall contain the name and address of the
applicant, the name and address of the owner of the land on which the tent
will be erected, the address of said land, the dates for which the license is
requested and a brief description of the tent and its proposed use.
§ 358-3. Items to accompany application.
The Town Clerk shall not accept any license application for presentation to
the Board of License Commissioners unless it is accompanied by written
approvals from the Town Building, Fire and Police Departments; by such
plans as any of such Departments shall deem necessary for purposes of
public safety; and by the license application fee.
§ 358-4. Grant or denial of license.
The Board of License Commissioners may grant or deny a license based on
considerations of public safety. It may grant a license for a shorter term
than sought and may issue licenses for the same tent and use for successive
terms.
§ 358-5. Inspections.
No license shall be issued until the Town Clerk has been informed that
a final inspection has been done by the Fire and Building Departments.
However, at the request of either of said Departments, in a case where the
tent will not be constructed or completed until after the office of the Town
Clerk is closed, the Town Clerk may issue the license to be physically held
by the Building Official or Fire Chief, who shall deliver it to the licensee
after final inspection.
§ 358-6. Exceptions.
These requirements shall not apply to tents erected for residential use in
connection with one-, two- and three-family private dwellings. (See R.I.G.L.
§ 23-28.1-2, as amended.)
§ 352-46 CHARTER § 358-7
C:487
§ 358-7. Fees.111
There shall be paid to the Fire Department an inspection fee of $30 per tent
and $50 per reinspection of a tent.
Chapter 364
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 364-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
BEACH, PARK, ATHLETIC OR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES OWNED BY
THE TOWN OF PORTSMOUTH — Any beach, park, athletic or recreational
facility, including, but not limited to, any playing field, ball field, basketball
court, tennis court, or playground, which is owned or operated by the Town
of Portsmouth, together with any area within 100 feet thereof owned by the
Town.
§ 364-2. Use of tobacco products prohibited.
Smoking and other uses of tobacco products are hereby prohibited at
any beach, park, athletic or recreational facility owned by the Town of
Portsmouth.
§ 364-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter may be ejected from the beach, park,
athletic or recreational facilities owned by the Town and/or may be fined not
more than $100, which sum shall be collected for the use of the Town.
Chapter 370
TRADE SHOWS
§ 370-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRADE SHOW — Any event in which manufacturers, wholesalers, and/or
retailers assemble to display or exhibit their wares and merchandise for
promotion and sale to the general public, including but not limited to art
shows, boat shows, antique shows and similar events. It shall not include
the promotion or sale of goods which takes place only as incidental to the
conducting of another event, such as a fair, festival or other entertainment,
the main purpose of which is not the promotion and sale of goods.
111. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 358-7 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 370-2
C:488
§ 370-2. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a trade show within the
Town of Portsmouth without first having obtained a license from the Town
Council.
§ 370-3. Scope.
The adoption of this chapter shall not authorize the conducting of trade
shows in any area where such use is prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance,112
nor shall its adoption or the issuance of the license exempt any land from
the requirement to apply to the Zoning Board of Review for a special
exception where required by the Zoning Ordinance or a variance.
§ 370-4. Fees.
Any person, firm or corporation which shall be granted a license shall,
prior to its issuance, pay to the Town Clerk, for the use of the Town, a
fee of $10 per exhibitor, not to exceed, however, the sum of $100 per
event; provided, however, that no fee shall be charged to any religious and
charitable societies and volunteer fire-fighting companies duly organized
and incorporated who conduct such a show for the purpose of furthering
their religious, benevolent or fire-fighting work.
§ 370-5. Payment of fees to Town.
All charges made and fees received under this chapter shall be paid to the
Town Treasurer for the use of the Town.
§ 370-6. Authority of Council to regulate shows.
As a condition precedent to the issuance of a license, the Council may
regulate the hours of the show, the means of ingress and egress, the number
of public safety officers (police and/or fire) required to protect the public
and such other matters as may be reasonably necessary to protect the
public health, welfare and morals. The Council may delegate the traffic,
police and fire regulating power to the Town Administrator. The licensee
shall, prior to the issuance of the license, deposit with the Town a sum
sufficient to reimburse the Town for the costs of officials needed to keep
order at the event.
§ 370-7. Inspections.
No license shall be issued until the premises to be used have been inspected
by the Fire Chief and Building Inspector and each has filed with the
licensing authority the certificates required by R.I.G.L. § 5-22-13, or any
amendments thereto. A fee of $10 shall be paid by the licensee prior to the
issuance of the license to cover the cost of the inspection by the Building
Inspector.
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Zoning.
§ 370-2 CHARTER § 370-8
C:489
§ 370-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall conduct a trade show without a license shall be
punished as provided by statute (R.I.G.L. § 5-22-18).
Chapter 375
TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development and subdivision
regulations — See Ch. 236.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 288.
§ 375-1. Establishment.
§ 375-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish Town policy and protective
regulations regarding the planting, maintenance, protection, preservation
and removal of public trees to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Portsmouth.
§ 375-3. Definitions.
Definitions of related terms used in this chapter and in educational
materials created by the Tree Commission can be found below:
ARBORIST — A person engaged in the professional practice of tree care,
licensed by the State of Rhode Island as a certified arborist.
CALIPER — The diameter of any tree trunk at breast height, 4 1/2 feet
above the ground.
DESTROY — Any intentional or negligent act which may reasonably be
expected to cause a tree to die within a period of three years, including but
not limited to damage inflicted upon the root system by machinery, storage
of materials to cause compaction, substantially changing the natural grade
A. There is hereby established in the Town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island,
an ordinance regulating the planting, maintaining, maintenance and
removal of trees in the public rights-of-way, parks and all public
property within the Town.
B. The Portsmouth Tree Commission is hereby established. The
Commission shall, together with the Tree Warden, recommend for Town
Council approval the establishment of regulations relating to the
planting, maintenance, protection and removal of trees on all public
property. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public
property within the Town and to any person, firm, corporation or public
or private utility.
§ 370-8 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 375-3
C:490
at the root system or around the trunk, excessive pruning or paving with
concrete, asphalt or other impervious materials.
DISEASED TREE — A tree or part thereof which has been blighted or
defaced, causing it to decline.
DRIPLINE — A vertical line extended from the outermost portion of a tree
canopy or crown to the ground.
PLANTING PLAN — A document detailing the proposed park or public
place, site, street widths, curbs, parking strips, driveways, sidewalks and
adjacent structures accurately defined to scale, the proposed location of
each tree, together with the location of each existing tree within the
proposed site in scaled relation to the other features of the plan, the species
of each and every tree proposed to be planted and those already existing
within the proposed site, either indicated on the plans or referenced with a
number with a key list.
PROTECTED TREE — Any public tree which is of such interest to the
Town because of its type, age, size or historical association that it shall be
protected pursuant to this chapter.
PRUNING — The removal of any branches greater than two inches in
diameter.
PRUNING STANDARDS — Those standards set forth by the International
Society of Arboriculture, Western Chapter, dated May 9, 1988, as amended.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — A tree or part of a tree that constitutes a hazard to
life or property, or harbors insects or disease that constitutes a potential
threat to other trees within the Town, or a health hazard to the citizens of
the Town.
PUBLIC TREE — All trees now or hereinafter growing in any public rightof-
way, park or public property within the Town, except those under the
jurisdiction or control of the State of Rhode Island or any department or
agency thereof.
REMOVAL — The uprooting or severing of the main trunk of the tree, or any
act that causes or can reasonably be expected to cause the tree to die.
REPLACEMENT TREE — Any tree that is planted to replace an existing
tree that must be or has been removed. Replacement trees must have a
minimum diameter breast height (DBH) of 2 1/2 to three inches or 12 to 14
feet in height. The Tree Warden may require a larger size or multiples of
trees based on the size and value of the tree(s) to be replaced.
TREE PIT — The hole dug in which the tree is to be placed for planting.
TREE TOPPING — The cutting back of limbs and stubs larger than three
inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
TREE WARDEN — The arborist appointed as the designated, qualified
official of the Town assigned to carry out the enforcement of this chapter as
well as additional duties under state law.
§ 375-3 CHARTER § 375-3
C:491
TRIMMING — The removal of nonessential branches less than two inches in
diameter.
§ 375-4. Tree Warden.
The Tree Warden shall be appointed by the Town Council. The Tree Warden
shall be an experienced arborist, certified by the State of Rhode Island.
The appointment and duties of the Tree Warden shall be in accordance
with R.I.G.L. Chapter 2-14, and as defined in R.I.G.L. § 2-14-5, and R.I.G.L.
Chapter 2-19, which governs the licensing of arborists.
§ 375-5. Tree Commission.
§ 375-6. Protection of public trees.
A. Composition and appointment. The Portsmouth Tree Commission shall
be composed of interested Town residents, up to a maximum of 20
persons. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business. The Tree Warden and a public works
representative shall serve as nonvoting members, ex officio. The Tree
Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson and such other officers
as it deems appropriate. Members of the Tree Commission shall be
appointed by the Town Council. As vacancies arise, the Town Clerk shall
publicly advertise for new members. All members of the Commission
shall serve without pay or compensation.
B. Duties. The Portsmouth Tree Commission shall:
(1) Act in an advisory role to the Town Council and the Tree Warden.
(2) In that capacity, do all acts necessary and proper to fulfill the
Town's tree programs, including the planting, care of and removal
of trees on public property in conjunction with the Town's
Department of Public Works and other related Town departments.
(3) Issue implementing guidelines based on recommendations of the
Tree Warden, subject to Town Council approval.
(4) Coordinate efforts by individual citizens, businesses, neighborhood
or charitable organizations and other groups wishing to donate
funds, volunteer work, provide information, or to contribute in any
other manner in order to protect, preserve and enhance the Town's
trees.
(5) Make recommendations to the Town Council on matters of tree
programs, educational programs or other related activities.
(6) Prepare a report annually for the Town Council summarizing the
activities of the Commission for the preceding year.
§ 375-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 375-6
C:492
A. As a general rule, the Town will ensure that public trees are properly
cared for. This will include spraying, pruning and fertilizing, when
necessary.
B. An individual citizen, however, may recommend a public tree that needs
care to the Tree Warden or to the Tree Commission. If it is determined
that the tree needs treatment, action will be taken by the Town.
C. No signs, symbols, wires or reflectors may be attached to public trees,
nor may public trees be carved, nailed or defaced. Trees on public
space shall not be chemically sprayed, pruned, cut, damaged, removed
or otherwise disturbed without the approval of the Tree Warden.
D. All public trees within 30 feet of any excavation, construction site or
street work shall be protected to the dripline throughout the length of
the project with a substantial frame or box not less than four feet high.
The developer/builder shall be responsible for compliance with this
requirement. The Tree Warden shall ensure compliance with this
provision.
E. No person shall deposit, store or maintain any soil, brick, sand,
concrete or any other materials that may impede the free passage of
water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any public tree growing therein,
except by written permission from the Tree Warden.
F. No person shall move any building or other large object that may injure
public trees or parts thereof without first obtaining written permission
from the Tree Warden.
G. Whenever it becomes necessary to remove a tree or group of trees in
connection with the paving of a sidewalk, or for the widening of a
portion of a street or highway, the Town shall replace the tree(s)
removed. Replacement trees shall meet the standards of size (as near
as possible), species and placement as the removed trees.
H. When a public tree is pruned or removed, all wood and branches shall
be removed expeditiously by the person(s) performing the work.
Stumps should be removed or ground down as a safety factor. When this
type of work is done, the Tree Warden shall be consulted by those doing
the work.
I. In accordance with state law (R.I.G.L. § 2-14-5), the Tree Warden may
enter upon private property when necessary to exercise care and
control. This affects trees or branches that overhang public roads or
grounds or trees that otherwise may threaten public safety. Other
powers of the Tree Warden will be as spelled out in Title 2, Chapter
2-14, of Rhode Island State Law (R.I.G.L. § 2-14-1 et seq.).
§ 375-6 CHARTER § 375-7
C:493
§ 375-7. Planting on public streets or places.
Any person desiring to plant a tree on a public street or in a public place
must follow all planting guidelines, including location and species, as
provided by the Tree Commission's public education literature.
§ 375-8. Protection of notable trees.
§ 375-9. Emergencies.
The provisions of this chapter may be waived by the Director of Public
Works, in consultation with the Tree Warden, in the case of emergencies,
such as winter storms, tropical storms, hurricanes or other natural or
man-made disasters, so that they in no way shall hinder private or public
works efforts to restore order to the Town of Portsmouth. All emergency
procedures shall, to the degree practical, follow the standards of this
chapter.
A. A "notable tree" is a public tree that possesses distinctive
characteristics such as great age or size, unique form or is of historical
significance.
B. Designation of public notable trees:
(1) The Tree Commission, upon the suggestion of the Tree Warden, a
member of the Commission or the recommendation of an individual
citizen, may designate a tree as a "notable tree."
(2) The criteria for this designation shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
(a) It is an outstanding specimen of a desirable species.
(b) It is one of the oldest or largest trees in the Town of
Portsmouth.
(c) It possesses distinctive form, size, age, location and/or
historical significance.
(3) After Tree Commission approval of a notable tree designation, the
Tree Commission shall maintain a list of these trees with their
specific locations and photographs. Copies shall be provided to the
Town Clerk and the Planning Board.
(4) Once a tree is designated a notable tree, it will be protected by the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 375-7 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 375-9
C:494
Chapter 382
VEHICLES, JUNKED OR ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 230. Motor vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 250.
§ 382-1. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be
deposited, stored or kept, in the open, on public or private property, a
dismantled, unserviceable, junked or worn-out vehicle (hereinafter "junk
vehicle"), unless a license for said storage has theretofore been obtained
from the Town Council or appropriate authority.
§ 382-2. Automobile storage yards prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or permit to be maintained an
automobile storage yard. For the purposes of this chapter, an "automobile
storage yard" is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous lots or parcels of land
under common ownership utilized for the storage, keeping or placement of
two or more motor vehicles which are neither duly registered according to
law, bear a current safety inspection certificate, nor are licensed pursuant
to this chapter.
§ 382-3. Notice to remove junk vehicles.
The owner of any junk vehicle shall remove same within 48 hours after
being ordered to do so by the Portsmouth Police Department. If the owner
is not known and cannot be readily ascertained, notice to remove may be
given by attaching such notice directly to the vehicle. The owner of any
parcel of land utilized as an automobile storage yard shall remove said
vehicles or otherwise cause said lot to comply with this chapter within 48
hours after being ordered to do so by the Portsmouth Police Department. If
the owner of said land cannot be identified and personally served with such
notice, the notice shall be mailed to the owner as listed on the records of
the Tax Assessor of the Town of Portsmouth at the address on file with that
office.
§ 382-4. Removal of junk vehicles from public highways.
If said junk vehicle is on a Town street or public highway, such forty-eighthour
notice shall be given by the Portsmouth Police Department; however,
if said vehicle constitutes a present hazard or unduly obstructs traffic or
ingress or egress to other public or private property, the Portsmouth Police
Department may cause the vehicle to be removed without any prior notice.
§ 375-9 CHARTER § 382-5
C:495
§ 382-5. Failure to remove vehicle.
Upon failure to remove any vehicle or vehicles within the time set forth
herein, the owner, lessee or other occupant of the premises or the
Portsmouth Police Department shall forthwith remove or cause to be
removed said vehicle from the location cited to a location provided for that
purpose by the Town of Portsmouth.
§ 382-6. Reclaiming vehicle.
The owner of any vehicle so removed may reclaim possession thereof from
the Town of Portsmouth by making application therefor within 30 days after
its receipt by the Town of Portsmouth upon providing the Town proof of the
availability of a lawful location to store said vehicle or other lawful plan
for disposition of said vehicle and paying to the Town of Portsmouth all
reasonable costs of removal, which shall be repaid to the person who paid
or incurred such charges, plus additional reasonable charges for storage of
said vehicle while in the possession of the Town.
§ 382-7. Sale of unclaimed vehicles.
If no claim for said aforedescribed vehicle is made within 30 days after
receipt thereof, the Town may sell said vehicle, and the proceeds thereof
shall be available to pay the reasonable costs of delivering same to the Town
if a claim be made by the person who paid such charges and the expense
of keeping and disposing of said vehicle. Any balance shall be paid into the
Town general fund.
§ 382-8. Liability for loss or damage.
Neither the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises from which any
aforedescribed vehicle shall be removed (if not the owner of the vehicle), his
or her servants or agents or the Town shall be liable for the loss or damage
to any vehicle while being removed or while in the possession of the Town
under the provisions hereof or as a result of any subsequent sale or other
disposition.
§ 382-9. Criteria for junked vehicles.
A. Dismantled, unserviceable, junked or worn-out vehicles as described
herein shall be deemed to include major parts thereof, including but not
limited to bodies and body parts, chassis, engines, transmissions, rear
ends, and the like.
B. In addition, a dismantled, unserviceable, junked or worn-out vehicle
shall include, but not be limited to, a vehicle upon which any of the
following conditions exist:
(1) Absence of any body part (inclusive of fenders) or any body part
(inclusive of fenders) which is rotted or dangerously damaged to
the extent that it may cause injury or damage to any passenger,
§ 382-5 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 382-9
C:496
§ 382-10. "Public property" defined.
The term "public property," as used herein, shall include property owned
by the Town or state, property acquired by the Town of Portsmouth at tax
sales and all streets and highways within the Town, whether they are public
highways or not.
§ 382-11. Nonapplicability.
This chapter shall not apply to the activities of persons, firms or
corporations licensed to operate junkyards, salvage yards, auto body repair
shops, automobile sales places or repair shops in furtherance of said
business and on the premises upon which said business is conducted.
§ 382-12. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the power of the Town
to remove or dispose of abandoned motor vehicles pursuant to Chapter 42
of Title 31 of the Rhode Island General Laws.
pedestrian or other vehicle if the subject vehicle is operated on the
highway;
(2) Any body part, frame, chassis, running board or floorboard rusted
or rotted to an extent which would allow excessive fumes to enter
the passenger compartment;
(3) Any passenger compartment door, motor compartment hood, trunk
lid or door which is missing or does not close and hold securely;
(4) Any cracked, broken, loose or sagging frame member;
(5) Any missing bumper;
(6) Any broken or missing lamp or light or a lamp or light not securely
fastened to the vehicle;
(7) Cracked passenger compartment glass which can be moved at the
crack, or absence of a windshield;
(8) Less than four mounted wheels with tires capable of maintaining
the required interior air pressure; and
(9) Absence of a fuel tank or insecurely attached fuel tank.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B(1) through (9),
inclusive, of this section, and subject to the provisions herein regarding
major parts of motor vehicles, any vehicle bearing a valid registration
tag and current inspection certificate shall not be deemed dismantled,
unserviceable, junked or worn out, unless said vehicle, in its current
state, is mechanically incapable of being operated.
§ 382-9 CHARTER § 382-13
C:497
§ 382-13. Issuance of licenses; fees.
Upon written application therefor, the Town Council may, for good cause
shown, issue a license for the storage of a junk vehicle or operation of
an automobile storage yard and, in issuing such licenses, may place such
conditions thereon as it deems just and appropriate under the totality of the
circumstances. Any license request for new applications will include a list
of abutters. The abutters shall be notified by the Town Clerk's office using
first-class mail, postage prepaid. The applicant is to supply the abutters
list to the Town Clerk's office. Renewal licenses will not require notice to
abutters. There shall be a nominal fee of $10 per initial license application
and no fee for renewals. Violation of the conditions of any license shall be a
violation subject to the same punishment as set forth in § 382-14 hereof. All
said licenses shall be limited to a term of not more than one year.
§ 382-14. Violations and penalties.113
Any person, firm or corporation in violation of this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, § 1-3, General
penalty.
Chapter 392
WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development and subdivision
regulations — See Ch. 236.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 336.
Zoning — See Ch. 405.
§ 392-1. Authority.
A. This chapter has been drafted in accordance with and under the
authority of the R.I.G.L. Title 45, Chapter 24.5-1 et seq. entitled
"Wastewater Management Districts," also identified as the "Rhode
Island Septic System Maintenance Act of 1987." This law sets forth the
basic powers and duties of a municipality in its operation of a
wastewater management district.
B. Nothing in this chapter replaces or precludes any obligation of the
owner to notify the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management ("RIDEM"), the Rhode Island Department of Health
("DOH"), the Coastal Resources Management Council ("CRMC"), or
their successors of on-site wastewater treatment systems' ("OWTS")
failures.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 382-13 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 392-2
C:498
§ 392-2. Findings.
The Portsmouth Town Council hereby finds the following evidence in
support of the establishment of an on-site Wastewater Management District
and ordinance:
§ 392-3. Purpose; applicability.
A. The legislative findings set forth in R.I.G.L. Title 45, Chapter 24.5-2 are
incorporated in this chapter by reference.
B. In accordance with the R.I.G.L. Title 45, Chapter 42-17.1-2, RIDEM's
rules and regulations for OWTS are set forth to provide minimum
standards for the location, design, construction and maintenance of
individual sewage disposal systems.
C. When properly located, designed, constructed and maintained, OWTSs
are an effective and environmentally sound method of wastewater
treatment and provide a viable and cost-effective alternative to
municipal sewers.
D. The cumulative effects of improperly maintained and malfunctioning
OWTSs contribute to the contamination of surface waters and
groundwaters and pose a risk to the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
E. In accordance with the R.I.G.L. Title 45, Chapter 45-24.5-3, municipally
created Wastewater Management Districts are designated to eliminate
and prevent the contamination of surface water and groundwater
caused by malfunctioning OWTSs through the implementation of OWTS
inspection and maintenance programs designed to operate as an
alternative to municipal sewer systems.
F. To be truly effective, municipally created Wastewater Management
Districts must operate in a spirit of coordination and cooperation with
RIDEM in order to accomplish the common goals of protecting the
public health and the quality of the environment.
G. The creation of a Town-wide Wastewater Management District is
consistent with and advances the goals of the Portsmouth
Comprehensive Community Plan to ensure the rural character of the
Town and the quality of the natural environment are not degraded and
the impacts of on-site wastewater treatment on the social, aesthetic and
cultural environment are minimized.
A. The declaration of purpose set forth in the R.I.G.L. Title 45, Chapter
45-24.5-3 is incorporated in this chapter by reference. The purpose of
this chapter is to establish the Portsmouth Wastewater Management
District (the "District") to ensure that all OWTSs within the District are
properly operated, regularly inspected, routinely maintained and
administratively managed to prevent system malfunction and to
operate as an alternative to municipal sewer systems.
§ 392-2 CHARTER § 392-3
C:499
§ 392-4. Definitions.
B. This chapter provides a framework for the efficient inspection, repair
and maintenance of OWTS within the District and recognizes the
homeowners' responsibility to ensure that their system is well
maintained and properly functioning.
C. Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to every owner of
property that has an OWTS of any type, including cesspools and holding
tanks, within the Town of Portsmouth.
A. Any terms not defined herein, and pertaining to OWTSs shall be
governed by the definition as it appears in the current RIDEM "Rules
Establishing Minimum Standards Relating to Location, Design,
Construction and Maintenance of On-site Wastewater Treatment
Systems," dated July 16, 2014, and as amended.
B. Any terms defined herein that do not appear in RIDEM's OWTS Rules,
indicated by an asterisk, are set forth by the Town of Portsmouth for the
purposes of implementation of this chapter.
ALTERNATIVE/EXPERIMENTAL TECHNOLOGY (or "A/E
TECHNOLOGY") — Any OWTS technology for which design parameters
are not specified in RIDEM's Rules, but has been demonstrated through
field testing, calculations and other engineering evaluations to comply
with performance standards consistent with RIDEM's OWTS Rules,
and for which a certification from RIDEM has been issued. RIDEM
maintains a list of approved A/E technology systems at
http://www.dem.ri.gov.
BUILDING SEWER — The pipe that begins outside the building
foundation wall and extends to the septic tank, the pipe that begins
outside the building foundation wall and extends to the grease tank, the
pipe from a grease tank to a septic tank, or the pipe carrying laundry
wastes directly to a leachfield.
CESSPOOL — Any buried chamber, including, but not limited to, any
perforated metal tank, perforated concrete vault or covered hollow or
excavation, which receives discharges of wastewater from a building
sewer for the purpose of collecting solids and discharging liquids to the
surrounding soil.
*DESIGN GUIDANCE — RIDEM design guidance established for septic
systems in the neighborhoods of Island Park and Portsmouth Park as
established in Design Guidance for OWTS Repairs — Island Park and
Portsmouth Park Neighborhoods, Portsmouth, effective date July 11,
2013, revision date January 9, 2015, and as amended.
DRAIN — Storm drains, foundation drains, and subsurface drains as
defined in the OWTS Rules.
EFFLUENT — Septage, water or other liquid, partially or completely
treated or in its natural state, flowing out of any component of an
§ 392-3 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 392-4
C:500
OWTS or flowing over the ground's surface or beneath the ground in
groundwater.
FAILED OWTS — Any OWTS that does not adequately treat and
disperse wastewater so as to create a public or private nuisance or
threat to public health or environmental quality, as evidenced by, but
not limited to, one or more of the following conditions:
GROUNDWATER TABLE — The upper surface of the zone of saturation
in an unconfined aquifer; includes a perched groundwater table.
*HANDBOOK — The current edition of the Rhode Island Department
of Environmental Management's Septic System Check-Up: The Rhode
Island Handbook for Inspection.
HOLDING TANK — A closed watertight structure used to contain
wastewater prior to being removed from the premises. A holding tank
does not discharge wastewater to the surface of the ground or to the
subsurface.
*INSPECTOR — A private OWTS inspector who is a registered system
inspector with the University of Rhode Island On-site Wastewater
(1) Failure to accept wastewater into the building sewer;
Discharge of wastewater to a basement; subsurface drain;
stormwater collection, conveyance, or treatment device; or
watercourse unless expressly permitted by RIDEM;
(2)
Wastewater rising to the surface of the ground over or near any
part of OWTS or seeping from the absorption area at any change in
grade, bank or road cut;
(3)
The top of the inlet or the top of the outlet for a septic tank,
distribution box, or pump tank is submerged;
(4)
The liquid depth in a cesspool is less than six inches from the inlet
pipe invert;
(5)
Pumping of the cesspool or septic tank is required more than two
times per year;
(6)
OWTS is shown to have contaminated a drinking water well,
watercourse, groundwater, surface water, wetlands and estuarine
waters;
(7)
If a septic tank, pump tank, distribution box, or cesspool is pumped
and groundwater seeps into it;
(8)
Any deterioration, damage, or malfunction relating to any OWTS
that would preclude adequate treatment and dispersal of
wastewater; or
(9)
Excessive solids are evident in the distribution box or distribution
lines.
(10)
§ 392-4 CHARTER § 392-4
C:501
Training Center or an equivalent training program both for
conventional and A/E systems (URI's INSP 100 and 200 courses).
INVERT — The lowest portion of the interior of a pipe or fitting.
*ISLAND PARK — The neighborhood bordered by the Sakonnet River
to the south and east, Boyd's Lane to the west and The Cove to the
north up to the bridge over the channel connecting The Cove with the
Sakonnet River.
LEACHFIELD — A group of one or more dispersal chambers or
trenches designed for the final treatment and dispersal of wastewater
into the underlying soil. The leachfield shall be held to mean the
horizontal and vertical lines circumscribing the outermost edges,
including the area between the chambers or trenches and the depth to
the bottom of stone.
MAINTENANCE (MAINTAIN) — The regular cleaning of any concrete
chamber, cesspool, septic tank, building sewer, distribution lines or any
other component of an OWTS for the purpose of removing accumulated
liquid, scum or sludge. The term "maintenance" shall also be held
to include regularly required servicing or replacement of any related
mechanical, electrical, or other component equipment.
*MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A current operation and
maintenance contract between an OWTS owner and a manufacturerapproved
service provider.
ON-SITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM (OWTS) — Any system
of piping, tanks, dispersal areas, alternative toilets or other facilities
designed to function as a unit to convey, store, treat or disperse
wastewater by means other than discharge into a public wastewater
system.
OWNER — Any person who holds legal title to any real property; or
has possession or control of any real property through any agent,
executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian
of the estate of a holder of a legal title. Each such person is bound to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
*OWTS INSPECTIONS — One of three types of OWTS inspections
undertaken to gather baseline information, identify a failed OWTS, to
assess maintenance needs and to determine the overall condition of an
OWTS.
FIRST MAINTENANCE INSPECTION — The initial inspection
performed on an OWTS and system site to assess whether any
repairs and/or replacement are necessary. The septic tank and/or
other components of the system are usually pumped as part of this
inspection to facilitate the evaluation of the current condition of the
OWTS. First maintenance inspections involve the location of OWTS
components and more detailed data gathering that are not usually
necessary for subsequent routine inspections.
(1)
§ 392-4 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 392-4
C:502
*PORTSMOUTH PARK — The neighborhood bordered by Morningside
Lane to the south, East Main Road and Chase Road to the west, Boyd's
Lane to the north, and the Sakonnet River to the east.
REPAIR — Any work performed on an OWTS in order to mend or
renovate a specific defect or deficiency after the failure, injury,
deterioration or partial destruction of a previously existing OWTS or
component thereof as permitted by RIDEM. A repair shall include any
upgrade or modification of an OWTS (e.g., replacement of a cesspool).
A repair shall not include any work performed on an existing OWTS that
increases the flow capacity of the system.
*RIDEM — The State of Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management or its successor organization.
SEPTAGE — Any solid, liquid or semi-solid removed from septic tanks,
cesspools, privies, domestic wastewater holding tanks or other similar
on-site wastewater treatment systems.
*SEPTAGE TRANSPORTER — Any person lawfully authorized to
transport septage.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge
of wastewater from a building sewer, and is designed and constructed
to permit the deposition of settled solids, the digestion of the matter
deposited, and the discharge of the liquid portion into the next
treatment component or distribution box.
STORM DRAIN — Any pipe or structure designed to collect, carry and
divert surface water runoff.
STRUCTURE — Any residence (as defined herein), building, garage,
shack, trailer or other permanent or semi-permanent facility, whether
commercial or noncommercial in use, which is proposed to be placed or
has been built or otherwise placed on a parcel of real property.
TRANSFER — A transfer of real property except between the following
relationships:
FUNCTIONAL INSPECTION — An inspection used to determine
the overall condition and functioning of an OWTS and using
standard RIDEM-approved flow trial methods, evaluate whether a
system is adequate to serve the wastewater treatment needs of the
household and to meet the design guidance, if applicable. This type
of inspection may use standard dye-tracing methods if needed to
confirm suspected septic bypasses or seeps where identified.
(2)
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE INSPECTION — An inspection
performed at a period of time after the first maintenance inspection
of an OWTS and system site to determine the need for pumping,
establish future inspections schedules and to assess whether any
repairs and/or replacement are necessary.
(3)
(1) Between current spouses;
§ 392-4 CHARTER § 392-4
C:503
§ 392-5. Program administration.
*VIOLATION — Failure to comply with and adhere to the rules and
regulations set forth in this chapter.
WASTEWATER — Human or animal excremental liquid or substance,
putrescible animal or vegetable matter or garbage and filth, including,
but not limited to, water discharged from toilets, bathtubs, showers,
laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks, and dishwashers. Both
blackwater and graywater are considered wastewater under this
chapter.
*WASTEWATER APPEALS BOARD — A five-member board appointed
by the Town Council to hear appeals of decisions of the Wastewater
Manager. Tenure and rules of conduct of the Board shall be determined
by the Town Council at the time of the Board's appointment. The Board
shall elect, at a minimum, a Chairman and a recording secretary to take
responsibility for all administrative duties.
*WASTEWATER MANAGER — The Town employee whose duty it is
to supervise the day-to-day administration of the Wastewater
Management District and the provisions of this chapter. The
Wastewater Manager or his/her designee shall serve as the
enforcement officer pursuant to the authority granted under this
chapter and any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. The
Wastewater Manager shall report directly to the Town Administrator
and be subject to direction and management by the Town
Administrator.
(2) Between parents and their children;
(3) Between full siblings; or
Where the grantor transfers the real property to be held in a
revocable or irrevocable trust, where at least one of the designated
beneficiaries is of the first degree of relationship to the grantor.
(4)
A. Boundaries and jurisdiction. The Wastewater Management District
shall encompass the entire Town of Portsmouth. Under this chapter, the
Town shall have jurisdiction to ensure the proper inspection, operation
and maintenance of all existing and future OWTSs and the phased
removal of all cesspools and unpermitted systems within the District
per § 392-6A in this chapter.
B. Administrative responsibilities.
(1) The day-to-day administration and enforcement of the Wastewater
Management District and the provisions of this chapter shall be the
responsibility of the Wastewater Manager. The Wastewater
Manager shall report directly to the Town Administrator.
(2) The Town Administrator shall develop the qualification
requirements for the Wastewater Manager. At a minimum, the
§ 392-4 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 392-5
C:504
Wastewater Manager, or his/her designee, should have a
demonstrated competency in the areas of soil science, OWTS
functioning, inspection and repair procedures, including
alternative/experimental technology, and shall have attended and
passed the courses to be accredited through the University of
Rhode Island On-site Wastewater Training or an equivalent training
program both for conventional and A/E systems (URI's INSP 100
and 200 courses) within six months of his/her appointment
confirmation by the Town Council.
(3) Should the Wastewater Manager, by reason of conflict of interest or
extended illness, be unable to act in a specific situation, the Town
Administrator may appoint a designee to act on his/her behalf.
(4) The Tax Collector shall be responsible for collecting all fees and
fines associated with this chapter. The Tax Collector may attach a
lien on the property for any unpaid fees and fines to enforce the
payment of such fees or fines.
(5) A five-member Wastewater Appeals Board shall be appointed by the
Town Council to hear appeals of decisions of the Wastewater
Manager.
C. Powers and duties of the Wastewater Manager. It shall be the duty of
the Wastewater Manager, without limitation, to:
(1) Supervise the administration of this chapter.
(2) Develop any and all rules and regulations necessary for the
implementation of this chapter for review and approval by the Town
Council.
(3) Render decisions regarding the rights and obligations of any owner
of property that is subject to the requirements of this chapter.
(4) Establish and manage a pump out/inspection schedule to ensure
every septic system in Portsmouth undergoes a first maintenance
inspection and subsequent regular routine maintenance
inspections.
(5) Issue notices of violation and levy fines pursuant to this chapter.
(6) Contract, through the Town Administrator, for services of licensed
septage transporters, private OWTS inspectors, licensed OWTS
installers and others as necessary.
(7) Provide for the passage of authorized personnel onto private
property when necessary and in accordance with the notice
provisions of this chapter for the purpose of investigations, periodic
inspections, pumping, maintenance and repair of OWTSs as
necessary.
§ 392-5 CHARTER § 392-5
C:505
§ 392-6. OWTS inspection and maintenance.
(8) Provide technical and administrative assistance to homeowners on
all matters pertaining to OWTS maintenance, repair, upgrade and
replacement.
(9) Maintain a list of inspectors and licensed septage transporters and
make such list available to property owners for the purpose of
arranging the inspection of their own OWTS.
(10) Maintain an electronic database of available information for each
on-site septic system in the Wastewater Management District along
with timeline tracking of system inspections and the status of
violations of this chapter and the replacement of failed systems.
(11) Enforce the phased removal of all cesspools and unpermitted
systems in the District per the timetables established in § 392-6A.
A. Purpose of the OWTS inspection program.
(1) The purpose of the OWTS inspection program for each OWTS in the
District is to determine:
(a) The overall condition of the system and whether the required
permits for the system are in place;
(b) When and at what frequency subsequent inspections should be
performed;
(c) The date of the next inspection;
(d) The need for system repair or replacement;
(e) Where appropriate, whether the system conforms to RIDEM
design guidance;
(f) Whether a system has failed; and
(g) Where required by this chapter, the system's functionality.
(2) Information from the inspections will also be used to complete a
Town-wide OWTS inventory and to track system inspections,
maintenance and upgrades.
B. General program description, requirements, and procedures.
(1) Each OWTS within the District shall be required to have a first
maintenance inspection, or baseline inspection. This initial baseline
inspection shall meet the criteria set forth in the Septic System
Checkup: The Rhode Island Handbook for Inspection (the
"Handbook"). The inspection should reflect critical site conditions
such as high groundwater and is designed to assess the condition of
the OWTS, and to determine whether any repairs and/or
replacement is necessary. This initial baseline inspection involves
§ 392-5 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 392-6
C:506
some data gathering and locating of system components not
usually necessary for subsequent routine inspections. If a septic
system is found to be a cesspool or if required permits for the
system are not in place, a determination shall be made as to
whether the system is within 50 feet of any component of a Town or
state storm drain system to determine compliance with § 392-6A of
this chapter. At the time of this initial inspection, the owner of the
OWTS shall provide the inspector with any pertinent information
the owner may have regarding the use, age, location, maintenance
history, design, plat and lot number, RIDEM and/or CRMC permit
number, engineering plans, etc., of the OWTS. For the
neighborhoods of Island Park and Portsmouth Park, the first
maintenance inspection must be sufficient to document and
evaluate compliance with RIDEM design guidance for these
neighborhoods and compliance with § 392-6A of this chapter. The
first maintenance inspection shall be accompanied by a system
pump out in order to determine before-and-after pump out
conditions.
(2) A functional inspection shall be conducted instead of a first
maintenance inspection for each OWTS within the District:
(a) At the point of sale or transfer if prior to the inspection phasing
schedule referenced in § 392-6B(4); or
(b) If the system is unpermitted and is less than 200 feet from a
coastal feature or less than 50 feet from a Town or state-owned
storm drain; or
(c) As needed at the discretion of the inspector or Wastewater
Manager at the time of inspection.
(3) For the neighborhoods of Island Park and Portsmouth Park, the
functional inspection, if required, must be sufficient to document
and evaluate compliance with RIDEM design guidance for these
neighborhoods and compliance with § 392-6A of this chapter. The
functional inspection shall be accompanied by a system pump out
in order to determine before-and-after pump out conditions.
(4) First maintenance inspections or functional inspections of all
OWTSs within the District will take place by December 31, 2022, in
accordance with an inventory and inspection phasing schedule
developed by the Wastewater Manager and the Planning
Department. First maintenance or functional inspections of all
OWTSs in the Island Park and Portsmouth Park neighborhoods will
take place by July 1, 2017. The remainder of Town will be divided
into management areas with the goal of completing approximately
800 inspections per year. The inspections shall begin in areas of the
Town identified as having a dense concentration of cesspools, a
history of OWTS failure, high seasonal OWTS use, or frequent
pumping. The next inspections will be in areas of known high
§ 392-6 CHARTER § 392-6
C:507
seasonal groundwater conditions or areas adjacent to other critical
natural resources and finally in areas not included in the above.
(5) OWTS owners who have an alternative/experimental technology
system, an active, valid maintenance agreement recorded in the
Town Clerk's office, and documentation that the OWTS is
monitored and maintained by a professional service provider, are
exempt from the first maintenance inspection requirements.
Annual service records shall be submitted to the Wastewater
Manager and may substitute for subsequent routine inspections as
long as the maintenance agreement remains valid and in force. In
Island Park and Portsmouth Park, the Wastewater Manager,
examining records on file in Town Hall, shall determine compliance
with the design guidance and report such to the RIDEM Office of
Water Resources OWTS Program.
(6) If a property owner has had an inspection performed by an
inspector within one year prior to being required to do so by this
chapter, and the inspector completes and signs the Town-required
form, the system need not undergo a functional or first
maintenance inspection. A schedule for subsequent routine
maintenance inspections will be established for such systems by
the Wastewater Manager per § 392-6D(2) of this chapter. In Island
Park and Portsmouth Park, the Wastewater Manager, examining
records on file in Town Hall, shall determine compliance with the
design guidance and report such to the RIDEM Office of Water
Resources OWTS Program.
(7) After an OWTS has undergone a functional or first maintenance
inspection, the owner will receive an inspection report from the
Wastewater Manager or his/her designee detailing the condition of
the system and a scheduled date for subsequent routine
maintenance inspections. All costs of inspections, including any
pumping and/or incidental maintenance, shall be the responsibility
of the OWTS owner.
(8) If a functional or first maintenance or routine maintenance
inspection reveals a failed OWTS or cesspool subject to the Rhode
Island Cesspool Act, the Wastewater Manager shall send a copy of
the inspection form to the Portsmouth Building Official and the
RIDEM Office of Water Resources OWTS Program and shall issue a
notice of violation requiring the property owner to submit an OWTS
application to RIDEM within a specified timeframe, and to
implement the immediate temporary measures required pursuant
to § 392-6H(3).
C. Who may inspect.
(1) All OWTSs must be inspected by an OWTS inspector as defined in
this chapter. All inspections shall follow the criteria and procedures
outlined in the handbook.
§ 392-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 392-6
C:508
(2) An inspector must satisfactorily complete a training course in the
use of the handbook through the University of Rhode Island's Onsite
Wastewater Training (OWT) Center and must at a minimum
have attended and passed the courses to be accredited through the
University of Rhode Island On-site Wastewater Training or an
equivalent training program both for conventional (URI's INSP 100
course) and, if applicable, innovative systems (URI's INSP 200
course). The Wastewater Manager shall also be qualified to
perform inspections, but shall only do so in special circumstances.
To inspect systems with A/E technology an inspector, in addition to
the above, must satisfactorily complete the course in alternative
and experimental system operation and maintenance offered
through the University of Rhode Island's On-site Wastewater
Training (OWT) Center or similar program approved by the Town.
(3) The Wastewater Manager shall maintain a list of inspectors and
licensed septage transporters and make such lists available to
property owners for the purpose of arranging the inspection of
their own OWTSs. The Wastewater Manager reserves the right to
remove an inspector or septage transporter from the list if the
inspections and subsequent reports or pump out activities are not
performed in accordance with the criteria outlined in the handbook
and this chapter.
D. Inspection frequency.
(1) Functional or first maintenance inspections shall take place in
accordance with the inspection phasing schedule referenced in
§ 392-6B(4), All OWTS owners will be mailed notification of the
requirement for a functional or first maintenance inspection, along
with a list of approved inspectors and OWTS educational material.
OWTS owners will have 60 days after receipt of this notification to
have the functional or first maintenance inspection performed.
(2) Subsequent routine maintenance inspections shall take place once
every five years or more frequently if required by the Wastewater
Manager. Subsequent routine maintenance inspections for
cesspools, including a pump out, shall take place once every two
years unless otherwise indicated in the Wastewater Manager's
functional or first maintenance inspection report. Subsequent
routine maintenance inspections for holding tank systems,
including a system pump out, shall take place annually. Routine
maintenance inspections for systems other than cesspools and
holding tanks need not include a pump out, unless recommended
by the previous inspection or if the combined depth of the sludge
and scum layer in the septic tank is greater than 25% of the depth
of the tank. OWTS owners will have 60 days after notification to
have a routine maintenance inspection performed.
E. Inspection forms and reports.
§ 392-6 CHARTER § 392-6
C:509
(1) Inspectors must use the Town-authorized and RIDEM-approved
field inspection forms for all inspections. Forms shall be provided
by the Wastewater Manager. A copy of all completed field
inspection forms shall be given by the inspector to the OWTS owner
and to the Wastewater Manager within five days of inspection.
(2) The Wastewater Manager shall keep the completed inspection
forms on file (electronically stored) for each OWTS inspected and
shall provide such forms to RIDEM upon request.
(3) After an OWTS has undergone an inspection and the Wastewater
Manager has reviewed the field inspection form, the owner will
receive an inspection report from the Wastewater Manager or his/
her designee detailing the condition of the system, any
maintenance recommendations, and a scheduled date for
subsequent routine maintenance inspections. In Island Park and
Portsmouth Park, the inspection report shall also indicate whether
the OWTS meets the design guidance. All inspection reports shall
be stored electronically and provided to RIDEM upon request.
(4) The Town shall summarize and submit to RIDEM the results of all
inspections in the Island Park and Portsmouth neighborhoods no
later than December 31, 2017.
F. OWTS maintenance and owner's responsibility.
(1) The OWTS owner shall assume all responsibility for hiring a
licensed septage transporter and inspector to complete the
inspection procedures directed by the Wastewater Manager within
the time frame required.
(2) OWTS owners who have an A/E technology system are required to
have a maintenance agreement recorded in the Town Clerk's office
and must provide documentation to the Wastewater Manager that
the OWTS is monitored and maintained by a professional inspector
on an annual basis.
G. Changes in inspection schedule. The Wastewater Manager, upon
written notification to the OWTS owner, shall have the authority to
change the inspection schedule of an OWTS, where such a change is
deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the system. Likewise,
the OWTS homeowner may petition the Wastewater Manager to alter
the inspection schedule. The OWTS owner must demonstrate, through
the use of appropriate site data and household information, that such a
change in the schedule would still ensure the proper operation of the
OWTS and fulfill the intent of this chapter. Information to be used by a
homeowner in the petition may include, but is not limited to, OWTS
inspection records and site data, such as soils, water table, household
information, seasonal use, water use and proximity to a critical
resource. For OWTS in Island Park or Portsmouth Park, any change in
inspection schedule must be approved by RIDEM.
§ 392-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 392-6
C:510
H. Immediate need to pump or implement other immediate temporary
actions.
(1) If an inspection or other evidence reveals that an OWTS requires
immediate pumping, the Wastewater Manager shall immediately
notify the homeowner. The Wastewater Manager will attempt to
contact the owner by phone and send the owner a written notice by
certified mail, allowing the owner five working days to pump the
system, and to present evidence of such pumping to the
Wastewater Manager in the form of a receipt from a licensed
septage transporter. The Wastewater Manager will also send a copy
of this written notice to RIDEM.
(2) In the event of a system failure that poses an immediate public
health and/or environmental hazard, and where the Wastewater
Manager has been unable to contact the owner using all reasonable
means, the Wastewater Manager is hereby authorized to enter
private property without the consent of the property owner, and to
effectuate a pump out and/or immediate repairs to the system, at
the owner's expense.
(3) The Wastewater Manager is also hereby authorized to direct the
OWTS owner to effect immediate temporary measures to redirect
flow, provide temporary mobile sanitation, isolate the
contamination from human contact or any other measures and
actions as the Wastewater Manager deems appropriate until the
condition is remedied. Failure on the part of the OWTS owner to
comply with any notices or directions issued under § 392-6H shall
be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(4) If observation or other evidence reveals an OWTS may be
malfunctioning but the situation does not require immediate
pumping or does not pose an immediate public health and/or
environmental hazard, the Wastewater Manager is hereby
authorized to direct the OWTS owner to have a functional
inspection of the system performed by a specified date.
I. Septage disposal. Septage or contents pumped from an OWTS shall be
discharged at a state-approved septage disposal facility.
J. Cesspools and unpermitted systems.
(1) Subsequent to the functional or first baseline inspection, all
cesspools and unpermitted systems in the Town of Portsmouth shall
be inspected every two years.
(2) Cesspools and unpermitted systems located within 50 feet of a
drain. All cesspools and unpermitted systems in the Town of
Portsmouth within 50 feet of a Town or state storm drain must be
replaced by the earlier of the following:
(a) Immediately, if the system is determined to be failed;
§ 392-6 CHARTER § 392-6
C:511
(b) Prior to the deadline specified in R.I.G.L § 23-19.15 (the Rhode
Island Cesspool Act of 2007), if applicable and as amended;
(c) Within 12 months of the date of sale or transfer of the property;
or
(d) Prior to January 1, 2020.
(3) All other cesspools and unpermitted systems. All other cesspools
and unpermitted systems in the Town of Portsmouth must be
replaced by the earlier of the following:
(a) Immediately, if the system is determined to be failed;
(b) Prior to the deadline specified in R.I.G.L § 23-19.15 (the Rhode
Island Cesspool Act of 2007), if applicable and as amended;
(c) Within 12 months of the date of sale or transfer of the property;
or
(d) Prior to January 1, 2025.
K. Holding tanks.
(1) Holding tank owners must have the holding tank inspected
annually by an approved inspector. The tank shall be pumped
completely as part of the annual inspection. The inspector shall
certify in writing, at minimum, the integrity of the tank, alarm and
telemetry functioning, and that the system has not been bypassed
or otherwise tampered with. Inspection results shall be submitted
by the inspector to the Wastewater Manager and to the RIDEM
Office of Water Resources as required by the RIDEM holding tank
policy. Failure to complete inspections and pump outs in
accordance with this section shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
(2) All holding tank owners are responsible for maintaining a regular
pump out schedule as needed and shall maintain records of pump
outs from the holding tank for the most recent four years. These
records shall be provided to the Wastewater Manager and/or
RIDEM upon request. All pump out receipts shall include the date
and volume pumped during each service visit and shall be reported
to the Wastewater Manager by both the holding tank owner and by
the licensed septage transporter.
(3) All holding tank owners are required to hold a valid pumping
contract for the holding tank with a licensed septage transporter at
all times. It is the owner's responsibility to provide the Wastewater
Manager and RIDEM with a copy of this pumping contract.
(4) If the number of pump outs exceeds 12 in any calendar year, the
Wastewater Manager shall notify RIDEM.
§ 392-6 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 392-7
C:512
§ 392-7. Enforcement.
A. The purpose of this Section is to provide an efficient means of
alleviating the public health and environmental problems associated
with failed OWTSs and noncompliance with the inspection
requirements of this chapter. It is also designed to provide the owners
of failed systems with the opportunity for technical and administrative
assistance in repairing their failed systems. Failure to comply with any
requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a violation. The
Wastewater Manager shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Failure to apply. Failure to submit an OWTS application to RIDEM for
repairs to or replacement of a failed system or a cesspool subject to the
Rhode Island Cesspool Act within the time frame established in a notice
of violation shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Town
enforcement shall be limited to failure to submit an OWTS application
and to implement the immediate temporary measures required
pursuant to § 392-6H(3) The Wastewater Manager shall notify RIDEM
of said noncompliance, and RIDEM shall be responsible for further
enforcement against said OWTS owners for the failure to repair or
replace.
C. Failure to pump and inspect.
(1) Failure to have an OWTS pumped and inspected as directed by the
Wastewater Manager and/or as required by this chapter shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter, and the Wastewater Manager
shall take appropriate enforcement action, including issuance of a
notice of violation seeking injunctive relief and penalties as
described in § 392-7G and H of this chapter.
(2) If proof of system pumping and inspection is not received by the
Wastewater Manager within 60 days of notification, the Wastewater
Manager may, after written notice to the owner and after no
response or appeal within two weeks on the part of the OWTS
owner, hire an inspector and licensed septage transporter to
complete the required activity, and the OWTS owner will be billed
by the Town. The OWTS owner will be notified by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of the intended date and time of such
actions. The bill will include the actual cost of pumping and
inspection as well as associated administrative costs.
D. Failure to pay bill. Failure to pay a bill incurred by the Wastewater
Manager for the pumping and inspection of the OWTS shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter and constitute a lien on the owner's property.
The OWTS owner shall be responsible for any associated interest,
administrative and court costs.
E. Failure to replace a cesspool or unpermitted system. Failure to cause
the removal of a cesspool or unpermitted system per the timetables
outlined in § 392-6A above shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
§ 392-7 CHARTER § 392-7
C:513
F. Failure specific to holding tanks. Failure of a holding tank owner to
provide holding tank pump out receipts including the date and volume
pumped during each service visit and provide a copy of a current valid
pumping contract with a licensed septage transporter to the
Wastewater Manager shall be deemed violations of this chapter.
G. Notice of violation. The Wastewater Manager may issue a notice of
violation to any owner of an OWTS deemed to be in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter. The notice shall be in writing and shall be
issued by regular mail, and by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and contain an explanation of the nature of the violation, required
actions, any assistance that is available from the Town, a reasonable
time frame for compliance, and the possible consequences for
noncompliance.
H. Penalties. Any OWTS owner may be subject to a penalty of not more
than $100 per violation per day for noncompliance with any provision of
this chapter. Each day of continuing violation shall constitute a separate
and distinct violation. Fines issued under this chapter shall not exceed
$500 per day for combined violations of this chapter. Each day of a
continuing violation constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
I. Administrative conference. All OWTS owners are encouraged to resolve
disputed notices of violation or inspection reports issued by the
Wastewater Manager or inspection forms completed by inspectors at an
informal administrative level before appealing to the Wastewater
Appeals Board. Any owner of an OWTS who is aggrieved by any action
or finding of the Wastewater Manager or inspector shall have the right
to an administrative conference. Request for an administrative
conference shall be submitted in writing to the Portsmouth Town Clerk
who shall in turn notify the Wastewater Manager to convene the
meeting. The request shall be in writing, within 30 days of the disputed
action and shall state clearly the factual and/or legal issue(s) or
decision to be resolved, the reason for requesting the conference, and
the relief sought. Representatives at the administrative conference
shall include the Wastewater Manager, the Building Official, the
inspector, if needed, the Town Administrator and a designated member
of the Town Council. An administrative conference shall be convened
within 30 days following the request and earlier whenever possible. A
written consent agreement, signed by the Town and the OWTS owner,
shall outline the specifics of any agreement developed as a result of an
administrative conference.
J. Hearings and appeals.
(1) Any owner of an OWTS who receives a notice of violation of this
chapter shall have the right to a hearing before a quorum of the
Wastewater Appeals Board. A request for such a hearing must be
made within 30 days of receipt of the notice, and shall be filed with
the Town Clerk's office.
§ 392-7 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 392-7
C:514
(2) The appeal shall be in writing and shall state clearly the factual
and/or legal issue(s) or decision that is being appealed, the reason
for the appeal and the relief sought.
(3) Upon receipt of an appeal, The Town Clerk shall notify the
Wastewater Appeals Board who in turn shall require the
Wastewater Manager to transmit forthwith to the Wastewater
Appeals Board all papers, documents and plans, or a true copy
thereof, constituting the record of the action which is being
appealed.
(4) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
being appealed. Under no circumstances, however, shall an OWTS
that presents an imminent or potential endangerment to the
environment and/or the public's health be allowed to continue to do
so during the appeal process.
(5) The Wastewater Appeals Board shall schedule a hearing on such an
appeal within 60 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. Notice of
the hearing shall be sent to the appellant at least 10 days prior to
the date set.
(6) A quorum is hereby defined as a minimum of three Wastewater
Appeals Board members.
(7) At the hearing, the appellant and any other interested party shall
be permitted to present evidence and argument on all issues
involved.
(8) The Wastewater Appeals Board shall cause minutes to be kept of
each hearing, and shall provide for an audio recording of each
hearing. Hearings may be recorded by stenographer at the request
of any party, provided that said party pays for the stenographer and
the transcript.
(9) Any final order and/or decision by the Wastewater Appeals Board
shall be stated on the record at the conclusion of the hearing and
shall be made in writing. The final order and/or decision shall
include findings of fact and conclusions of law, separately stated.
All final orders and/or decisions shall be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the appellant and shall be recorded in
the Town Clerk's office. The Wastewater Appeals Board final order
and/or decision shall be considered a final administrative action for
purposes of judicial review.
(10) In exercising its powers, the Wastewater Appeals Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm
wholly or partly and may modify the order, requirement, decision,
or determination appealed from and may make any orders,
requirements, decisions, or determinations that ought to be made,
and to that end has the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 392-7 CHARTER § 392-7
C:515
K. Appeals to District Court.
(1) Any person or owner aggrieved by a decision of the Wastewater
Appeals Board may seek judicial review of the decision.
(2) Proceedings for review are instituted by the filing of a complaint in
the Second Division District Court within 30 days of the date the
decision was issued.
(3) The filing of a complaint shall not stay the decision of the
Wastewater Appeals Board. The Wastewater Appeals Board may
grant, or the Court may order, a stay upon appropriate terms.
(4) Within 30 days after service of the complaint, or within further time
allowed by the Court, the Wastewater Appeals Board shall transmit
to the Clerk of the Court the entire record of the proceedings under
review.
(5) If, before the date set for hearing, application is made to the Court
for leave to present additional evidence and it is shown to the
satisfaction of the Court that the additional evidence is material
and that there were good reasons for failure to present it in the
proceeding before the Wastewater Appeals Board, the Court may
order that the additional evidence be taken before the Wastewater
Appeals Board upon conditions determined by the Court. The
Wastewater Appeals Board may modify its findings and decision by
reason of the additional evidence and shall file that evidence and
any modifications, new findings or decisions with the District
Court.
(6) The review shall be conducted by the Court without a trial and shall
be confined to the records. Only in cases of alleged irregularities in
the procedure before the Wastewater Appeals Board not shown on
the record, proof thereof may be taken by the Court. The Court,
upon request, shall hear oral argument and receive written briefs.
(7) The Court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the
Wastewater Appeals Board as to the weight of the evidence on
questions of fact. The Court may affirm the decision of the
Wastewater Appeals Board or remand the case for further
proceedings, or it may reverse or modify the decision if substantial
rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, inferences, conclusions or decisions are:
(a) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
(b) In excess of statutory authority of the Wastewater Appeals
Board;
(c) Made upon unlawful procedure;
(d) Affected by other error of law;
§ 392-7 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 392-7
C:516
§ 392-8. Financing.
§ 392-9. Education.
(e) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative and
substantial evidence on the whole record; or
(f) Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by an abuse of
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
A. Fines collected. Any funds collected in the course of implementing this
chapter shall be kept as an enterprise account, separate from the
Town's general fund, to be used in furtherance of the purposes of this
chapter.
B. Program financing. The Town Council shall have the authority to raise
funds for the administration, operation, contractual obligations, and
services of the District.
C. Septic loan program. The Town under the authority of the State
Legislature shall have the authority to issue bonds or notes, or to
receive grants for the purpose of establishing a revolving fund. This
fund may be used to make low-interest loans or grants available to
qualified property owners for the improvement, correction, or
replacement of a failed OWTS. The Finance Director, in conjunction
with the Wastewater Manager, Planning Department and Town
Administrator shall establish specific criteria to define eligibility for
grants or loans. These criteria are subject to approval by the Town
Council.
D. Pump out subsidies. The Town shall have the authority to establish a
pump out subsidy program to incentivize OWTS owners to maintain a
proper pump out schedule under the direction of the Wastewater
Manager. Criteria and funding sources for this program are at the
discretion of the Town Council.
A. A public education program shall be established and overseen by the
Wastewater Manager, with technical assistance from other appropriate
sources, to inform people about the benefits and goals of the
Wastewater Management District and this chapter. The public
education program may include public presentations, public awareness
programs, written materials, and other program incorporating print,
radio, or television media as necessary and appropriate. The
educational program shall include, but not be limited to the following:
(1) The operations and management framework of the Wastewater
Management District;
(2) The proper operation and maintenance of OWTS;
(3) The proper disposal of hazardous waste, including household
hazardous waste;
§ 392-7 CHARTER § 392-9
C:517
Chapter 397
YARD SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 230. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 274.
§ 397-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, or allow to be conducted upon
their property, a yard sale, unless such person has first obtained a license
therefor.
§ 397-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
YARD SALE — An activity whereby any person offers for sale to the general
public goods and merchandise by the use of a sign or signs and/or the
conspicuous display of goods and merchandise not in the regular course of
a lawfully established business.
§ 397-3. Issuance or denial of license; appeals.
The Chief of Police shall be authorized to issue licenses where such issuance
is not detrimental to the public welfare. Any applicant aggrieved by a denial
of application may appeal such denial to the Town Council, which shall
consider the application de nova. The Town Council may deny, grant, or
conditionally grant each application brought before it for consideration.
(4) Water conservation and the development of a water conservation
program;
(5) The protection of critical resource areas;
(6) The use of environmentally sensitive cleaning products.
B. In addition to the general public education described above, each
notice sent to an OWTS owner shall contain educational materials
specific to the notice and the actions that must be taken.
C. The Wastewater Manager shall prepare a written report submitted to
the Town Administrator at the end of each fiscal year describing the
public education program as implemented during the previous 12
months and an implementation plan for the next 12 months.
§ 392-9 PORTSMOUTH CODE § 397-4
C:518
§ 397-4. Restrictions.
No person may conduct, or allow to be conducted upon their property, a
yard sale more often than twice each calendar year. No yard sale for which
a license has been granted may extend beyond two days. No yard sale may
begin earlier than 8:00 a.m. or end later than 6:00 p.m.
§ 397-5. Application form.
Any person who makes application for a license hereunder shall do so on a
form prescribed by the Town Council for such purpose.
Chapter 405
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 10, Art. II.
Earth removal — See Ch. 155.
Garages and gasoline stations — See Ch. 206.
Hazardous waste management
facilities — See Ch. 221.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 230.
Land development and subdivision
regulations — See Ch. 236.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 288.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
320.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 336.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 339.
Tree preservation and protection — See Ch.
375.
Wastewater management districts — See Ch.
392.
Yard sales — See Ch. 397.
§ 397-4 CHARTER § 397-5
C:519

ARTICLE I
General Purposes
Section A. General application of this ordinance.
No building shall be erected or used, and no land shall be used, or lot
created or divided unless in conformity with the regulations of this
Ordinance or other Ordinances of the Town of Portsmouth. All other
buildings, and all other uses of land or of buildings, are hereby expressly
prohibited, except those already lawfully existing which by the provisions of
this Ordinance, become lawfully non-conforming.
Section B. Purposes.
This ordinance is designed to address the following purposes. The Town
of Portsmouth recognizes these purposes, each with equal priority and
numbered for reference purposes only:
1. Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
2. Provide for a range of uses and intensities of use appropriate to the
character of the Town, reflecting current and expected future needs,
with reasonable consideration of the character of the districts and their
peculiar suitability for particular uses.
3. Provide for orderly growth and development which recognizes:
a) The goals and patterns of land use contained in the comprehensive
plan of Portsmouth;
b) The natural characteristics of the land, including its suitability for
use based on soil characteristics, topography, and susceptibility to
surface or groundwater pollution;
c) The values and dynamic nature of coastal and freshwater ponds,
the shoreline, and freshwater and coastal wetlands;
d) The values of unique or valuable natural resources and features;
e) The availability and capacity of existing and planned public and/or
private services and facilities, as well as the Town's ability to
provide them;
f) The need to shape and balance urban and rural development, to
prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; and
g) The conservation of the value of buildings.
4. Provide for the control, protection, and/or abatement of air, water,
groundwater, and noise pollution, and soil erosion and sedimentation;
5. Provide for the protection of the natural, historic, cultural, and scenic
character of Portsmouth and areas herein;
Section A CHARTER Section B
C:521
Section C. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
This ordinance shall be interpreted and administered in a manner
consistent with Comprehensive Community Plan, dated 1992 as amended.
In the instance of uncertainty in the construction or application of any
section of this ordinance, the ordinance shall be construed in a manner that
will further the implementation of, and not be contrary to, the goals and
policies and applicable elements of said Comprehensive Plan.
Section D. Existing buildings and land use.
Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall prevent or be construed to
prevent the continuance of the use of any building or improvement for any
6. Provide for the preservation and promotion of agricultural production,
forest, silviculture, aquaculture, timber resources, and open space;
7. Provide for and protect the public investment in transportation, water,
stormwater management systems, sewage treatment and disposal, solid
waste treatment and disposal, schools, roads, recreation, public
facilities, open space, and other public requirements;
8. Promote a balance of housing choices, for all income levels and groups,
to assure the health, safety and welfare of all citizens and their rights to
affordable, accessible, safe, and sanitary housing;
9. Provide opportunities for the establishment of low and moderate
income housing;
10. Promote safety from fire, flood, and other natural or man-made
disasters;
11. Promote a high level of quality in design in the development of private
and public facilities;
12. Promote implementation of the comprehensive plan of Portsmouth
adopted pursuant to Chapter 45-22.2 of the Rhode Island General Laws;
13. Provide for coordination of land uses with contiguous municipalities,
other municipalities, the state, and other agencies, as appropriate,
especially with regard to resources and facilities that extend beyond
municipal boundaries or have a direct impact on that municipality;
14. Provide for efficient review of development proposals, to clarify and
expedite the zoning approval process;
15. Provide for procedures for the administration of the zoning ordinance,
including, but not limited to, variances, special-use permits, and, where
adopted, procedures for modifications;
16. Provide for coordination, as necessary, with contiguous communities
and the State.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:522
purpose to which such building or improvement or land is lawfully devoted
at the time of enactment of this Ordinance.
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:523

ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section A. Generally.
Words or terms used in this ordinance shall have the meanings stated in this
section, unless explicitly noted otherwise within any other section.
Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular includes
the plural and the plural the singular. The word "used" includes "designed,
intended, or arranged to be used." The word "shall" is mandatory; the word
"may" is permissive; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the
word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "land" includes the words
"marsh" and "water."
Section B. Definitions of terms.
The following terms for the purposes of this ordinance are defined below:
ABUTTER — One whose property abuts, that is, adjoins at a border,
boundary, or point with no intervening land. For the purpose of notification,
an abutter shall include one whose property is directly across the street.
ACCESSORY FAMILY DWELLING UNIT — An accessory dwelling unit for
the sole use of one (1) or more members of the family of the occupant or
occupants of the principal residence, but not needing to have a separate
means of ingress and egress.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or of a building, or portion thereof,
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building. An accessory use shall not be permitted without the principal use
to which it is related.
In no case shall such accessory use dominate, in area, extent or purpose, the
principal lawful use or building; and except in the case of signs permitted
by this ordinance, it shall not be located between the principal building and
the street right-of-way.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN — A component of a housing element, as
defined in § 45-22.2-4(33) of the Rhode Island General Laws,114 to meet
housing needs in a city or town that is prepared in accordance with
guidelines adopted by the State Planning Council, and/or to meet the
provisions of § 45-53-4(b)(1) and (c) of the Rhode Island General
Laws.[Added 6-26-2006]
AGGRIEVED PARTY — An aggrieved party, for purposes of this ordinance,
shall be:
114. Editor's Note: The definition of "affordable housing plan," formerly found in the cited
section of the state statutes, was renumbered by Ch. 09-310 of the 2009 Session Laws and
subsequently repealed by Ch. 11-313 of the 2011 Session Laws. See now the definition in
RIGL § 42-128.2-3.
Section A CHARTER Section B
C:525
AGRICULTURE — Any commercial enterprise which has as its primary
purpose farming, cultivation of crops, husbandry, horticulture, viticulture,
viniculture, floriculture, forestry, ranching, stabling of horses, dairy
farming, or aquaculture, or the raising of livestock, including for the
production of fiber, furbearing animals, poultry, or bees, along with the
necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the farm product,
provided that the operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary
to that of the principal agricultural activity. The mixed-use of farms and
farmlands for other forms of enterprise including, but not limited to, the
display of antique farm equipment, retail sales, tours, classes, petting,
feeding and viewing of animals, hay rides, crop mazes, festivals and other
special events are hereby recognized as a valuable and viable means of
contributing to the preservation of agriculture.[Amended 6-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-06-08]
AGRICULTURE-PROMOTION USE — A use of land or of a building, or
portion thereof, which tends to support, sustain, promote, or encourage
agriculture or farming activity. An agriculture promotion use shall have
limited or no impacts to surrounding properties and shall not be permitted
without the principal agricultural use to which it is related. In no case
shall such agriculture promotion use dominate, in area, scale, extent or
purpose, the existing principal agricultural use of the land and/or buildings.
Agriculture promotion uses may include, but are not limited to: the display
of antique farm equipment, farm tours, educational classes, petting, feeding
and viewing of animals, and hay rides.[Amended 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-06-08]
AGRICULTURE-SPECIAL EVENTS — A use of land or of a building, or
portion thereof, for a social occasion or activity which tends to support,
sustain, promote, or encourage agriculture or farming activity and which
contributes to revenue derived from agriculture or farming activity. An
agriculture special event shall be permitted only on parcels qualified to
participate in either the state or the local farm tax exemption program. in
no case shall such agriculture special event use dominate, in area, scale or
extent, the existing principal agricultural use of the parcel and/or buildings
on the parcel. Agriculture-Special Events may include, but are not limited
to events such as harvest fairs and festivals, indoor or outdoor concerts,
weddings and receptions and corporate or private functions.[Added
6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06-08]
ALTERATION — An alteration includes an addition, projection into yards,
or change from one (1) type of use to another. (See also Substantial
Improvement.)
APPLICANT — An owner or authorized agent of the owner submitting an
application or appealing an action of any official, board or agency.
Any person or persons or entity or entities who can demonstrate that
their property will be injured by a decision of any officer or agency
responsible for administering the zoning ordinance of Portsmouth; or
a.
b. Anyone requiring notice pursuant to this ordinance.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:526
APPLICATION — The completed form or forms and all accompanying
documents, exhibits, and fees required of an applicant by an approving
authority for development review, approval, or permitting purposes. (See
also Vested Rights below and in Article XV.)
APPROPRIATE — Suitable or compatible, in the context of the site and the
surrounding area and uses.
APPROVED AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN — An affordable housing plan
that has been approved by the state Director of Administration as meeting
the guidelines for the local comprehensive plan as promulgated by the State
Planning Council; provided, however, that state review and approval, for
plans submitted by December 31, 2004, shall not be contingent on the city
or town having completed, adopted, or amended its comprehensive plan as
provided for in § 45-22.2-8, § 45-22.2-9, or § 45-22.2-12 of the Rhode Island
General Laws.[Added 2-4-2008]
AQUACULTURE — Cultivation, propagation and harvesting of fish, shellfish
and vegetation products grown in water, including installing cribs, racks
and other in-water structures for cultivating these products, but does not
include filling, dredging, or post mining.[Amended 9-9-1997115]
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises used for the
major repair of automobiles in which electric or gas welding or cleaning
by explosive spray and/or other activities of a potentially hazardous nature,
including but not limited to 1) spray painting; 2) body, fender, clutch,
transmission, differential axle, spring and frame repairs; 3) major
overhauling of engines requiring removal therefrom of cylinder head or of
crankcase pan; 4) repairs of radiator requiring removal thereof; 5) complete
recapping or retreading of tires.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any premises used for automobile
fuels and oil, tires, accessories and/or services for automobiles at retail
direct to the motorist consumer, including the making of minor repairs.
BUFFER — Land which is maintained in either a natural or a landscaped
state, and is used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on
surrounding areas, properties or rights-of-way.
BUILD — Includes the words "erect", "construct", "alter", "enlarge", "move",
"modify" and any others of like significance.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy. The word "building" shall include the word
"structure" unless the context unequivocally indicates otherwise. "Building"
shall mean any three-dimensional enclosure by any building materials of
any space for use or occupancy, temporary or permanent.
115. Note: Previous wording stated: "Cultivation and harvesting of products, including fish and
vegetation, that are produced naturally in freshwater wetlands, and installing cribs, racks
and other in-water structures for cultivating these products, but does not include filling,
dredging, post mining, or the construction of any buildings or any water-regulating
structures."
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:527
BUILDING HEIGHT — For a vacant parcel of land, building height shall be
measured from the average, existing-grade elevation where the foundation
of the structure is proposed. For an existing structure, building height shall
be measured from average grade taken from the outermost four (4) corners
of the existing foundation. In all cases, building height shall be measured
to the top of the highest point of the existing or proposed roof or structure.
The distance shall exclude spires, chimneys, flag poles, and the like. For
definition of building height in special flood hazard areas see Article III,
Section F.13.[Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02-25]
CALIPER — The trunk diameter measurement of nursery stock trees
measured at six inches (6") above the ground for trees up to and including
four inches (4") caliper size, and measured at twelve inches (12") above
the ground for trees larger than four inches (4") caliper size. A tree may
be deemed "destroyed" when any part of a tree is damaged to the point
where that tree's survival beyond three (3) full growing seasons is unlikely,
as determined by a certified Arborist.[Added 2-4-2008]
CAPACITY or LAND CAPACITY — The suitability of the land, as defined
by geology, soil conditions, topography, and water resources, to support
its development for uses such as residential, commercial, industrial, open
space, or recreation. Land capacity may be modified by provision of
facilities and services.
CLINIC — A building used for out-patient care and treatment of ill, infirm or
injured persons, but which does not provide board, room or regular hospital
care and services.
CLUSTER — A site planning technique that concentrates buildings in
specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used for
recreation, common open space, and/or preservation of environmentally,
historically, culturally, or other sensitive features and/or structures. The
techniques used to concentrate buildings may include, per the requirements
of this ordinance, but are not limited to, reduction in lot areas, setback
requirements, and/or bulk requirements, with the resultant open land being
devoted by deed restrictions for one (1) or more uses. Under cluster
development there is no increase in the number of lots that would be
permitted under conventional development.
COASTAL FEATURES — "Coastal features" as defined in Chapter 23 of Title
46 of the Rhode Island General Laws, as determined by the RI Coastal
Resources Management Council.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — Retail business and consumer services.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE — A home or residential facility where children
and/or adults reside in a family setting and may or may not receive
supervised care. This shall not include halfway houses or substance abuse
treatment facilities. This shall include, but not be limited to the following:
Whenever six (6) or fewer retarded children or adults reside in any type
of residence in the community, as licensed by the State pursuant to
a.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:528
COMPATIBILITY — The characteristics of different uses or activities that
permit them to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict.
Elements affecting compatibility include, but are not limited to, intensity of
occupancy as measured by dwelling units per acre, lot coverage, pedestrian
or vehicular traffic generated, volume of goods handled, and such
environmental effects as noise, vibration, glare, air pollution, or radiation.
COMPLETED APPLICATION — The completed form or forms and all
accompanying documents, exhibits, and fees required of an applicant by
all local boards or officials who would otherwise act with respect to an
application.[Added 6-26-2006]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The comprehensive plan adopted and approved
pursuant to the Rhode Island Comprehensive Plan Act of 1990 and to which
any zoning adopted shall be in compliance.
CONDOMINIUM — A building of multiple units - each unit owned
individually.
CONSISTENT WITH LOCAL NEEDS — Reasonable in view of the State need
for low and moderate income housing, and considering (i) the number of low
income persons in the Town; (ii) the need to protect the health and safety
of the occupants of the proposed housing or of the residents of the Town;
(iii) the need to promote better site and building design in relation to the
surroundings or to preserve open spaces, and (iv) if the local zoning or land
use ordinances, requirements, and regulations are applied as equally as
possible to both subsidized and unsubsidized housing.[Added 6-26-2006]
CORNER LOT — A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets
having an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
Chapter 24 of Title 40.1. All requirements pertaining to local zoning are
waived for these community residences;
A group home providing care or supervision, or both, to not more
than eight (8) mentally disabled or mentally handicapped or physically
handicapped persons, and licensed by the state pursuant to Chapter 24
of Title 40.1;
b.
A residence for children providing care or supervision, or both, to not
more than eight (8) children including those of the care giver and
licensed by the state pursuant to Chapter 72.1 of Title 42;
c.
A community transitional residence providing care or assistance, or
both, to no more than six (6) unrelated persons or no more than
three (3) families, not to exceed a total of eight (8) persons, requiring
temporary financial assistance, and/or to persons who are victims of
crimes, abuse, or neglect, and who are expected to reside in that
residence not less than sixty (60) days nor more than two (2) years.
Residents will have access to and use of all common areas, including
eating areas and living rooms, and will receive appropriate social
services for the purpose of fostering independence, self-sufficiency, and
eventual transition to a permanent living situation.
d.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:529
CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION — (See HOME OCCUPATION).
DAY CARE - DAY CARE CENTER — Any other day care center which is not a
family day care home, including Day nursery, nursery school, kindergarten
or other agency giving day care to children.
DAY CARE - FAMILY DAY CARE HOME — Any home other than the
individual's home in which day care in lieu of parental care or supervision
is offered at the same time to six (6) or fewer individuals who are not
relatives of the care giver, but may not contain more than a total of eight (8)
individuals receiving day care.
DAYS — Calendar days, unless otherwise specified in this ordinance.
DEVELOPMENT — The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill or land disturbance; any change in use, or alteration or
extension of the use, of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW — The process whereby authorized local
officials review the site plans, maps, and other documentation of a
development to determine the compliance with the stated purposes and
standards of the ordinance also known as 'site plan review'.
DISTRICT — (See ZONING USE DISTRICT)
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — A system for the removal of water from land by
drains, grading, or other appropriate means. These techniques may include
runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after
construction or development, the means for preserving surface and
groundwaters, and the prevention and/or alleviation of flooding.
DREDGED MATERIAL — Material that is dredged or excavated from coastal
waters or from rivers, lakes or streams.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:530
DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — An establishment that, by
design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures,
encourages or permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product
while remaining in a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to,
restaurants, banks and retail establishments.
DUPLEX — A type of two-family dwelling in which the dwelling units are
separated by a common wall.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or portion thereof providing complete,
independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation,
and containing a separate means of ingress and egress.
EARTH REMOVAL —
The extraction or removal of any sand, gravel, loam, topsoil, clay, shale
or rock from any tract of land or water body. Earth removal shall also be
included to mean uses customarily accessory to and necessary for earth
removal operations, including rock crushing, washing, sorting, storing and
other treatment of soil excavated on the site, but specifically excluding any
processing of soil transported from off-site areas, and the manufacturing of
soil-related products such as premixed concrete, bricks, block and the like.
Excluded from this definition is earth removal involving the process of
grading land:
a. For the construction of a building for which a building permit has been
issued; or
b. For the construction of a roadway; or
c. For a subdivision in accordance with a plat, plan or plans approved by
the Planning Board.
Earth Removal is further governed by the provisions of Portsmouth
Ordinance #107 "Regulating, Controlling and Licensing Earth Removal".116
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use on
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner
of the property shall not erect any structures.
ONE FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for, or occupied by one
(1) family.
a.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A freestanding building, designed or
intended exclusively for residential use containing two (1) dwelling
units. (This can be two (2) attached dwelling units.)
b.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING — A freestanding building, designed or
intended exclusively for residential use containing three (3) or more
dwelling units. (This can be more than two (2) attached dwelling units.)
c.
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Earth Removal.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:531
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY — The extraction of minerals, including: solids,
such as coal and ores, loam, peat, sand, gravel, clay or silt; liquids, such as
crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. The term also includes
quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing,
and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the extraction site
or as a part of the extractive activity.
FAMILY — A person or persons related by blood, marriage, or other legal
means. See also "Household".
FARM BREWERY — A facility located on a farm or as part of an agricultural
operation, which is qualified to participate in either the state or the local
farm tax exemption program, for the brewing of beer which is
manufactured, in part, with ingredients including, but not limited to, hops,
grain, and fruit grown on the farm, where customers have the opportunity
to tour the farm and production facilities, sample beer, and purchase and
consume beer offsite, in accordance with R.I. G.L. § 3-6-1. This use includes
facilities required to produce, package, maintain, store, ship and receive
product, as well as facilities for administrative office functions and space for
tours, tastings, and promotional activities for customers. Brewery facilities
and related infrastructure must not consume more land area than
agricultural activities. Special events may be allowed by special use permit
under the "agricultural special events" use in conjunction with this
use.[Added 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10-09]
FLOOD PLAIN or FLOOD HAZARD AREA — As defined in section 45-22.2-4
[of the Rhode Island General Laws]. An area that has a one percent (1%) or
greater chance of inundation in any given year, as delineated by the federal
emergency agency pursuant to the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
as amended (P.L. 90-448) [42 U.S.C. 4011 et seq.]. Further definitions with
reference to floodplains, flood hazard areas, and other related terms are
provided in Article III of this ordinance.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total area of a building measured by taking
the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for
occupancy or storage.
HALF-STORY — That portion of a building next beneath a sloping roof and
in which there are less than four feet (4') vertically between the top of the
floor and the intersection of the bottoms of the rafters with the interior
faces of the wall.
HALFWAY HOUSES — A residential facility for adults or children who have
been institutionalized for criminal conduct and who require a group setting
to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society.
HARDSHIP —
In granting a use variance the subject land or structure cannot yield any
beneficial use if it is required to conform to the provisions of the zoning
ordinance. Nonconforming use of neighboring land or structures in the
same district and permitted use of lands or structures in an adjacent
district shall not be considered in granting a use variance; and
a.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:532
HAZARDOUS USE — Any use which is offensive or noxious by reason of
potential of fire, noise or vibration, dust, gas, fumes, odor, smoke, cinders,
flashing or excessively bright light, refuse matter or electromagnetic
radiation. Any use which is potentially hazardous to health or safety
because of danger of flooding, inadequacy of drainage or inaccessibility to
fire fighting apparatus or other protective service or any use which creates
excessive noise beyond the property line. Any use which emits hazardous
materials, as defined by the State and EPA, into the air or water.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity customarily carried out for gain by a
resident, conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. An
occupation or a profession which:
HOSPITAL — A health care facility with an organized medical staff
providing for twenty-four (24)-hour in-patient services for diagnosis, care
In granting a dimensional variance, that the hardship that will be
suffered by the owner of the subject property if the dimensional
variance is not granted shall amount to more than a mere
inconvenience, which shall mean that there is no other reasonable
alternative to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of one's property.
The fact that a use may be more profitable or more valuable after the
relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief.
b.
Is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or in a building or other
structure accessory to a dwelling unit;
a.
b. Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit;
Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for
residential purposes; and
c.
Conforms to the following conditions:
Performed by the resident and using no more than one hundred
fifty square feet (150 ft.2) of floor area and such activity shall not be
visible from a lot line.
(1)
There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign (except as
permitted under Article IX.), no exterior storage of material and no
other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from
the residential character of the principal building.
(2)
No vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare or offensive noise
shall be produced.
(3)
No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.
(4)
Any parking required for the conduct of such home occupation
shall be provided off the street and not in a required front yard.
(5)
d.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:533
and treatment of two (2) or more individuals unrelated by blood or
marriage.
HOTEL-MOTEL — A structure containing sleeping rooms with or without
a common eating facility; each room having its own private toilet facilities
and each room let for compensation.
HOUSEHOLD — One (1) or more persons living together in a single
dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living and
eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage
of food within the dwelling unit. The term "household unit" shall be
synonymous with the term "dwelling unit" for determining the number of
such units allowed within any structure on any lot in a zoning district. An
individual household shall consist of any one (1) of the following:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that substantially reduces or
prevents the infiltration of stormwater.
INFEASIBLE — Any condition brought about by any single factor or
combination of factors, as a result of limitations imposed on the
development by conditions attached to the zoning approval, to the extent
that it makes it impossible for a public agency, nonprofit organization, or
limited equity housing cooperative to proceed in building or operating low
or moderate income housing without financial loss, within the limitations
set by the subsidizing agency of government, on the size or character of
the development, on the amount or nature of the subsidy, or on the tenants,
rentals, and income permissible, and without substantially changing the
rent levels and unit sizes proposed by the public agency, nonprofit
organization, or limited equity housing cooperative.[Added 6-26-2006]
KENNEL — A use involving the permanent or temporary keeping or
treatment of animals for commercial purposes. Maintaining pets as part of
residential occupancy, breeding pedigree animals by a single owner (either
as a hobby or for profit), and raising of livestock for farming purposes are
not within this definition.
LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A project in which one (1) or more
lots, tracts, or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a
coordinated site for a complex of uses, units, or structures, including,
but not limited to, planned development and/or cluster development for
residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open space, and/or
mixed uses as may be provided for in the zoning ordinance.
LARGE SCALE RETAIL DEVELOPMENT — Any new or expanded retail
business, office or consumer service development totaling greater than
twenty-five thousand square feet (25,000 ft.2) in one (1) or more buildings
A family, which may also include servants and employees living with the
family; or
a.
A person or group of up to four (4) unrelated persons living together
who are not within the second degree of kinship to each other, as
defined by Civil Law.
b.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:534
as approved by the Planning Board as a Planned Retail/Service
Development.[Added 2-4-2008]
LETTER OF ELIGIBILITY — A letter issued by the Rhode Island Housing
and Mortgage Finance Corporation in accordance with § 42-55-5.3(a) of the
Rhode Island General Laws.[Added 6-26-2006]
LEVEL OF SERVICE — The Highway Capacity Manual, published by the
Transportation Research Board lists the following levels of service;[Added
2-4-2008]
A = Free Flow
B = Reasonably free flow
C = Stable flow
D = Approaching unstable flow
E = Unstable flow
F = Forced or breakdown flow
The Level of Service for any road or intersection and the estimated Level
of Service as a result of a proposed development shall be determined by
methods described in the Highway Capacity Manual.
Level of
Service
(LOS)
Control Delay per
Vehicle
(sec/veh) Description
A and B 10(A) > 10 and
20(B)
No delays at intersection with smooth
progression of traffic. Uncongested
operations; all vehicles clear in a
single cycle.
C > 20 and 35 Moderate delays at intersection with
satisfactory to good progressions of
traffic. Light congestion; occasional
back-ups on critical approaches.
D > 35 and 55 Forty-percent (40%) probability of
delays of one (1) cycle or more at
every intersection. No progression of
traffic along the roadway with ninetypercent
(90%) probability of being
stopped at every intersection
experiencing "D" condition.
Significant congestion on critical
approaches, but intersection
functional. Vehicles required to wait
through more than one (1) cycle
during short peaks. No long standing
lines formed.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:535
Level of
Service
(LOS)
Control Delay per
Vehicle
(sec/veh) Description
E > 55 and 80 Heavy traffic flow condition. Delays of
two (2) or more cycles probable. No
progression. One-hundred-percent
(100%) probability of stopping at
intersection. Limit of stable flow.
Blockage of intersection may occur if
traffic signal does not provide for
protected turning movements.
F > 80 Unstable traffic flow. Heavy
congestion. Traffic moves in forced
flow condition. Three (3) or more
cycles to pass through intersection.
Total breakdown with stop-and-go
operation.
Source: The latest edition of Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) published
by the Transportation Research Board, 2000.
LOCAL BOARD — Any Town Zoning Board of Review, Planning Board,
Planning Board of Review, or Building Inspector; or the officer or board
having supervision of the construction of buildings or the power of
enforcing municipal building, subdivision, or zoning laws; or the Town
Council.[Added 6-26-2006]
LOT — Either:
LOT AREA — The total area within the boundaries of a lot, excluding
any street right-of-way, usually reported in acres or square feet. (See also
Developable Lot Area under Article IV.)
LOT BUILDING COVERAGE — The amount of area on a lot covered by the
horizontal cross-section of structures. Lot coverage shall be measured by
The basic development unit for determination of lot area, depth, and
other dimensional regulations; or
a.
A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal
instrument such as a recorded deed or recorded map and which is
recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title.
All lots shall be undivided by a street, under one (1) ownership, with
ascertainable boundaries established by deed or deeds of record or
a segment of land ownership, defined by lot boundary lines on a
land division plan duly approved by the Planning Board under the
Subdivision Control Ordinance.117
b.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:536
the horizontal cross-section of structures. The horizontal cross section of a
structure will include overhangs, patios, porches, steps, etc.
LOT DEPTH — The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot
line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth
is an average of the depth.
LOT FRONTAGE — That continuous portion of a lot abutting a street,
measured along a straight line connecting the point of intersection of the
side lot lines with the front lot line.
LOT LINE — A line of record, bounding a lot, which divides one (1) lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public or private
space and shall include:
FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. In
the case of a lot that abuts more than one (1) street, the street address
dictates which street lot line is the front.
a.
REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line,
or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, an
assumed line at least ten feet (10') in length entirely within the lot,
parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.
b.
SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. On a corner lot,
a side lot line may be a street lot line, depending on requirements set
forth herein.
c.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:537
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum front setback line.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which fronts upon two (2) parallel streets, or which
fronts upon two (2) streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the
lot.
LOW OR MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Any housing subsidized by
the federal, state, or municipal government under any program to assist
the construction or rehabilitation of housing as low or moderate income
housing, as defined in the applicable federal or state statute, or local
ordinance whether built or operated by any public agency or any nonprofit
organization, or by any limited equity housing cooperative or any private
developer, that will remain affordable for ninety-nine (99) years or such
other period that is either agreed to by the applicant and Town but shall not
be for a period of less than thirty (30) years from initial occupancy through
a land lease and/or deed restriction or prescribed by the federal or state
subsidy program but shall not be for a period less than thirty (30) years
from initial occupancy through a land lease and/or deed restriction.[Added
6-26-2006]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
flood hazard section of this ordinance.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be required and
accepted by a governmental agency to ensure that necessary improvements
will function as required for a specific period of time.
MARINA — An area for the storage or mooring of boats with frontage on a
navigable body of water and with facilities for the landing of boats.
MASS STORAGE OF FUEL — Fuel storage in tanks greater than twelve
thousand (12,000) gallons each.[Added 6-17-2002]
MEETING HOUSING NEEDS — Adoption of the implementation program
of an approved affordable housing plan and the absence of unreasonable
denial of applications that are made pursuant to an approved affordable
housing plan in order to accomplish the purposes and expectations of the
approved affordable housing plan.[Added 6-26-2006]
MERE INCONVENIENCE — See section 45-24-41 [of the Rhode Island
General Laws]. A situation in which there is no other reasonable alternative
to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of one's property. See also Article
VI. on dimensional variances.
MIXED USE — A mixture of land uses within a single development, building,
or tract.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:538
MOBILE HOME - TRAILER —
MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER PARK — A parcel of land which has been
planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes or trailers for
transient or nontransient use and is designed to accommodate two (2) or
more mobile homes or trailers.
MULTI-FAMILY BUILDING — A building containing three (3) or more units.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT SUBSIDY — Assistance that is made available
through a Town program sufficient to make housing affordable, as
affordable housing is defined in § 42-128-8.1(d)(1) of the Rhode Island
General Laws; such assistance may include, but is not limited to, direct
financial support, abatement of taxes, waiver of fees and charges, and
approval of density bonuses and/or internal subsidies, and any combination
of forms of assistance.[Added 6-26-2006]
NONCONFORMANCE — A building, structure, or parcel of land, or use
thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of
a zoning ordinance and not in conformity with the provisions of such
ordinance or amendment. Nonconformance shall be of only two (2) types:
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single family dwelling unit built on
a chassis suitable for year round occupancy and containing the same
water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile
housing.
a.
TRAILER — The following shall be considered a trailer:
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular portable structure built on a
chassis, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation
and vacation, having body width not exceeding eight feet (8') and a
body length not exceeding thirty-two feet (32').
(1)
PICK-UP COACH — A structure to be mounted on a truck chassis
for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
(2)
MOTOR HOME — A portable temporary dwelling to be used for
travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a
self-propelled vehicle.
(3)
CAMPING TRAILER — A folding structure mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation use.
(4)
b.
NONCONFORMING BY USE: A lawfully established use of land,
building, or structure which is not a permitted use in that zoning
district. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than
are permitted by the use regulations of a zoning ordinance shall be
nonconforming by use; or
a.
NONCONFORMING BY DIMENSION: A building, structure, or parcel
of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of the zoning
ordinance. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of the zoning
ordinance, other than those pertaining to the permitted uses. A building
b.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:539
NOTICE OF NONCOMPLIANCE — A notice issued by the zoning
enforcement officer of Portsmouth informing the applicant for development
approval that the application is not in compliance with Portsmouth's zoning
regulations.
NURSING HOME — A health care facility primarily intended to provide
care for the elderly. A nursing home may provide different levels of care
according to the needs of the individual patient. Said levels of care may
include skilled care beds, intermediate care facilities, congregate living
units (individual living units with limited cooking and eating facilities
provided as an alternative to common eating facilities), independent living
units (apartments with full eating facilities enabling elderly patients to
maintain a more independent life style), adult day care and all other
services reasonably ancillary to the operation of a modern nursing home.
Density requirements for a nursing home shall be governed by the
maximum percentage of lot coverage provisions as set forth in Article VII,
Section C, Apartments.
OCCUPIED — Includes the words "designed to be, arranged to be, or
intended to be occupied".
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated,
designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use
and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring
such open space; provided that the area may be improved with only those
buildings, structures, streets, and off-street parking and other
improvements that are designated to be incidental to the natural openness
of the land.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A district established in a zoning ordinance that
is superimposed on one (1) or more districts or parts of districts and that
imposes specified requirements in addition to, but not less, than those
otherwise applicable for the underlying zone.
PARCEL — A lot, or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under
single control, and usually considered a unit for purposes of development.
(See also Lot.)
PARKING AREA OR LOT — That portion of a development that is used
by vehicles for access, circulation, parking, and loading and unloading. It
comprises the total of circulation areas, loading and unloading areas, and
parking spaces.
PARKING SPACE — An area containing not less than the square footage
required by Article IX. of this ordinance to be used exclusively as a parking
stall and maneuvering space for one (1) motor vehicle.
or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by
the use regulations of a zoning ordinance shall be nonconforming by
use; a building or structure containing a permitted number of dwelling
units by the use regulations of the zoning ordinance, but not meeting
the lot area per dwelling unit regulations, shall be nonconforming by
dimension.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:540
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — A set of criteria or limits relating to
elements which a particular use or process either must meet or may not
exceed.
PERMITTED USE — A use by right which is specifically authorized in a
particular zoning district.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A "land development project", as defined
herein, and developed according to plan as a single entity and containing
one (1) or more structures and/or uses with appurtenant common areas.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — Projects in which one (1) or more
lots, tracts or parcels are developed or proposed to be developed as a
coordinated site for a complex of uses, units or structures,
including:[Added 9-29-2002]
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:541
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — A planned, coordinated
development of a tract or tracts of land with two (2) or more buildings as an
environment for a variety of transportation, storage or industrial uses and
related activities. Such development is planned, designed, constructed and
managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with particular attention
given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building
design and location and open space. The project is developed or controlled
by a single proprietary entity and has an enforceable master plan and/
or covenants, conditions and restrictions. The development may consist
of one (1) or more parcels, condominium ownership or a combination
thereof and may contain public and/or private streets. For the purposes
of this definition an industrial use is one engaged in basic processing and
manufacturing from raw or extracted materials, of non-hazardous finished
or unfinished products or parts and including processing, compounding,
stamping, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, sale or distribution,
and incidental storage of such products or parts, the testing of such
products or parts and research and development. Such uses produce no
noise, odor, smoke or vibration in excess of state or federal standards or
specific local regulation and produces no heat, glare, dust, dirt, odors or
gases perceptible at any lot line.
PLANNED CORPORATE DEVELOPMENT — A planned, coordinated
development of a tract or tracts of land with two (2) or more buildings
as an environment for a variety of office, management, regulatory and
light industrial uses and related activities. Such development is planned,
designed, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated
basis with particular attention given to on-site vehicular circulation,
parking, utility needs, building design and location and open space. The
project is developed or controlled by a single proprietary entity and has
an enforceable master plan and/or covenants, conditions and restrictions.
The development may consist of one (1) or more parcels, condominium
ownership or a combination thereof and may contain public and/or private
streets. For the purposes of this definition a light industrial use is one
engaged in manufacture from previously prepared materials, of nonhazardous
finished products or parts and including processing, fabrication,
assembly, treatment, packaging, sale or distribution, incidental storage of
such products or parts, the testing of such products or parts and research
and development, but excluding basic industrial processing. Such uses
produce no noise, heat or glare perceptible at any lot line and emit no
vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, toxic or offensive odors or gases.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:542
PLANNED MARINE TRADE DEVELOPMENT (PMTD) — A planned,
coordinated development of a tract or tracts of land with two (2) or more
buildings as an environment for a variety of marine trade related activities.
Such development is planned, designed, constructed and managed on an
integrated and coordinated basis with particular attention given to onsite
vehicular circulation, parking, open water access, storage and utility
needs, building design and location and open space. The project is
developed or controlled by a single proprietary entity and has an
enforceable master plan and/or covenants, conditions and restrictions.
The development may consist of one (1) or more parcels, condominium
ownership or a combination thereof and may contain public and/or private
streets.
PLANNED MARINA VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT (PMVD) — A planned,
coordinated development of a tract or tracts of land with two (2) or more
buildings as an environment for a variety of residential, recreational and
marina-related uses. Such development is planned, designed, constructed
and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with particular
attention given to integration of land-based uses with marina and waterbased
uses, on-site vehicular circulation, parking, shared water access,
storage and utility needs of the PUD only, building design and location and
open space. The project is developed or controlled by a single proprietary
entity and has an enforceable master plan and/or covenants, conditions
and restrictions. The development may consist of one (1) or more parcels,
condominium ownership or a combination thereof and may contain public
and/or private streets. Said development must possess not less than two
thousand linear feet (2,000') of shore frontage exclusive of ponds and/or
lakes, and must include marina facilities.
PLANNED RESORT DEVELOPMENT (PRD) — A planned, coordinated
development of a tract or tracts of land with two (2) or more buildings
as an environment for a variety of residential, recreational and related
uses. Such development is planned, designed, constructed and managed
on an integrated and coordinated basis with particular attention given
to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, shared water access (if any),
storage and utility needs of the PUD only, building design and location and
open space. The project is developed or controlled by a single proprietary
entity and has an enforceable master plan and/or covenants, conditions
and restrictions. The development may consist of one (1) or more parcels,
condominium ownership or a combination thereof and may contain public
and/or private streets.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:543
PLANNED RETAIL/SERVICE DEVELOPMENT — A planned, coordinated
development of a tract or tracts of land with two (2) or more buildings
as an environment for a variety of retail, service, and office uses and
related activities. Such development is planned, designed, constructed and
managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with particular attention
given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building
design and location and open space. The project is developed or controlled
by a single proprietary entity and has an enforceable master plan and/or
covenants, conditions and restrictions. The development may consist of one
(1) or more parcels, condominium ownership or a combination thereof and
may contain public and/or private streets.
PLANNING BOARD — The body established by the Town which has the
responsibility to prepare a comprehensive plan and make recommendations
concerning that plan to the Town Council, to rule upon subdivisions as
provided in the Subdivision Ordinance,118 and to rule upon, review or advise
upon other proposals as provided in this Ordinance.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or land development plan showing
the location, boundaries, and ownership of individual properties.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any drainage facility, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot
improvement, or other facility for which the local government may
ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or
which may affect an improvement of which local government responsibility
is established.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space conveyed or otherwise dedicated to
a municipality, municipal or state agent, board of education, or public body
for recreation or conservation uses.
RETAIL BUSINESS, OFFICE OR CONSUMER SERVICE COMPLEX,
EXISTING — A development of one (1) or more commercial establishments
primarily retail, office or consumer service oriented in nature, located on
a single lot or contiguous lots upon which such use exists at the time of
enactment of this amendment and consisting of five thousand gross square
feet (5,000 ft.2) of floor space or more, or a total land area (including
parking and travel areas) of twenty-thousand square feet (20,000 ft.2) or
more. Provided, however, that floor space located within a story which is
more than one half (1/2), vertically, below the average natural grade of
the ground adjoining said building shall be exempt from the floor space
requirement. (See ARTICLE V. Table of Use Regulations, E. Retail Business
and Consumer Service Establishments Uses, 14.2.)[Amended
10-10-1996119]
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
119. Note: Prior to the adoption of the current wording on 10-10-1996 for RETAIL BUSINESS,
OFFICE OR CONSUMER SERVICE COMPLEX, EXISTING and RETAIL BUSINESS, OFFICE
OR CONSUMER SERVICE COMPLEX, NEW, the definition of RETAIL BUSINESS, OFFICE
OR CONSUMER SERVICE COMPLEX read as follows: A new development of one or more
commercial establishments primarily retail, office or consumer service oriented in nature,
located on a single lot or contiguous lots upon which no such use exists at the time of
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:544
RETAIL BUSINESS, OFFICE OR CONSUMER SERVICE COMPLEX, NEW
— A development of one (1) or more commercial establishments primarily
retail, office or consumer service oriented in nature, located on a single lot
or contiguous lots upon which no such use exists at the time of enactment
of this amendment and consisting of five thousand gross square feet (5,000
ft.2) of floor space or more, or a total land area (including parking and
travel areas) of twenty thousand square feet (20,000 ft.2) or more. Provided,
however, that floor space located within a story which is more than one half
(1/2), vertically, below the average natural grade of the ground adjoining
said building shall be exempt from the floor space requirement. (See Article
V. Table of Use Regulations, E. Retail Business and Consumer Service
Establishments Uses, 14 and 14.1 and Article VII, Section G.)
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, sidewalk or other pedestrian path, bicycle path, railroad,
road, electric transmission line, gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm
sewer main, shade trees, pier or dock or other special use, including
preservation of scenic vistas.
ROADSIDE STAND — A non-enclosed or semi-enclosed structure for the
sale of agricultural or horticultural products, the major portion of which are
grown or produced on the premises or elsewhere by the same producer and
must provide off-street parking.[Amended 10-25-2010; 6-8-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-06-08]
SCREENING — The method by which a view of one (1) site from another
adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques
include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features.
SETBACK LINE or LINES — A line or lines parallel to a lot line at the
minimum distance of the required setback for the zoning district in which
the lot is located that establishes the area within which the principal
structure must be erected or placed. (See also definition of "yard" and the
Land Space Requirements Table.)
SIGN — See Article IX. Signs.
SITE PLAN — The development plan for one (1) or more lots on which is
shown the existing and/or the proposed conditions of the lot.
SPACE-HABITABLE — Those areas within the exterior walls of a dwelling
which have head room or not less than seven feet (7') measured vertically
upward from the top of the finished floor but excluding basement areas and
excluding areas in any accessory structure attached to any dwelling.
SPECIAL USE — A regulated use which is permitted pursuant to the specialuse
permit issued by the authorized governmental entity, pursuant to
application and consisting of 5,000 gross square feet of floor space or more, or a total
land area (including parking and travel areas) of 20,000 square feet or more. Provided
however, that floor space located within a story which is more than one half vertically
below the average natural grade of the ground adjoining said building shall be exempt
from the floor space requirement. Such development shall be a special use permit per the
provisions of Article VII. Section E.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:545
section 45-24-42 [of the Rhode Island General Laws]. Formerly referred to
as a special use permit.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — (See Special Use.)
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement,
substantial improvement or other improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STORY — That portion of a building contained between any floor and the
floor or roof next above it, but not including any portion so contained if more
than one-half (1/2) of such portion vertically is below the average natural
grade of the ground adjoining such building.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used,
for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets may be further classified by
the functions they perform.
STREET, ACCESS TO — A way of approaching or entering a property. All
lots of record shall have adequate and permanent access to a public street
for all vehicles normally associated with the uses permitted of that lot and
for emergency vehicles.
STREET, PRIVATE — A way open to vehicular ingress and egress, not owned
and maintained by the Town of Portsmouth, established as a separate tract
for the benefit of certain, adjacent properties. This definition shall not apply
to driveways.
STREET, PUBLIC — All public property reserved or dedicated for street
traffic, owned and maintained by the Town of Portsmouth.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy, or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below, the
surface of land or water.
SUBSTANDARD LOT OF RECORD — Any lot lawfully existing at the time of
adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance and not in conformance with
the dimensional and/or area provisions of that ordinance.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either, a) before the
improvement or repair is started, or b) if the structure has been damaged,
and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition 'substantial improvement' is considered to occur when the first
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:546
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either 1)
any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary or safety code specification which is solely necessary
to assure safe living conditions or 2) any alteration of a structure listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
TOWN — The Town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island.[Added 6-26-2006]
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance. An authorization for the construction or maintenance of a
building or structure, or for the establishment or maintenance of a use of
land, which is prohibited by a zoning ordinance. There shall be only two (2)
categories of variance, a use variance or a dimensional variance.
VESTED RIGHTS — The right to initiate or continue the development of
an approved project under the regulations that were in effect at the time
of approval, even if, after the approval, the regulations change prior to the
completion of the project (See Article XV, for validity periods for each stage
of approval).
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — A hospital used solely for the medical and
surgical treatment of animals under the care of a veterinarian.
VISION CLEARANCE — The land adjoining a street intersection that is
kept clear of obstructions between three (3') and seven feet (7') above the
ground to protect the visibility and safety of motorists and pedestrians.
The protected sight distance area is the triangle with legs that are the
intersecting flowlines of two (2) streets at an intersection. The legs shall
extend thirty-five feet (35') away from the intersection of the flowlines.
WATERFRONT DISTRICT — This district must contain a minimum of fifty
(50) acres and shore frontage of two thousand five hundred linear feet
(2,500') (excluding ponds, lakes, wharves, piers, breakwaters and other
USE VARIANCE. Permission to depart from the use requirements of a
zoning ordinance where the applicant for the requested variance has
shown by evidence upon the record that the subject land or structure
cannot yield any beneficial use if it is to conform to the provisions of the
zoning ordinance.
a.
DIMENSIONAL VARIANCE. Permission to depart from the dimensional
requirements of a zoning ordinance, where the applicant for the
requested relief has shown, by evidence upon the record, that there
is no other reasonable alternative way to enjoy a legally permitted
beneficial use of the subject property unless granted the requested
relief from the dimensional regulations. However, the fact that a use
may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after
the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief.
b.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:547
structures). The district's purpose is to cater to marine activities such as
commercial boat docks, boat service areas, marine equipment stores, boat
storage and construction yards, boat repair facilities, bait and tackle shops,
wholesale and retail fish and shellfish establishments, refreshment stands
and marine oriented clubs. Other uses to be permitted in accordance with
the use table.
WATERS — As defined in section 46-12-1(b) [of the Rhode Island General
Laws].120
WETLAND, COASTAL — As defined in section 2-1-14 [of the Rhode Island
General Laws].121 A coastal wetland shall mean any salt marsh bordering
on the tidal waters of this state, whether or not the tide waters reach the
littoral areas through natural or artificial water courses, and such uplands
contiguous thereto, but extending not more than fifty (50) yards inland
therefrom, as the director shall deem reasonably necessary to protect those
salt marshes for the purposes set forth in 2-1-13 [of the Rhode Island
General Laws].122
WETLAND, FRESHWATER — As defined in section 2-1-20 [of the Rhode
Island General Laws]. "Fresh water wetlands" shall include, but not limited
to, marshes, swamps, bogs, ponds, rivers, river or stream flood plains or
banks, area subject to flooding or storm flowage; emergent and submergent
plant communities in any body of fresh water including rivers and streams
and that area of land within fifty feet (50') of the fresh water including rivers
and streams and that area of land within fifty feet (50') of the edge of a bog,
marsh, swamp, or pond, as defined in Section 2-1-20 [of the Rhode Island
General Laws].
YARD —
FRONT YARD — An open space extending the entire width of a lot from
lot sideline to lot sideline between the front lot line or lines and the
nearest point of a building.
a.
REAR YARD — An open space extending the entire width of a lot line
from sideline to sideline between the rear lot line or the corner of a
triangular lot farthest from the front lot line and the nearest point of
the building.
b.
SIDE YARD — An open space extending along a sideline of a lot between
the front yard and the rear yard on such lot and extending between the
sideline of such lot to the nearest point of the building.
(See also definition of 'setback line' and the 'Land Space Requirements
Table.)
c.
120. Editor's Note: See now RIGL 46-12-1(23).
121. Editor's Note: RIGL §§ 2-1-13 to 2-1-17 have been repealed.
122. Editor's Note: RIGL §§ 2-1-13 to 2-1-17 have been repealed.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:548
ZONING — The reservation of certain specified areas within Portsmouth
for building and structures, or use of land, for certain purposes with other
limitations such as height, lot coverage, and other stipulated requirements.
ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW — The body established by the Town pursuant
to Town Charter and Article XII. of this ordinance, which has the power
to hear and decide appeals, of determinations made by the Zoning
Enforcement Office, to authorize variances from this ordinance, to authorize
special use permits, and to hear and decide other matters pursuant to
Articles XIII. and XIV. of this Ordinance.
ZONING CERTIFICATE — A document signed by the zoning enforcement
officer, as required in this zoning ordinance, which acknowledges that a use,
structure, building or lot either complies with or is legally nonconforming
to the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or is an authorized
variance or modification therefrom.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The persons charged with the
administration and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance shall be: (1) the
Building Official of the Town of Portsmouth, whose minimum qualifications
shall be official certification as a building official or inspector in the State
of Rhode Island, together with a working knowledge of zoning principles
and practices, and/or (2) the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of
Portsmouth, whose minimum qualifications shall be a working knowledge of
zoning principles and practices.[Amended 6-13-2005123]
ZONING MAP — The map or maps which are a part of the zoning ordinance
and which delineate the boundaries of all mapped zoning districts within
the physical boundary of Portsmouth.
ZONING ORDINANCE — An ordinance enacted by the Town Council
pursuant to this ordinance and in the manner providing for the adoption
of ordinances in the Town's home rule charter, which sets forth regulations
and standards relating to the nature and extent of uses of land and
structures, which is consistent with the comprehensive plan of Portsmouth
as defined in Title 45 Chapter 22.2 [of the Rhode Island General Laws].
ZONING USE DISTRICTS — The basic unit in zoning, either mapped or
unmapped, to which a uniform set of regulations applies, or a uniform
set of regulations for a specified use. The districts include, but are not
limited to: agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional, open space,
and residential. Each district may include sub-districts. Districts may be
combined.
123. Note: The former wording was: The local official designated by the Town to administer and
enforce this ordinance, pursuant to Article XII. of this ordinance. For the purposes of this
ordinance, that official shall be the Building Inspector.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:549

ARTICLE III
Division into Districts
Section A. Establishment of districts.
The Town of Portsmouth is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
R-10
R-20
R-30
R-40
R-60
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
C-1
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
I-L (Light)
I-H (Heavy)
WATERFRONT DISTRICTS
WD
OPEN SPACE AND PUBLIC LANDS DISTRICT
OS
WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT
WRPD
REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
RD
Section B. District boundaries and descriptions.
1. The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on
the map accompanying this Ordinance entitled "Zoning Map,
Portsmouth, Rhode Island" dated January 15, 1980 and signed by the
members of the Town Council of Portsmouth, and said Map, the original
of which is hung in the Office of the Town Clerk, is hereby declared to
be part of this Ordinance.
2. Intent and purposes of districts.
Section A CHARTER Section B
C:551
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS are intended to allow orderly
development of residential dwellings designed to complement the
natural features of the land, to promote suitable placement of
buildings and related facilities in relation to the site and surrounding
areas, with adequate living space and open space, to avoid
overcrowding of land, to encourage good design, to avoid
overburdening municipal facilities, and to insure compatibility with the
immediate neighborhood and with the natural environment.
R-10 DISTRICT is a residential zone with minimum lot size of ten
thousand square feet (10,000 ft.2)
R-20 DISTRICT is a residential zone with minimum lot size of
twenty thousand square feet (20,000 ft.2)
R-30 DISTRICT is a residential zone with minimum lot size of
thirty thousand square feet (30,000 ft.2)
R-40 DISTRICT is a residential zone with minimum lot size of
forty thousand square feet (40,000 ft.2)
R-60 DISTRICT is a residential zone with minimum lot size of
sixty thousand square feet (60,000 ft.2) and special restrictions to
preserve and protect important natural resources.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT C-1 is established to provide areas for
commercial establishments and serve community and Town-wide
shopping and service needs.
TOWN CENTER DISTRICT - TC is established to provide for a
pedestrian-friendly commercial district that is more densely developed
than the Commercial C-1 zone. Developments in the Town Center
District shall, to the extent possible, contribute to an atmosphere of a
traditional New England town center. While allowing mixed uses and
planned unit developments, this district is more restrictive than the
C-1 District in terms of discouraging or prohibiting uses that are not
conducive to its purpose. Other than prohibited uses, all proposed uses
in the TC District are subject to special use permits and design review.
[Added 10-27-2004]
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS are established to encourage intensive
industrial and business activities, with proper safeguards for
protecting nearby residential areas and environmentally sensitive
areas.
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL I-H is established to provide for levels of noise,
vibration, smoke, odor and other evidence of industrial activity
commensurate with State and Federal standards and other
performance standards that may be set by the Town.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL I-L is established to provide for a lesser level of
noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other evidence of industrial activity
commensurate with performance standards that may be set by the
Town.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:552
WATERFRONT DISTRICT WD is established primarily for
businesses catering to marine and marine-related activities.
OPEN SPACE AND PUBLIC LANDS OS is established for all lands
which shall be dedicated to open space, recreation, conservation, or
public uses.
REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT is existing or formerly property of the
U.S. Navy generally known as the tank farms.
3. Identification of certain districts. Further identification of boundaries
for certain districts is established by the Zoning Map and Lot numbers
as follows:
R-60 is established by the Zoning Map and specific lot numbers as
follows:
R-60 DISTRICT LOTS124
MAP 13
LOT: Founders Grove (junction of Route 138 & Boyd's Lane, State
property).
MAP 28125
LOT: 71 (500 feet surrounding St. Mary's Pond, Sisson Pond and
Lawton Valley Reservoir, measured landward from the high water
line, not in Open Space District).
MAP 32
LOTS: 1, 1A, 1B, 2, 3 (south of Brook, 500 feet west of West Main
Road to western lot line)
MAP 37
LOTS: 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34
MAP 50 [Added 12-11-2000]
LOTS: 3
MAP 59
LOTS: 17A, 19
MAP 62
LOT: 6
124. Note: Technical Amendment August 1996 to correct errors: Portions of lots in Maps 51,
56, 60, 61 and 63 are in R-60 zone within 500 feet surrounding St. Mary's Pond, Sisson
Pond and Lawton Valley Reservoir, measured landward from the high water line, not in
Open Space District, as follows: MAP 51 - LOTS: 53, 55, 55A MAP 56 - LOTS: 4, 5, 6, 12,
12A, 12B, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 30. MAP 60 - LOTS: 10, 11, 13, 14, 14A, 16, 17, 20, 22, 22A,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 45, 46, 47. MAP 61 - LOTS: 1, 3, 5 MAP 63 - LOT: 1.
125. Note: Technical Amendment August 1996 to correct errors: No portion of Map 28 is in
R-60 zone.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:553
R-60 DISTRICT LOTS (Prudence Island)
Map 71
LOT: 1
Map 72
LOTS: 1, 2 and 3
Map 73
LOTS: 25-A, 25-B
Map 74
LOTS: 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, and 23
Map 76
LOTS: 1, 2, 3, 5, 5-A, 5-B, 6, 6-A, 6-B
Map 77
LOTS: 79, 80, 109, 110, 111 and 114
Map 78
LOTS: 78 and 79
Map 79
LOTS: 1, 2 and 69
Map 80
LOT: 1
Map 81
LOTS: 5 and 5-A
Map 82
LOTS: 1 and 6
Map 83
LOTS: 1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 12, 12-C, 12-D, 12-E, 12-I, 12-J, 12-K, 12-L,
12-M, 13 and 14
Map 84126
LOTS: 60-A, 60-B, 77, 78, 80, 81, 82, 83 and 84
4. Identification of non-residential districts. Further identification of nonresidential
zoning district boundaries is established by the Zoning Map
and Lot numbers as follows:
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT LOTS
MAP 19
LOTS: 80,127 86, 87, 88, 89, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135
126. Note: Article III. Section B., paragraph 3 R-60 District Lots. That map 84, Lot 60,
(Prudence Island) be rezoned from Open Space to R-20 with the requirement that no lots
coming out of that lot be smaller than 47,000 square feet (three lots in all). AMENDED:
August 15, 1994
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:554
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT LOTS
MAP 20
LOTS: 1, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362
MAP 21
LOTS: 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 49, 50, 51, 52, 56, 57, 58, 64, 66, 67, 68,
69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 85A,
86, 86A, 104, 105, 139A, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 145A, 146, 147,
148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 160, 162
MAP 24
LOTS: 1, 2, 9, 10, 10A, 11, 12, 13, 14, 51, 52, 52A, 53, 53A, 54, 58,
59, 59A, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64
MAP 25
LOTS: 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 16, 17, 21
MAP 29
LOTS: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5A, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 30, 31, 32, 32A, 33, 39, 40,
100, 101, 101A, 101B, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 113, 116,
117
MAP 31128
LOTS: 1, 2, 3, 4, 4A, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 20A, 21, 22, 23, 24, 24B,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29A, 29B, 30, 32, 32A, 33, 34, 34A, 126, 127, 128, 129,
75, 76, 77, 78
MAP 33
LOTS: 41B
MAP 34129
127. Note: That Map 19, Lot 80 be rezoned from Residential-20 to Commercial (without
restrictions). (The previously set conditions being: That the hours of operation would be
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, that all boats will be delivered or
taken from the premises during these business hours, that there will be appropriate
screening that will not block the view of homes but will protect property rights, that there
will be no repair shops and that the building will be used for storage and retail sale only.)
(Could vary the conditions by going to the Zoning Board of Review.) Also previously voted
was to allow a business office and medical offices. ADOPTED: August 15, 1994.
128. Note: ARTICLE III, Section B, (4), "Commercial District Lots, Map 31" is amended by
deleting Lot 29 there from. Effective September 9, 1997, Lot 29 on Map 31 be rezoned
Residential-20 (from Commercial) subject to the following conditions: That the owners of
said lot 29 shall maintain the existing chain link fence along the common boundary with
lot 70 on Map 28; that the owners of lot 29 enhance the present vegetative buffer along
said boundary with lot 70 so that it has a screening effect equal to a compact evergreen
screen five feet deep and at least six feet in mature height and said enhanced buffer be
maintained; that the owners of lot 29 install and maintain a compact evergreen screen,
five feet deep, not less than six feet in mature height and no less than two and one-half
feet in height at planting along the common boundary of lot 29 and lot 29-A. Adopted
September 9, 1997. Article III, Section B 4 amended November 10, 1999 by deleting lots
79, 80, 81 & 82 on Map 31 from Commercial District Lots and re-designating R-20. Lots
32 and 32A, Map 31, as subdivided and zone line adjusted per Planning Board and Town
Council approvals on 9-10-2018.
129. Note: Lot 7 added August 23, 2010. Article III, Section B paragraph 4 Commercial lots -
effective July 12, 2004, Lot 6 on Map 34 is zoned commercial with the following
conditions: 1. The property will be sub-divided as shown on the plan submitted to the
Town Council on July 12, 2004. (Town Clerk's Note: The Plan referred to was recorded in
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:555
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT LOTS
LOTS: 7, 6, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40,
41
MAP 35
LOTS: 15A, 16, 18
MAP 41130
LOTS: 29
MAP 42
LOTS: 2, 35, 36, 43, 44, 90
MAP 44
LOTS: 10A, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 (from West Main Road 500 feet east),
15A, 16, 17, 18, 19
MAP 45
LOTS: 1, 2, 43, 44, 44A, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96 (268' north and
498' southeast of East Main Road)
MAP 47
LOTS: 32, 33, 34, 35, 36
MAP 51
LOTS: 15,131 16, 34, 34A, 34B, 34C, 35, 36, 37, 37A, 37B, 37D
LOTS: 4, 5, 12132
MAP 55
LOTS: 4, 5, 8 and the easterly most three hundred (300) feet of Lots
9, 10, 11 & 12133
the Land Evidence Records on July 20, 2004, as Plan #862.) 2. Use of the premises to be
limited to professional medical offices. 3. The size, location and design of the new building
be in substantial accordance with the plans submitted to the Town Council on July 12,
2004, subject to any changes approved by the Portsmouth Zoning Board of Review.
130. Note: Article III, Section B paragraph 4 Commercial lots - effective November 9, 1999, Lot
29 on Map 41 is zoned commercial with the following conditions: 1. That all lighting be
designed to illuminate only the subject property and be directed away from neighboring
property. 2. That there be no construction or parking on the westerly forty (40) feet of the
subject lot and said area be devoted solely to a landscape buffer. 3. That a compact
evergreen screen, no less than six (6) feet in mature height, be planted and maintained: a.
Along the entire westerly boundary, and b. Beginning with a point equidistant from East
Main Road with the easterly point of any building and running westerly along the
boundaries with lots 31 and 32 to the northwest corner of the subject lot. 4. That all work
be performed within the building. 5. That the use be limited to retail sales and service,
specifically excluding food or beverage service. 6. That the curb cut to East Main Road be
abandoned and all access be from Crossings Court.
131. Note: Adopted 5-24-2004 (from R20 to Commercial)
132. Note: Adopted 2-11-2008 (from Residential to Commercial)
133. Note: Adopted: 12-15-1999. Article III, Section B paragraph 4 Commercial lots - Lot 8 and
the easterly most three hundred (300) feet of Lots 9, 10, 11 & 12 on Map 55 are zoned
commercial with the following conditions: 1. That the property be limited to the following
uses: a. Professional offices such as engineers, attorneys, financial planners, real estate
and/or insurance agencies and the like; b. Day care facilities limited to serving the needs
of employees of the site and neighboring assisted living facility; c. Offices and clinics for
medical, dental, psychiatric or other health services for the examination or treatment of
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:556
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT LOTS
MAP 56
LOTS: 6, 7, 8
MAP 57
LOTS: 2, 3, 4, 5, 34B, 36
MAP 58
LOTS: 1, 2, 3
MAP 77 [Added 3-28-2011]
LOTS: 113
TOWN CENTER COMMERCIAL DISTRICT LOTS134
MAP 33
LOTS: 37, 38, 39, 40
MAP 34
LOTS: 1, 2, 3, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104
MAP 35
LOTS: 13, 14, 15 (772' west of East Main Road), 17, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26
MAP 36
LOTS: 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 12A, 13, 14 (434' east of East Main Road) 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 61*
* Indicates zone changed subject to filing of deed restriction.
LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT LOTS
MAP 37
LOTS: 48, 69
MAP 38
persons as out patient, including laboratories that are a part of such offices or clinics; 2.
That the following uses are expressly prohibited: retail sale businesses; drive-in or drivethrough
facilities, whether attended or unattended; food or beverage service and/or
restaurants whether or not intended for the use of the primary occupants of the building;
wholesale businesses or storage businesses; business or financial offices or establishments
other than allowed pursuant to paragraph 1a & c above; service businesses other than
expressly allowed pursuant to paragraph 1a, b & c above; social clubs, lodges, libraries,
schools or museums. 3. This amendment is conditioned upon the issuance of all final
approvals by the State of Rhode Island Department of Transportation and any other
appropriate agency to authorize the installation of a traffic signal at the entrance to West
Main Road, (Route 114). 4. If the condition set forth in paragraph 3 above is satisfied, this
amendment shall become effective upon the recordation in the Portsmouth Land Evidence
records of a special use permit authorizing the establishment of a nursing home/assisted
living facility on Tax Assessor's Map 55, Lot 13.
134. Note: The following lots were re-zoned from "Commercial" to "Town Center - Commercial"
on 10-27-2004: MAP 33 - LOTS: 37, 38, 39, 40 MAP 34 - LOTS: 1, 2, 3, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99,
100, 101, 102, 103, 104 MAP 35 - LOTS: 13, 14, 15 (772' west of East Main Road), 17, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 MAP 36 - LOTS: 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 12A, 13, 14 (434' east of East
Main Road) 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 61*
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:557
LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT LOTS
LOTS: 1,135 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 7C, 7D, 7E, 11, 12, 13, 13A, 13B, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32
MAP 43 [Added 4-29-2002]
LOTS: 1 part136
MAP 44
LOTS: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 15 (see Commercial)
MAP 51137
LOTS: 47, 50, 53, 54, 55
MAP 52
LOT: 5
MAP 53:
LOTS: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 18A,
18B, 18C, 18D, 18E, 18F, 18G, 18H, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 32A, 18J
MAP 57
LOTS: 6, 7, 7A, 7B138
MAP 58
LOTS: 50, 50A, 50B, 51, 52, 53
HEAVY INDUSTRY DISTRICT LOTS
MAP 16139
LOT: 37
135. Note: Article III, Section B 4 is amended to add the following parcels to that section
entitled: "LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT LOTS" That portion of Lot 1 on Map 38 rezoned
from Light Industry to R-20: Beginning at a point, which said point is the northwest
corner of the portion of the parcel to be zoned R-20 and the intersection of the southerly
side of Cory's Lane, then running southwesterly, along the northwesterly boundary line of
said parcel, a distance of twelve hundred (1,200) feet more or less to the southwest corner
of said parcel as a point for a corner; thence turning and running southeasterly, along the
southwesterly boundary line of said parcel a distance of four hundred seventy-five (475)
feet to a point for a corner; thence turning and running northeasterly in a straight line;
parallel and four hundred seventy-five (475) feet southeasterly of the first course herein
described a distance of twelve hundred (1,200) feet more or less to the southerly side of
Cory's Lane to a point for a corner; thence turning and running northwesterly, bounded
northeasterly by said Cory's Lane, four hundred seventy-five (475) feet to the point or
place of beginning. Adopted 3-20-2006.
136. Note: Article III, Section B 4 is amended to add the following parcels to that section
entitled: "LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT LOTS": That portion of Lot 1 on Map 43 designated
thereon as parcel L (from the eastern boundary to a line 600 feet easterly and parallel to
the centerline of the railroad line). That the certain map entitled: "Zoning Map,
Portsmouth, Rhode Island, dated January 15, 1980" be amended to reflect said changes.
137. Note: Parcels Map 51, Lots 49, 51, 52 and 54 were removed from the Light Industrial zone
5-7-2008.
138. Note: Map 57 lots 7A and 7B added 3-22-2000.
139. Note: Adopted: 11-3-1997. ARTICLE III, Section B(4), District Boundaries is amended to
delete the following parcel of land from "Heavy Industry District Lots": Tax Map 16, Lot 40
(previously a portion of existing Lot 37); Lot 40 on Tax Assessor's Map 16 is rezoned
Residential-40, subject to the following conditions: That the northerly portion of Lot 37,
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:558
HEAVY INDUSTRY DISTRICT LOTS
MAP 17
LOT: 8
MAP 22
LOTS: 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 19, 20, 21, Lot 10 (500 feet East of RR)
MAP 23
LOT: 18 (500 feet East of RR)
MAP 26
LOTS: 1, 2, 2A, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 13
MAP 27
LOTS: 6, 6A, 7, 24A, 24B,140 25
MAP 32
LOT: 3 (North of Brook from 500' west of West Main Road to western
lot line)
MAP 50
LOTS: 1, 2, 5
MAP 51
LOT: 1
WATERFRONT DISTRICT LOTS
MAP 37
LOTS: 36, 36A, 36B, 36C
MAP 43
LOTS: 1 part,141 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
MAP 50
now known as Lot 40, on Tax Map 16 be zoned Residential-40 upon the following
conditions: - that a subdivision plan substantially in compliance with the plan reviewed by
the Council be approved by the Portsmouth Planning Board and that said plan contain the
following: - trees which form part of a canopy over Therien Road must be marked on said
plan and not removed, - that all lots, including those having frontage on Therien Road,
have access over a common drive from West Shore Road; - that lots fronting on Therien
Road be subject to a 150 foot building setback restriction, (exclusive of sheds and fences),
running parallel to Therien Road up to a point 125 feet from the easterly boundary of lot
40, - that lots bordering lots 38 and 39 be subject to a 30 foot building setback restriction
(exclusive of sheds and fences) along the northerly border of lot 38 and the easterly and
northerly border of lot 39; - that the plat provide an easement for the owner of lot 39 to
travel over and across an existing driveway on lot 37; - that the plat provide the owner of
lot 33 an easement for parking purposes which could be screened with shrubbery if
necessary; - that the matter of Riley Lamson v. Zoning Board of Review, M.P. 97-6 be
dismissed.
140. Note: Map 27, lots 24A and 24B added 3-22-2000.
141. Adopted 4-29-2002. Note: Article III, Section B 4 is amended to add the following parcels
to that section entitled "WATERFRONT DISTRICT LOTS" 1. that portion of Lot 1 on Tax
Map 43 designated thereon as Parcel M. 2. that portion of Lot 1 on Map 43 designated
thereon as Parcel L (from the centerline of the railroad line to a line 600 feet easterly of
and parallel to the centerline of the railroad line).
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:559
WATERFRONT DISTRICT LOTS
LOTS: 6, 7
OPEN SPACE AND PUBLIC LANDS DISTRICT LOTS
MAP 7
LOT: 8
MAP 13
LOT: 1
MAP 25
LOT: 48
MAP 37
LOT: 37
MAP 38
LOT: 6A
MAP 43
LOT: 1 part,142 1A
MAP 49
LOT: 44
MAP 50
LOT 7 part (see note 22)
MAP 56
LOT: 4, 5
MAP 59
LOTS: 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 25, 26
MAP 60
LOT: 25
MAP 61
LOT: 6, 7, 8
MAP 62
LOT: 3, 4, 5, 8, 9
REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT LOTS [Added 3-15-2010]
MAP 43
LOT: 1L
142. Adopted 4-29-2002. Note: That Article III, Section 4 is amended to add the following
parcels to that section entitled "OPEN SPACE AND PUBLIC LANDS DISTRICT LOTS": 1.
All of Lot 1 on Map 43 south of Lawton Brook and all of lot 7 on Map 50 south of Lawton
Brook's outfall to the Bay, (commonly known as tank farms 3 and 4 and adjacent coastal
areas).
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:560
Section C. Rules for interpretation of zoning boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of zones, as shown on the Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
Section D. Application of district regulations.
1. Boundaries indicated as following the center lines of a highway, street,
railroad or utility right-of-way shall be construed to follow such center
line.
2. Boundaries indicated as following property lines shall be construed to
follow such property lines.
3. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to
follow such shore lines (mean high water) and in the event of change in
the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line.
4. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, ponds or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such center lines or middle of said stream, river, pond or body of
water.
5. Land created by the filling of a stream or water body shall be
considered to be within the district of the land from which such fill was
extended.
6. Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be
construed as following Town limits.
7. When a lot is situated in part in the Town of Portsmouth and in part in
an adjacent municipality, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
applied as if the entire lot were situated in Portsmouth.
8. Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features indicated
in 1 through 7 above shall be so construed.
9. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map nor in District
Boundaries in Section B above shall be determined by the scale of the
Zoning Map.
10. Where the exact location of a boundary line cannot be determined
under the above subsections, the location of such line shall be
determined by the zoning enforcement officer.
11. Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by the above subsections, the Zoning Board
of Review shall interpret zoning district boundaries.
1. When a lot is transected by a Zoning District Boundary, the regulations
of this Ordinance applicable to the larger part by area of such lot may
also, at the option of the lot owner, be deemed to govern the smaller
Section C CHARTER Section D
C:561
Section E. Open Space and Public Lands District.
part beyond such Zoning District Boundary but only to a distance of not
more than forty linear feet (40') in depth beyond such zoning District
Boundary.
2. No building shall be erected except on a lot fronting on a public street,
and there shall be not more than one (1) principal building on any lot,
except as allowed under this Ordinance.
3. No accessory building in a residential district may be converted to a
principal use.
4. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance to the contrary,
any structures, buildings and land owned, leased or used by the Town of
Portsmouth may be erected, enlarged, or used by the Town of
Portsmouth in the performance of its governmental functions, in any
district, and said structures, buildings or lands so erected, enlarged, or
used shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.
1. The Open Space and Public Lands District is established for all lands
which shall be dedicated to open space, recreation, conservation, or
public uses.
2. The following are the permitted uses:
a) Recreation.
b) Conservation.
c) Public Uses.
d) Wildlife Management.
e) Agriculture.
f) Forest Management.
g) Historic Monuments.
h) Museum.
i) Nonprofit historical restoration.
j) Structures accessory to permitted uses, as a special use permit.
k) Utility lines, provided they are underground, as a special use
permit.
l) On Town owned land, any use approved by the Portsmouth Town
Council.
(Note: There shall not be a listing of permitted uses in this district
in the Use Tables in Article V.)
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:562
Section F. Flood hazard areas. [Amended 3-22-2010; 8-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-08-26A]
3. No dimensional requirements shall be set for permitted uses in this
district, provided that setbacks from abutting non-open space district
parcels shall be those of said abutting district.
4. Special Use Permits. The Zoning Board of Review may permit in an
open space district any use which will not interfere with the primary
purpose of this district for open space, recreation, and conservation.
1. Purpose.
a) The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure public safety, to
minimize hazards to persons and property from flooding, to protect
watercourses from encroachment, and to maintain the capability of
floodplains to retain and carry off floodwaters. The Town of
Portsmouth elects to comply with the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
b) The provisions herein governing the development and use of inland
and tidal land subject to flood hazards shall be minimum provisions,
shall take precedence over any other conflicting laws, ordinances,
or codes, shall not impair or remove the necessity of compliance
with any other applicable laws, ordinances, or codes and shall
consider any flood plain management programs in neighboring
municipalities.
2. Applicability.
a) All lands determined by the Building Official to be within Special
Flood Hazard Areas and flood fringe lands shall be subject to the
procedures and regulations established in this section.
b) The special flood hazard areas are herein established as a
floodplain overlay district. The District includes all special flood
hazard areas within the Town of Portsmouth designated as Zone A,
AE, V, or VE on the Newport County Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) and Digital FIRM issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National
Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Newport County
FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Portsmouth
are panel numbers 0011J, 0012J, 0013J, 0014J, 0018J, 0019J, 0038J,
0039J, 0076J, 0077J, 0079J, 0081J, 0082J, 0083J, 0084J, 0091J,
0092H, 0094H, 0101J, 0103J, 0111J, 0113J, dated September 4,
2013. The exact boundaries of the District may be defined by the
one-hundred-year (100-year) base flood elevations shown on the
FIRM and further defined by the Newport County Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) report dated September 4,2013. The office of the
Portsmouth Building Official is responsible for floodplain
management. The FIRM and FIS report and any revisions thereto
Section E CHARTER Section F
C:563
are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the
Building Official of the Town of Portsmouth. [Amended 2-25-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-02-25]
3. Administration.
a) Provisions of this section of the ordinance, including plan review
for compliance, record keeping, enforcement and coordination with
State and Federal agencies are administered by the Portsmouth
Building Official or his/her designee in reference to RIGL
§ 23-27.3-108.1.
b) Violations of flood hazard regulations are administered per
ARTICLE XVI of this ordinance in reference to RIGL
§ 23-27.3-122.3.
c) All proposed construction or other development within a Special
Flood Hazard Area shall require a permit.
d) The National Flood Insurance Program Special Flood Hazard Area
requires permits for all projects that meet the definition of
development, not just "building" projects. Development projects
include any filling, grading, excavation, mining, drilling, storage of
materials, temporary stream crossings. If the construction or other
development within a Special Flood Hazard Area is not covered by
a building permit, all other non-structural activities shall be
permitted by either the Rhode Island Coastal Resources
Management Council and/or the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management as applicable. Therefore if another
State agency issues a permit, the local building official must have
the opportunity for input and keep a copy of the respective permit
in their files.
e) If the construction or other development within a Special Flood
Hazard Area is not covered by a building permit or other approved
permit application, a flood hazard development permit shall be
required. The application for a flood hazard development permit
shall be submitted to the Portsmouth Building Official and shall
include:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) An address or a map indicating the location of the construction
site;
(3) A site plan showing location of existing and proposed
structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities,
areas to be cut and filled, and the dimensions of the lot;
(4) A statement of the intended use of the structure;
(5) A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:564
(6) Specification of dimensions of the proposed structures;
(7) The specific datum used for all elevations;
(8) The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor,
including basement, and if the lowest floor is below grade on
one or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above;
(9) Base flood elevation data for all new, relocated or substantially
improved structures;
(10) The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the
structure will be floodproofed;
(11) The description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
f) Prior to the issuance of a building or development permit, the
applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary permits and
approvals have been received from all government agencies from
which approval is required by Federal or State law.
g) All permit applications for construction or other development
within a Special Flood Hazard Area shall be reviewed to determine
whether the proposed site will be reasonably safe from flooding. All
new construction and substantial improvements shall:
(1) Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy;
(2) Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(3) Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages, and;
(4) Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that
are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
h) All new subdivision proposals, including new manufactured home
parks, shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site
will be reasonably safe from flooding. All such proposals shall be
reviewed to assure that:
(1) They are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage
within the flood-prone area,
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage,
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:565
(3) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
4. Reference to existing regulations.
a) The Special Flood Hazard Areas are established as a floodplain
overlay district. All development in the district, including structural
and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by
special use permit must be in compliance with the following:
• Rhode Island State Building Code (as established under Rhode
Island General Law § 23-27.3-100.1)
• Coastal Resources Management Program, Coastal Resource
Management Council (RIGL § 46-23)
• Endangered Species Act, Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (RIGL § 20-1-2)
• Freshwater Wetlands Act, Department of Environmental
Management (RIGL § 46-23-6)
• Minimum Standards Related to Individual Sewage Disposal
Systems, Department of Environmental Management (RIGL
§ 46-12)
• Water Quality Regulations, Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (RIGL § 42-17.1 and 42-17.6 and
46-12)
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above
referenced State regulations may only be granted in accordance
with the required variance procedures of these State regulations.
b) All new and replacement water supply systems proposed for
installation in a Special Flood Hazard Area are to be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
c) All new and replacement waste water treatment systems proposed
for installation in a Special Flood Hazard Area are to be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into such systems
and discharge from such systems into flood waters. New or
replacement onsite waste water treatment systems are to be
located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding. The provisions of this paragraph are reviewed and
administered by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management (RIDEM).
d) All manufactured homes to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard
Area shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize
flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system in accordance with the provisions of the Rhode
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:566
Island Building Code. This requirement is in addition to applicable
State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
e) In a riverine situation requiring any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, the carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained. If the watercourse crosses
municipal boundaries, the Portsmouth Building Official shall notify
the adjacent community, as well as:
NFIP State Coordinator
Rhode Island Emergency Management Agency
645 New London Avenue
Cranston, RI 02920
Risk Analysis Branch
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
5. Base flood elevation and floodway data.
a) Floodway Data - In Zones A, A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that
have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available
Federal, State, local, or other floodway data shall be used to
prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b) Base Flood Elevations in A Zones - Where BFE data is available, the
Building Official shall obtain and maintain records of the lowest
floor elevation and height of flood proofing for all new and
substantially improved construction.
c) Base Flood Elevations in A Zones - In the absence of BFE data and
floodway data, the best available Federal, State, local, or other BFE
or floodway data shall be used as the basis for elevating residential
and non-residential structures to or above the base flood level and
for flood proofing non-residential structures to or above the base
flood level.
d) Base Flood Elevations in A Zones - BFE data is required for
subdivision proposals or other developments greater than fifty (50)
lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser.
6. Use regulations. Uses permitted by right or by Special Use Permit
pursuant to Article V of this ordinance and located in Special Flood
Hazard Areas (not including flood fringe lands) shall be subject to the
following provisions:
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:567
a) A and AE Zones:
(1) Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within Zones A and AE, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point
within the community.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures within Zones A and AE shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the Base
Flood Elevation.
(3) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures within Zones A and AE:
(i) Shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to or above the base flood level OR,
(ii) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having
the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
(4) Where a non-residential structure is intended to be made
watertight below the base flood level:
(i) A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop and/or review structural design, specifications,
and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of paragraph 7.c)(2) above and,
(ii) A record of such certificates which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are flood proofed shall be maintained with the
Portsmouth Building Official.
(5) For all new construction and substantial improvements in the A
and AE Zones, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
limited storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:568
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(i) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch (1"2) for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above grade.
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(6) All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved upon within Zones A and AE on sites: a) outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or d) in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the
result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to or above the base flood elevation and is securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation collapse and lateral movement.
(7) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
upon in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
within Zones A and AE that are not subject to the provisions of
paragraph 6.a)(6) above shall be elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above
the Base Flood Elevation, OR,
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches
(36") in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
(8) Detached accessory structures in Zones A, AE, A1-30, AO, and
AH (i.e., garages, sheds) do not have to meet the elevation or
dry flood-proofing requirement if the following standards are
met:
(i) The structure has a value less than one thousand dollars
($1,000).
(ii) The structure has unfinished interiors and must not be
used for human habitation. An apartment, office or other
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:569
finished space over a detached garage is considered
human habitation and would require the structure to be
elevated.
(iii) The structure is not in the floodway.
(iv) The structure is not used for storage of hazardous
materials.
(v) The structure is used solely for parking of vehicles and/or
limited storage.
(vi) The accessory must be wet floodproofed and designed to
allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood water.
(vii) The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(viii) Service facilities such as electrical, mechanical and
heating equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or
above the base flood elevation.
(ix) The structure must not increase the flood levels in the
floodway.
b) V and VE Zones (coastal high hazard areas):
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements in within
Zones V and VE shall be elevated on pilings and columns so
that:
(i) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is
elevated to or above the base flood level, and,
(ii) The pile or column foundation and structure attached
thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loads
acting simultaneously on all building components. Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable State or local building standards. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop or review
the structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods
of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this
section.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements within
Zones V and VE shall have the space below the lowest floor:
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:570
(i) Free of obstructions as described in FEMA Technical
Bulletin 5 "Free of Obstruction Requirements for Buildings
Located in Coastal High Hazard Area in Accordance with
the National Flood Insurance Program", or
(ii) Constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect
screening intended to collapse under wind and water
without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building
or supporting piles or columns; or,
(iii) Designed with an enclosed area less than three hundred
square feet (300 ft.2) that is constructed with nonsupporting
breakaway walls that have a design safe
loading resistance of not less than ten (10) or more than
twenty (20) pounds per square foot.
Use of break-way walls which exceed a design safe
loading resistance of twenty (20) pounds per square foot
(either by design or when so required by local or State
codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional
engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed
meet the following conditions:
a) Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load
less than that which would occur during the base
flood; and,
b) The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the
effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously
on all building components (structural and nonstructural).
Water loading values used shall be those
associated with the base flood. Wind loading values
used shall be those required by applicable State or
local building standards.
Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or limited storage.
(3) For all new construction and substantial improvements within
Zones V and VE, the Portsmouth Building Official shall obtain
the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the
lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings
and columns), determine whether or not such structures
contain a basement, and maintain a record of all such
information.
(4) All new construction and substantial improvements within
Zones V and VE shall be located landward of the reach of mean
high tide.
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:571
(5) The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited
within all V and VE Zones.
(6) The man-made alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands
is prohibited within all V and VE Zones.
(7) All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved upon within Zones A and AE on sites: a) outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or d) in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the
result of a flood, shall meet the standards of paragraphs 6.b)(1)
through (6) of this section.
(8) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
upon in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
within Zones V and VE that are not subject to the provisions of
paragraph 6.b)(7) shall meet the standards of paragraph
6.a)(7).
7. Recreational vehicles.
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Special Flood Hazard
Areas shall meet one (1) of the following requirements:
a) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days,
b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use,
c) Meet the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured
homes in paragraph 4.d).
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions
8. Additional conditions.
a) For the following uses, additional reasonable conditions dealing
solely with flood protection measures may be imposed by the
Building Official. Likewise, the Zoning Board of Review may impose
similar restrictions as additional conditions in the issuance of a
Special Use Permit for the following uses:
RESIDENTIAL USES
a) Apartment House
b) Hotel, Motel, Motor Court, Tourist Home, Rooming House
c) Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:572
d) Recreation Buildings & Structures (for private use)
e) Private Garage
f) Buildings for Customary Home Occupations
g) Other Accessory Buildings
PUBLIC, SEMI-PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
a) Hospitals (other than animals), Sanitaria & Nursing Homes
b) School (offering standard courses)
c) Nursery School, Kindergarten
d) Public Utilities
e) Public Water Facilities
AGRICULTURAL USES
a) Accessory Buildings
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
a) Banks
b) Golf Courses, Country Club, Marina
c) Auction Barns
d) Open Air Display Lots, Commercial Parking Lots
e) Storage Warehouses
f) Lumber, Fuel and Ice Establishments
g) Research Facilities
h) Light Industry
i) Light Manufacturing
j) Industrial Establishments
k) Other Industrial Establishments
l) Gravel Pits, Earth Removal
b) No person shall change from business/commercial to residential
use of any structure or property located in the floodway of a Special
Flood Hazard Area so as to result in a use or expansion that could
increase the risk to the occupants.
9. Storage of bulk materials. No material shall be stored in Special
Flood Hazard Areas or in the flood fringe area which is likely to cause
an obstruction, create a fire hazard or pollute the water during flood
periods. Such materials include but are not limited to substantial
quantities of lumber and other floatable materials, volatile materials,
acids, poisons, liquids other than water and soluble materials.
10. Disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this
ordinance is considered reasonable but does not imply total flood
protection.
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:573
11. Severability. If any section, provision, or portion of this ordinance is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the
ordinance shall not be affected.
12. Variance procedures. Variances shall not be issued within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result. The Building Official shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increase premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars
($25) for one hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage; and (2)
such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions, including justification of their issuance. All such
variances issued shall be reported in the Town's Annual Report to the
Federal Insurance Administrator.
13. Definitions. Words and phrases defined herein pertain to flood plain
management and are for the purposes of Article III, Section F of this
ordinance only.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation of the crest of the
base flood or one hundred (100)-year flood. The height, as established
in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or
other datum where specified), in relation to mean sea level expected to
be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the
floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the one
hundred (100) year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
and depicted on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
BASEMENT — Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See definition for "Structure".
BUILDING HEIGHT — [Added 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02-25]
For any property or structure located in a special flood hazard area,
as shown on the official FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs),
building height shall be measured from base flood elevation (BFE),
and where freeboard, as defined in this section, being utilized
or proposed, such freeboard area, not to exceed five feet (5'),
shall be excluded from the building height calculation; provided,
however that the Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management
Council (CRMC) design elevation maps may be used by an owner
a)
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:574
COASTAL A ZONE — Area within a special flood hazard area, landward
of a V Zone or landward of an open coast without mapped V Zones.
The principal source of flooding must be astronomical tides, storm
surges, seiches, or tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During the base
flood conditions, the potential for breaking wave heights shall be
greater than or equal to one point five feet (1.5').
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — The area subject to velocity hazard
(wave action) designated on a FIRM as Zone V or VE.
COST — As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other
improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written
contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to:
the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements,
utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building
equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and
utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site
preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on
at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand
total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications,
survey costs, permit fees, costs to correct code violations subsequent to
a violation notice, outside improvements such as septic systems, water
supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation
systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings
or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial
improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings
or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or
extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public
or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED
HOME SUBDIVISION — A manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
or applicant to establish a base flood elevation for a property that
is higher than the official FEMA FIRMs.
For building sites in special flood hazard areas where the base
flood elevation (BFE) is higher than the average existing grade,
the maximum height for buildings and structures shall be in
accordance with the general intensity regulation tables at Article
IV, Section B and Article VIII, Section D6.a) of this chapter minus
the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE), however
established, and the average existing grade. In all cases, building
height shall be measured to the top of the highest point of the
existing or proposed roof or structure. The distance shall exclude
spires, chimneys, flag poles, and the like.
b)
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:575
the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including,
as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION — The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The
federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).
FLOOD FRINGE LANDS — The continuous land area adjacent to and
higher than Special Flood Hazard Areas, the elevation of which is no
greater than one foot (1') above the adjacent base flood elevation, and
for purposes of the flood provisions within this Zoning Ordinance shall
be subject only to provisions dealing with storage of bulk materials in
flood fringe lands.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas [one
hundred (100)-year floodplain] and the insurance risk premium zones
applicable to a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official study of a community
in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
conducted a technical engineering evaluation and determination of
local flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface elevations. The
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide
both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations, and may
provide the regulatory floodway limits.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the
overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PLAIN — The continuous area bounding a water body or water
course, the elevation of which is equal to or lower than the base flood
elevation; also, any isolated land of higher elevation with a total area
less than the district's minimum residential lot size.
FLOOD PROOFING — Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:576
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot (1').
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE OR FACILITY — A use that cannot
perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in
close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG) — The highest natural elevation of
the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually
in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by
the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historic significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed
on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an
approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior
or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LIMWA) — An advisory line
indicating the limit of the one point five-foot (1.5') wave height during
the base flood.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement) but excluding any unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or limited storage in an area other than a basement, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:577
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one (1) or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed
for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers,
recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles or transportable
structures placed on a site for one hundred and eighty (180)
consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
MARKET VALUE — Market value is the price of a structure that a
willing buyer and seller agree upon. This can be determined by an
independent appraisal by a professional appraiser; the property's tax
assessment, minus land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation
of the structure; the structure's Actual Cash Value.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "Start of
Construction" (see below) commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later,
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective
date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations adopted by the
community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single
chassis; (b) four hundred square feet (400 ft.2) or less when measured
at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — See definition for "Floodway".
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance
of flooding in any given year. After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99,
AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE or V. For
purposes of these regulations, the term "special flood hazard area" is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard".
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:578
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial
improvement or other improvement was within one hundred and eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/
or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and
roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
For insurance purposes, means:
1. A building with two (2) or more outside rigid walls and a fully
secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site;
2. A manufactured home ("a manufactured home," also known as a
mobile home, is a structure; built on permanent chassis,
transported to its site in one (1) or more sections, and affixed to a
permanent foundation); or
3. A travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to
a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community's
floodplain management and building ordinances or laws.
For the latter purpose, "structure" does not mean recreational vehicle
or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in
paragraph (3) of this definition, or a gas or liquid storage tank.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either, a) before
the improvement or repair is started, or b) if the structure has been
damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the
purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered
to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:579
Section G. Traffic Sensitive Overlay District.
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term
does not, however, include either 1) any project for improvement of a
structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety
code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions or 2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management ordinance that allows construction in a manner
otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION — Failure of a structure or other development to be fully
complaint with the community's floodplain management ordinance. A
structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required
floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
1. Traffic Sensitive Districts are established for the following purposes:
a) To facilitate the movement of traffic along major roads in
Portsmouth in a safe and orderly manner;
b) To reduce the number of and increase the spacing of driveways
which may disrupt traffic flow;
c) To reduce infringement on the rights of the public to travel
roadways in a safe manner, while at the same time providing for
adequate access and egress to properties; and
d) To protect the public safety along major thoroughfares in the Town
where accidents have frequently occurred.
2. All driveways opening onto streets listed in Subparagraph 5 of this
Section shall have suitable turnaround space so that automobiles do not
back out into said streets.
3. On any lot with frontage on the streets listed in Subparagraph 5 of this
Section the following shall apply:
a) Only one (1) driveway or curb opening onto streets listed in
Subparagraph 5 of this Section shall be created to serve the
original lot; or
b) Future subdivision or lots created from the original lot shall be
served by a single common driveway or curb opening onto the
streets listed in Subparagraph 5 of this Section; or
c) A public street or street system approved by the Planning Board
under the provisions of the Rules and Regulations Regarding the
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section G
C:580
Section H. Watershed Protection District. [Added 11-17-1997]
Subdivision of Land143 shall be created to serve all subsequent lots
created from the original lot.
4. Common driveways, rights-of-way or other common means of access to
adjacent streets listed in Subparagraph 5 of this Section shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Review before any building permit shall be issued for lots created from
the original lot.
5. This Section shall be applicable only to lots having frontage on the
following streets:
a) East Main Road (Route 138).
b) West Main Road (Route 114).
c) Bristol Ferry Road (Route 114).
d) Turnpike Avenue.
e) Union Street.
f) Middle Road.
g) Sandy Point Avenue. [Added 6-5-1995144]
h) Wapping Road. [Added 6-5-1995145]
i) Glen Road. [Added 6-5-1995146]
j) Boyd's Lane. [Added 6-5-1995147]
k) Braman's Lane. [Added 6-5-1995148]
l) Stringham Road. [Added 3-15-2010]
m) Burma Road.149 [Added 3-15-2010]
Plat 66, Lot 4 as presently constituted is exempt (see footnotes).
1. Purpose. The provisions herein governing the development and use of
land in the Watershed Protection District, as defined in Subsection H.3.
below, shall be minimum provisions, and shall be superimposed on the
underlying zoning districts or parts of districts, and impose specified
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
144. Note: This amendment exempts Plat 66, Lot 4 as presently constituted.
145. Note: This amendment exempts Plat 66, Lot 4 as presently constituted.
146. Note: This amendment exempts Plat 66, Lot 4 as presently constituted.
147. Note: This amendment exempts Plat 66, Lot 4 as presently constituted.
148. Note: This amendment exempts Plat 66, Lot 4 as presently constituted.
149. Note: Also known as "Defense Highway."
Section G CHARTER Section H
C:581
requirements in addition to, but not less than, those otherwise
applicable for the underlying district, and shall consider any watershed
protection management programs in neighboring areas. These
provisions are established for the following purposes:
a) To protect, preserve and maintain the quality and quantity of
drinking water supplies which are of substantial value as a public
drinking water supply upon which the residents of the Town of
Portsmouth and others depend by regulating the use and
development of land adjoining water courses and/or primary water
recharge areas;
b) To regulate or prevent uses of land within the Watershed Protection
District having the potential to adversely affect the quality or
quantity of the drinking water of the Town;
c) To locate all construction, land disturbance and drainage facilities
at a maximum possible distance from drinking water reservoirs and
their tributaries.
d) The Portsmouth Comprehensive Plan requires protective measures
to ensure that our drinking water is plentiful and of the highest
quality.
e) To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
It is intended that this section be interpreted in view of the
paramount public interest involved in the protection of critical
drinking water supplies.
2. Other regulations to apply. Except for the provisions of this section as
they apply to the Watershed Protection District and in which such land
is located, all other provisions of this Ordinance shall continue in full
force and effect. Where there is a conflict between these provisions and
those of the Portsmouth Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations,150 these provisions shall prevail.
3. Designation of Watershed Protection District. The Watershed Protection
District is that land area, the surface water and ground water from
which have a direct or indirect effect on the quality of water in the
primary water bodies of the watershed. The Watershed Protection
District is defined as approximately that area bounded by Mill Lane on
the north, thence proceeding south on Middle Road to its terminus on
Union Street, thence proceeding east to East Main Road, thence
proceeding south on East Main Road to the Middletown Town Line,
thence proceeding west along the Town line to Jepson Lane, thence
proceeding north along Jepson Lane to its terminus at Union Street,
thence proceeding west on Union Street to its terminus at West Main
Road, thence proceeding north to its intersection of Mill Lane.
150. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section H PORTSMOUTH CODE Section H
C:582
a) Map III-1, which is derived from the "Water Quality Protection Plan
for the City of Newport, December 1989", shall be used for
determining inclusion in or exclusion from the Watershed
Protection District, and shall supersede the written description
above. The Zoning Officer shall determine from Map III-1 and onsite
surface topography the location of a parcel or portion thereof
in the Watershed Protection District.
b) Where the bounds of the Watershed Protection District are in doubt
or in dispute, the burden of proof shall be upon the owners of the
land in question to show where such bounds should properly be
located. At the request of the landowner(s), the Town may engage a
professional surveyor, hydrologist or soil scientist to determine
more accurately the location and extent of the Watershed area and
may charge the owner(s) for all or part of the cost of the
investigation.
4. Designation of hydrological zones within the Watershed Protection
District. The Watershed Protection District is composed of two
subzones with differing permitted uses and other regulations, as
approximated on Map III-2 herein. The reservoir/adjacent recharge
zone "A" Zone, and an upland drainage area or "UD" Zone.
a) "A" Zone. The area close to the surface reservoir which is critical to
the protection of surface and subsurface water supplies, and
requires a high degree of protection from incompatible land uses.
(1) Within five hundred feet (500') from the edge of Lawton Valley
Reservoir, St. Mary's Pond or Sisson Pond as determined by the
methodology specified in the R.I. Freshwater Wetlands Act,
and as certified by a professional engineer; and
(2) Areas of Stissing silt loam and Mansfield mucky silt loam (U.S.
Soil Natural Resource Conservation Service "Se and Ma" soil
types), as designated on the Soil Survey of Rhode Island 1981,
as amended, the maps and definitions of which are hereby
incorporated by reference to this Ordinance, as designated on
the Watershed Protection District Map III-2, the locations of
which may be confirmed by a soil scientist at the applicant's
expense; and/or
(3) All streams, wetlands and their buffers that are determined by
RIDEM application procedures to be tributaries to a drinking
water reservoir, as defined in Subparagraph 4.c) below.
Notwithstanding Subparagraph (2) above, wetland delineation,
as defined by RIDEM regulations, shall be used to determine
the exact bounds of the "A" zone within a parcel beyond the
area designated in Subparagraph (1) above.
b) "UD" Zone. The watershed area designated which is contributory to
surface water runoff to the primary water bodies either through
Section H CHARTER Section H
C:583
surface water runoff or groundwater movement that is not in the
"A" Zone.
c) The word "reservoir" shall be defined as Lawton Valley Reservoir,
St. Mary's Pond, Sisson Pond, and Bailey's Brook.
d) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article III, Section D.1, where a
lot is partially in the Watershed Protection District, that portion in
the Watershed Protection District shall adhere to all requirements
of this Section. Where a lot is partially in Zone "A" of the Watershed
Protection District and partially in Zone "UD", the requirements of
each zone shall be applied to that portion in the respective
districts.
5. Permitted uses in Zone "A". The following are the only uses permitted in
Zone A, regardless of uses allowed in the underlying zoning district.
(There shall not be a listing of permitted uses in this district in the Use
Tables in Article V.):
a) Conservation and management of soil, water, natural and wooded
open areas and wildlife.
b) Public water lines and related facilities.
c) Public or private parks.
d) Single family houses and uses and improvements customarily
accessory thereto.
e) Agriculture and outdoor recreation areas not including structures
or impermeable surfaces, provided there are vegetated buffers
around the primary impoundments that comprise the reservoirs.
f) Historic Monuments.
6. Prohibited uses in Zone "UD". Any use permitted in the underlying
zoning district by right or by special exception is permitted as such,
except for the following, which are expressly prohibited. (There shall
not be a listing of permitted uses in this district in the Use Tables in
Article V.)
a) Outdoor storage of junk or salvage materials.
b) Outdoor or underground storage of flammable, explosive or
hazardous material as defined by RIDEM regulations, including
petroleum, except as provided in Subparagraph 6.i) below.
c) Sewage treatment plant.
d) Incinerator.
e) Sanitary landfill.
f) Solid waste transfer station.
Section H PORTSMOUTH CODE Section H
C:584
g) Vehicle washing establishment.
h) Uses which discharge wastewater other than surface water into
other than an approved sewage disposal system.
i) Accessory uses to any principal use which involves any of the
following practices:
(1) Storage or disposal of hazardous waste (including petroleum)
as defined by Rules and Regulations for Hazardous Waste
RIDEM 7/18/84, as amended;
(2) Placement of an ISDS within two hundred feet (200') of the
surface water of a reservoir;
(3) Any underground storage of liquid fuel.
(4) Any above ground storage of liquid fuel in excess of three
hundred (300) gallons for any residential use, except uses by
public utilities subject to the provisions of RIDEM Oil Pollution
Control Regulations. Above ground storage of liquid fuel in
excess of three hundred (300) gallons for non-residential uses
may be permitted provided that said storage is placed at a
maximum feasible distance from the reservoirs and their
tributaries, and that construction, containment and
maintenance be in accordance with RIDEM Oil Pollution
Control Regulations.
7. Prohibited uses in Watershed Protection District. The following uses are
designated as a "Severe Threat to Water Quality" and are expressly
prohibited from the Watershed Protection District:
a) Any use that would generate a wastewater discharge other than
domestic sewage, including but not limited to:
(1) Photo processors.
(2) Furniture strippers.
(3) Laboratories.
(4) Dry cleaners.
(5) Laundromats.
b) Any use, storage or processing of a hazardous material, including
but not limited to:
(1) Gas stations.
(2) Landfills.
(3) Oil distributors.
(4) Printers.
Section H CHARTER Section H
C:585
(5) Fertilizer, pesticide, or herbicide warehouse or storage, except
storage conducted in accordance with the R.I. Pesticide
Control Act, if applicable, or as permitted and regulated under
the R.I. Pesticide Control Act or the R.I. Right to Farm Act.
(6) Auto body and auto repair shops.
c) A pre-existing nonconforming use or accessory use or a use
previously permitted by Special Use Permit may be expanded by
Special Use Permit if both the planned expansion and the prior use
or accessory use meet the applicable State regulations on storage
and use of hazardous materials, and both prior and planned storage
of hazardous materials are not within three hundred feet (300')
from the surface water of a reservoir or two hundred feet (200')
from a tributary thereto, and an adequate enclosed containment
system is provided.
8. Land use classification for uses not listed in Subsections 5, 6 or 7.
Because this ordinance cannot anticipate every type of proposed use,
other land uses within the Watershed Protection District are
categorized by potential effects on water quality. For each of these
proposed uses, the Zoning Board of Review shall determine the
appropriate use classification. The Zoning Board of Review may require
a set of mandatory protective measures (conditions) as part of any
building or development permit according to the Use Classifications set
forth below.
The following categories, ranging from least to the most severe threat
to water quality, apply:
a) Class 1 — No Risk
Including but not limited to: Open space, passive recreation.
b) Class 2 — Slight Risk
This category provides a substantial economic use to a landowner
without posing a major risk to drinking supplies.
Including but not limited to: Crops utilizing minimal amounts of
fertilizers and pesticides including permanent pasture, hay crops
and turf, low density residential [two (2) or more gross acres per
dwelling unit], utility lines, and developed recreation.
c) Class 3 — Moderate Risk
These uses require regulatory oversight and strict adherence to
applicable mitigative measures to prevent contamination problems.
Agricultural activities require application of an approved
conservation plan and best management practices.
Section H PORTSMOUTH CODE Section H
C:586
Including but not limited to: Agricultural production including
livestock, nurseries and orchards, corn, fruit and vegetables,
medium density residential [one-quarter (1/4) to two (2) gross
acres per dwelling unit], and commercial uses provided that total
impervious surface is less than or equal to twenty-five percent
(25%) of total lot area.
d) Class 4 — Higher Risk
Threat of spills, leaks, or unauthorized discharge of domestic
wastewater or hazardous materials from these land uses. Permitted
with caution and with substantial mitigative measures.
Including but not limited to: Institutional, high density residential
[less than one-quarter (1/4) gross acre per dwelling unit], sand and
gravel mining, appliance repair, commercial uses provided that no
dimensional variance for total lot coverage per the provisions of
Article VII., Section G. shall be permitted. Light industrial uses
which do not require discharge of other than domestic wastewater,
provided that no dimensional variance for lot coverage per the
provisions of Article IV., Section B. shall be permitted. Uses which
generate considerable wastewater and/or may utilize toxic or
hazardous substances including, schools, hospitals, medical offices
and nursing homes, motels/hotels, and car washes.
e) Class 5 — Severe Threat to Water Quality
Uses which employ hazardous chemicals including but not limited
to photo processors, furniture strippers, laboratories, printers, dry
cleaners and laundromats, gas stations, oil distributors, auto body,
underground fuel storage tanks, toxic chemical storage, except as
provided under Subparagraphs 6.i) and 7.c) above, and commercial
uses with impervious surface in excess of seventy percent (70%) of
a lot are not permitted in the watershed protection area.
9. Mandatory development restrictions.
a) Stormwater drainage.
For any subdivision adding or extending a street, discharge
(including discharge via a stormwater basin) of stormwater into
streams and wetlands that are determined by RIDEM application
procedures to be tributaries to a drinking water reservoir, as
defined in Subparagraph 4.c) herein, will not be permitted unless
the applicant can provide adequate scientific and technical
documentation and engineering plans which prove, to the
satisfaction of the Town, that specific pollution controls and/or
other mitigation measures and BMPs will completely eliminate any
measurable impact to water quality. Said plans and documentation
will become conditions of approval. The burden of proof rests on
the applicant.
Section H CHARTER Section H
C:587
(1) Unless specified herein, all drainage facilities shall be
designed and installed in accordance with Article X. of the
Portsmouth Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.151
(2) Calculations shall include estimated runoff from rooftops and
driveways.
(3) A maintenance plan for each stormwater basin shall be filed.
(4) To the maximum extent practicable, stormwater shall be
diverted to one (1) or more grass swales and other natural
upland treatment facilities, rather than detention ponds
located at the bottom of a hill. To the maximum extent
practicable, stormwater shall be retained and allowed to
infiltrate the soil on-site, rather than be discharged from the
site.
(5) Storm water from the entire site shall be designed to remove
eighty percent (80%) of total suspended solids. Storm water
basins shall be designed in accordance with the RI Stormwater
Design and Installation Standards Manual, and shall comply
with Article X. of the Portsmouth Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations.152
(6) A maintenance guarantee, as provided in Article X. of the
Portsmouth Land Development and Subdivision Regulations,153
shall be provided.
b) Septic systems regulations.
(1) Septic systems, including all leaching fields and other parts of
a septic system, shall not be allowed within two hundred feet
(200') of any water body or any stream or wetland that is
determined by RIDEM application procedures to be tributary
to a drinking water reservoir.
(2) A reserve area for replacement systems is mandatory in the
watershed district. Said reserve area shall be subject to the
same requirements as the main septic system. (Dual
alternating leach fields, where the idle one is allowed to clean
itself out over time, are encouraged.)
(3) Innovative/Alternative technology septic systems, as approved
by RIDEM, which have been shown to greatly reduce nitrogen,
pathogens, BOD and TSS, shall be used in all new construction
within the "A" Zone. Such systems must have pressurized
distribution to leach fields.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section H PORTSMOUTH CODE Section H
C:588
(4) All septic tanks installed after the effective date of this
ordinance shall be certified watertight in accordance with
ASTM standards, and guaranteed as such by the manufacturer.
(5) Galley systems are prohibited.
c) Sub-Drains on Lots: Installation of conduits such as tile, pipe, or
tubing beneath the ground surface on a lot to divert ground water,
to intercept or prevent water movement into a wet area, to relieve
artesian pressure, to remove surface runoff, to serve as an outlet
for other drains, or to replace natural subsurface drainage patterns
that are interrupted or discontinued due to construction operations
are prohibited if the individual and/or collective purpose is to
obtain a septic system. Sub-drains are permitted in accordance
with Article X. of the Portsmouth Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations154 for other purposes, provided they are
located at least twenty feet (20') from any portion of the septic
system.
(1) Location and placement of developed areas. All development
shall be situated as far from the reservoirs, tributaries,
wetlands as reasonably possible. The Town shall consider soils
and topography in making such decisions.
(2) At least fifty percent (50%) of each parcel within three hundred
feet (300') of the surface water of a reservoir shall remain
undisturbed.
10. Mandatory site design standards.
Environmentally sensitive site design standards (best management
practices) are required for all permitted uses, whether by special use
permit or otherwise, in the Watershed Protection District. These
standards are developed to optimize water quality, as opposed to
technical "make do" compliance.
The following measures shall be required, as applicable and feasible, in
the best interests of protecting water quality:
a) Vegetated buffers must be maintained or planted around all critical
environmental areas, including reservoirs, and their tributaries.
Vegetated buffers ninety-five feet (95') in width shall be composed
of the following:
(1) A strip of land fifteen feet (15') wide starting at the edge of the
pond or stream bank, which shall be comprised of mature trees
and shrubs that are to remain undisturbed. Outflow from
subsurface drains must not be allowed to enter or pass through
this area.
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section H CHARTER Section H
C:589
(2) Next to the fifteen foot (15') strip, a strip of land at least sixty
feet (60') wide, which shall be comprised of trees and shrubs
that may be managed as necessary. Outflow from subsurface
drains must not be allowed to enter or pass through this area.
(3) Thence a strip of land at least twenty feet (20') wide, which
shall be comprised of the devices designed to convert
concentrated overland or piped flow to uniform shallow sheet
flow.
(4) Specifications for these buffers shall be according to a
publication entitled "Riparian Forest Buffers", U.S. Department
of Agriculture. 1991. Trees and shrubs employed shall be
selected based on a publication entitled "Sustainable Trees and
Shrubs for Southern New England", University of Rhode
Island, 1995.
b) Surface water runoff shall be directed toward areas covered with
vegetation for surface infiltration.
c) Surface water runoff shall be directed toward the lesser restricted
district where the property is located within two (2) or more
districts, as feasible.
d) Parking lot controls, including pervious surfaces and drainage
facilities shall be employed.
e) Buildings and impervious surfaces shall be set back at least one
hundred fifty feet (150') from the inland edge of the reservoirs and
their tributaries.
f) Minimize tree removal: Applicant must demonstrate why each area
must be cleared. Priority shall be given to maintaining established
trees. Existing natural buffers, as in 10.a) above, shall be
maintained.
g) All grading, filling, excavation, tilling, or chemical use shall be set
back at least one hundred feet (100') (or RIDEM regulations,
whichever is greater, or per the R.I. Right to Farm Act if applicable)
from the inland edge of the reservoirs and their tributaries.
h) Areas to be disturbed within three hundred feet (300') of any water
body or wetland shall be clearly marked on approved plans. On site,
prior to any construction activity, the areas to be disturbed shall be
clearly delineated with stakes and ropes, or other appropriate
material, and the downhill border of said area lined with staked hay
bales in accordance with the Portsmouth Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Ordinance.155
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 320, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
Section H PORTSMOUTH CODE Section H
C:590
11. Design principles. The following design principles shall be employed for
all developments in the Watershed Protection District:
a) Addressing Development Constraints with Respect to Site
Features.
(1) Avoid slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%).
(2) Minimize impacts to groundwater.
(3) Recognize soil limitations.
(4) Avoid wetlands.
b) 'Sustainable Development' Principles.
(1) Design with topography and natural features.
(2) Creative preservation of open space.
(3) Compatibility with surrounding land uses.
c) Employing 'Mesi-scaping' Principles.
(1) Plant or preserve native vegetation to minimize need for
irrigation and use of chemical additives.
d) Use of vegetative buffers.
(1) Create or restore vegetative buffers for non-point source
pollution control and wildlife habitat.
(2) Link with existing buffer areas to protect stream and river
corridors.
e) Orienting layout to minimize pollutant loading.
(1) Minimize roadways; locate roads to reduce de-icing
requirements.
(2) Consider alternative ISDS/treatment systems, as approved by
RIDEM.
12. Development plan review.
a) All proposed construction and development in the watershed, with
the exception of individual single family houses and accessory uses,
shall be referred to the Planning Board and shall undergo formal
development plan review, per the above standards, and per the
provisions of Article XI. Development Plan Review herein.
Development of a single family house on a pre-existing lot shall be
referred the Zoning Officer.
b) Environmental review assessment.
(1) A development requiring the construction of a street;
Section H CHARTER Section H
C:591
Section I. Water Resource Protection District, WRPD. [Added
8-26-2002]
(2) A development requiring a storm water treatment pond; or
(3) A nonresidential development.
c) The Environmental Review Assessment shall contain appropriate
supporting data on stormwater runoff and pollutant loading,
setting forth the probable impact or effect of the proposed
development on the water supply of the Town. In compiling such
statement, the applicant shall consult with regional agencies
having knowledge and authority in water quality protection,
including but not limited to the Newport Water Department and the
R.I. Dept. of Environmental Management, both of which shall
receive notice of proposed development per the requirements of
Article XIII Section C.2)b). The Environmental Review Assessment
shall cover at least the subject areas listed herein for evaluation
and conformance with pertinent local, state and federal
performance standards.
d) The Environmental Review Assessment shall also contain a
description of the existing environmental setting to include all
manmade, natural and physiographic features within five hundred
feet (500') of the property line including but not limited to wetlands
or water bodies, topographic contours, vegetation and existing
development.
e) Construction of one (1) single family house on a lot conforming to
the minimum lot size and other provisions herein shall not be
required to submit an Environmental Review Assessment.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to ensure that new construction
does not result in an undue burden on the resources of public water
systems within the district by ensuring that all new construction not
approved for connection to the public water system has an independent
supply of potable water. The water resource protection district is an
overlay district which imposes specified requirements in addition to
those otherwise applicable for the underlying zone.
2. Uses. Any uses permitted by right or special use permit in the
underlying zone are likewise permitted as such in the WRPD.
3. Intensity regulations. Land space regulations, density and intensity
regulations shall be the same as are applicable in the underlying
district.
4. Special regulations. No building permit shall be issued for the
establishment of a new dwelling unit, either by new construction or
conversion of an existing structure unless the applicant produces:
Section H PORTSMOUTH CODE Section I
C:592
Section J. Multi-family Incentive District. [Added 6-26-2007]
a) Proof of water availability by connection to the public water
system, or
b) A certificate attesting that an individual water source (such as a
drilled well, driven well, dug well, desalinization facility, etc.) has
been established on the property, which is capable of providing
potable water in the amounts and pressures required by the RI
State Building Code. Such water source shall be established and
tested to the satisfaction of the Building Official and compliance
with all federal, state and local regulations shall be met prior to
issuance of the building permit.
5. Designation of district. The WRPD shall consist of all land on
Portsmouth Tax Assessor's Maps 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78,
79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86 and 87.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to encourage the development of
affordable and low- and-moderate income housing, as defined in Article
II., in which density of development may exceed that of conventional
multi-family development. This is an overlay district which imposes
specified requirements and development bonuses as an alternative to
those otherwise applicable for the underlying zone.
2. Uses. Multifamily Housing in which at least twenty-five percent (25%)
of the units are "Low or moderate income housing", as defined in Article
II. Other uses permitted in the underlying zones are contained in Article
V.
3. Intensity and development regulations. For Multifamily Housing are
contained in Article XIX, Section F. Other uses permitted in the
underlying zones shall adhere to regulations for those types of uses as
stipulated elsewhere in this ordinance.
4. Designation of district. The Multifamily Incentive District shall consist
of all land as shown in the map, attached hereto, entitled "Incentive
Zone for Residential Multi-Family Development". It consists of all
parcels in Town except those in Heavy and Light Industry zones and the
Watershed Protection Overlay District.
Section I CHARTER Section J
C:593
Section K. Redevelopment District. [Added 3-15-2010]
Section J PORTSMOUTH CODE Section K
C:594
1. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to ensure that development that
takes place in the Redevelopment District according to the goals set out
in the West Side Element of the Comprehensive Plan.
a) The Redevelopment District is hereby defined as Map 43 Lot 1L,
now or formerly known as Navy Tank Farms 1 and 2, and any
subdivisions thereof.
2. Permitted uses.
a) Uses in the Redevelopment District are limited to the following
categories of Planned Unit Developments, which are further
defined in Article VIII:
(1) Planned Corporate Development.
(2) Planned Marine Trade Development.
(3) Planned Retail/Service Development.
(i) A Planned Retail/Service Development within the
Redevelopment District may include multi-family housing
per the provisions of Article VIII., provided that at least ten
percent (10%) of said units are "Low and Moderate
Income", as defined in Article II.
(ii) Density of such multi-family housing shall be per the
provisions of Article XIX., which provides a density bonus
that shall be counted as a municipal subsidy for lowmoderate
income housing.
(4) Any combination thereof.
3. Intensity regulations. Land space regulations, density and intensity
regulations shall be the same as are applicable for the type of Planned
Unit Development proposed.
4. Procedures. Procedures to be followed for the consideration of Planned
Unit Development proposals are contained in Article VIII. Section D.
herein (Land Development Projects).
5. Other regulations to apply. Except for the provisions of this section as
they apply to the Redevelopment District and in which such land is
located, all other provisions of this Ordinance shall continue in full force
and effect. Where there is a conflict between these provisions and those
of the Portsmouth Land Development and Subdivision Regulations,156
these provisions shall prevail.
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section K CHARTER Section K
C:595

ARTICLE IV
District Intensity Regulations
Section A. Land space requirements - general.
1. No building or structure shall be built nor shall any existing building or
structure be enlarged or altered except in conformance with the
regulations of this Zoning Ordinance as to lot coverage, lot area, area
per dwelling unit, lot width, front, side and rear yards, and maximum
height of structures, in the several districts as set forth herein, except
as may otherwise be provided in this Ordinance.
Side lot lines may deviate from this requirement for natural constraints,
such as watercourses, wetlands, etc., or where prudent subdivision
practices necessitate special consideration. In all such cases the burden
shall be on the applicant to justify such deviations in design.
2. Lot lines to be substantially at right angles to street lines. Side lot lines
shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines, or radial to
curved street lines, for their full length from front to rear.
3. The land and yard space required for any new building or use shall not
include any land or area required by any other building or use to fulfill
zoning requirements.
4. Developable land area.
This provision shall not apply to any lot of less than two (2) acres in
area existing and recorded as of July 1, 1994.
For the purpose of calculating the minimum lot size required by this
Ordinance or calculating the maximum number of units, maximum
lot coverage, or maximum density permitted in accordance with any
development standards contained in this Ordinance, the terms "land",
"land area", "lot size", and "lot area" or any such similar term shall
mean "developable land area", which is defined as follows: Developable
Land Area is the total gross land area of the parcel proposed for
development LESS the total of the following:
a) Freshwater wetlands as defined in Title 2, Chapter 1 of the General
Laws of Rhode Island as amended and in any rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto. Provided, however, that any setback
requirement from the edge of a wetland as so defined in Title 2,
Chapter 1, shall not be included in the calculation of wetland area.
b) Coastal shoreline systems as defined by Section 120.0-2A.1 of the
Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Program, as
amended February 1982, or subsequent amendments thereto, as
follows:
(1) Beaches and barrier beaches.
(2) Cliffs, ledges and bluffs.
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:597
(3) Coastal wetlands.
(4) Sand dunes.
(5) All directly associated contiguous areas which are necessary to
preserve the integrity of such features.
c) Any public or private street or street right-of-way.
d) Existing water surfaces.
e) Areas required for stormwater retention/detention under this
Ordinance, or any other Ordinance of the Town of Portsmouth, or
by the RI Department of Environmental Management, or by the RI
Coastal Resources Management Council.
f) Areas required for utility easements of public utilities.
5. No yard or lot legally existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance
shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by
this Ordinance.
6. Corner lot. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be established by
which lot line the front entrance to the building faces, or is proposed to
face. Corner lots may deviate from this requirement if strict application
would prevent any reasonable use of said lot. Burden shall be on the
applicant to justify such deviations.
7. Density and coverage in multi-use situations. On any lot on which more
than one (1) type of use is allowed, either as a matter of right or as a
special use permit, the amount of land needed to meet the area or
coverage requirements for one (1) use may not be used to meet the
requirements of any other use. Where the ordinance may be interpreted
in more than one (1) manner, that interpretation shall be used which
results in the least intensive use of the land and the most open space.
8. Any land taken by eminent domain, or conveyed for a public purpose for
which the land could have been taken or was taken by eminent domain,
shall not be deemed to be transferred in violation of the land area,
width and space provisions of this Ordinance.
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:598
Section B. Land Space Requirements Table.
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Maximum
Bldg. Height
Zoning
District
Min. Lot
Size
Min. Lot
Area per
Dwelling
Unit
Min.
Lot
Frontage Front Rear Side Stories Feet
Max. %
Lot
Coverage
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
R-10 10,000* 10,000** 100' 20' 20' 10' 2-1/2 35' 20%
R-20 20,000* 15,000** 110' 30' 30' 15' 2-1/2 35' 20%
R-30 30,000* 30,000** 125' 30' 30' 20' 2-1/2 35' 20%
R-40 40,000 40,000 125' 30' 30' 20' 2-1/2 35' 20%
R-60 60,000 60,000 200' 50' 50' 50' 2-1/2 35' 10%
COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS
C-1 20,000 110' 30' 20' 15' 2 35' 25%
TC-C [Added
10-27-2004]
20,000 110' 5' 20' 15' 3 35' 35%
INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS
I-L 40,000 200' 60' 50' 30' 2 35' 25%
I-H 40,000 200' 60' 50' 30' 2 35' 25%
WATERFRONT
DISTRICTS
WD 20,000 15,000 110' 30' 30' 15' 2-1/2 35' 30%
* Except 40,000 square feet where not serviced by a public water system
** Where more than one dwelling unit is permitted on a lot.
Section C. Special yard and coverage requirements.
1. Not less than the frontage requirements shall be maintained
throughout the front yard depth, except as provided for in Section D.5
of this Article or by dimensional variance, and for Planned Unit
Developments per the provisions of Article VIII. [Amended
10-27-2004157]
2. The required front, side and rear yards shall be unoccupied and
unobstructed by buildings or structures, except as provided as follows:
157. Note: "and for Planned Unit Developments per the provisions of Article VIII" adopted
10-27-2004.
Section B CHARTER Section C
C:599
a) Ordinary projections of window sills, cornices, eaves and other
structural features may extend not more than eighteen inches (18")
into the space above required yards:
b) Signs as permitted herein;
c) Driveways and walkways;
d) Fences as permitted herein;
e) Accessory uses and structures as permitted herein.
3. On lots abutting streets on more than one (1) side, the front yard
requirements shall apply to each of the abutting streets.
4. A dwelling need not be set back more than the average of the setbacks
of dwellings on the lots adjacent to either side. If a vacant lot exists on
one (1) side, it shall be considered as a dwelling setback at the depth of
the required front yard.
5. Storage sheds up to one hundred twenty square feet (120 ft.2) in area
must be located in the rear yard and are permitted no closer than three
feet (3') to rear and side lot lines. Storage sheds over one hundred
twenty square feet (120 ft.2) in area must be located in the rear yard and
meet all dimensional requirements of the district in which they are
located.
6. On any lot which contains a development of a commercial nature there
shall be a compact evergreen screen along any side or rear lot line
which abuts a residential zone. The screening area shall be five feet (5')
deep and the evergreen plants shall be at least six feet (6') in mature
height. In place of said screening area, an opaque fence may be allowed
as a special condition.
7. If more than one (1) building (other than a one (1), two (2), or three (3)
car garage, a tool shed, a greenhouse or a cabana) is lawfully placed on
any lot in single or common ownership, the distance between the
nearest parts of such buildings shall be not less than twenty feet (20').
8. Open storage must provide front, side and rear yards as indicated by
district.
9. Maximum Lot Coverage may be increased in the TC Zone and in
Planned Unit Developments if off-site parking is provided per the
provisions of Article IX. Section A.6. or 7. herein. [Added 10-27-2004]
10. In all districts, off-street parking provided and maintained as paved/
impervious surface shall be counted as part of the allowable lot
coverage as defined and specified herein and in Articles VII, VIII and IX
of these regulations. However, driveways to and parking areas for
single and two-family residential uses, other than those listed in Article
VII and VIII, shall not be counted toward lot coverage. [Added
2-4-2008; amended 2-13-2012]
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:600
Section D. Height and yard modifications.
11. Parking areas composed of pervious surfaces are encouraged for all
land uses and lots, unless there are overriding environmental
limitations, and may be provided to meet part of any required parking
spaces on a lot. Except for single and two-family residential uses, as
above, twenty percent (20%) of such pervious surfaces which provide
for grass surface shall be counted as part of the overall allowable lot
coverage; otherwise sixty percent (60%) of such pervious surfaces shall
be counted. [Added 2-4-2008; amended 2-13-2012]
1. Height restrictions may be waived by the Board of Review for office
buildings, Planned Unit Developments and motels subject to the
following conditions: [Amended 10-27-2004158]
Town Center All Other Districts
Minimum land area 2 acres 5 acres
Minimum frontage 110 feet 300 feet
Minimum yard depths in addition to required yard depths; one foot (1')
for each foot of height in excess of maximum allowed as a matter of
right for the zoning district in which it is located.
Except fifty feet (50') when abutting a residential zone, and screening
shall be provided.
2. The following structures or parts of structures, when accessory to a
permitted or special use permit principal use may be permitted above
the maximum height limitations set forth herein, provided they meet all
other rear lot, side lot and front lot requirements of this Ordinance:
Flagpoles, chimneys, radio masts, television antennas, water towers,
skylights and other necessary features appurtenant to buildings which
are usually carried above roofs and are not intended for human
occupancy.
a) Wireless or broadcasting towers are not excepted herein, but are
subject to a special use permit. (See also Article VII. Section E. for
antennas over thirty-five feet (35') in height.)
3. Structures other than those listed in the paragraph above, may exceed
the height limitation provided only upon the granting of a dimensional
variance by the Zoning Board of Review.
4. For the purpose of side yard regulations, the following dwellings with
common party walls shall be considered as one (1) building occupying
one (1) lot: duplex dwellings and townhouse dwellings.
158. Note: TC-C (Town Center Commercial) adopted for Planned Unit Developments per the
provisions of Article VIII adopted 10-27-2004.
Section C CHARTER Section D
C:601
Section E. Density and coverage in multi-use situations.
Except as otherwise provided herein, on any lot on which more than one
(1) type of use is allowed, either as a matter of right, a special use permit
or a Planned Unit Development, the amount of land needed to meet the
area or coverage requirements for one (1) use may not be used to meet the
requirements of any other use. Where the ordinance may be interpreted in
more than one (1) manner, that interpretation shall be used which results in
the least intensive use of the land and the most open space.
5. Irregular shaped lots are to receive special consideration by the Board
in that lot frontage may be determined at a depth of thirty feet (30')
radially opposite and concentric with the front boundary, providing that
the front boundary line is not less than seventy-five feet (75') in length.
This thirty foot (30') strip is to be excluded from the overall lot size
requirement.
6. Side Yard and Rear Yard setbacks may be reduced, except where
abutting residentially zoned parcels, in the Town Center District and in
Planned Unit Developments, dependent upon the degree of fire
protection and access, in consultation with the Fire Department.
[Added 10-27-2004]
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:602
ARTICLE V
Use Regulations
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, in each district no
building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied except for the
purposes permitted as set forth in the accompanying Table of Use
Regulations, Section B.
Proposed uses not so listed may be presented to the Zoning Board of Review
by the property owner. Such uses shall be evaluated by the Zoning Board
of Review according to the most similar use(s) that is (are) listed, as well
as the purposes and uses generally permitted in the subject use district.
The Zoning Board of Review may approve the proposed use as permitted, or
deny the proposed use as not permitted, or allow the proposed use subject
to a Special Use Permit.
2. A use listed in Section B of this Article is permitted as a right in
any district under which it is denoted by the letter "Y" subject to such
requirements as may be specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.
3. If designated in the Tables by the letter "S", the use is permitted as
a Special Use Permit by the Zoning Board of Review subject to such
restrictions as set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance and such further
restrictions as said Board may establish. The designation of "S" in the Table
in given district does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that
such use will be permitted.
Nothing herein contained shall preclude the Board of Review from granting
multiple Special Use Permits for a single project or proposal or to condition
the granting of one (1) or more Special Use Permits upon the
implementation or completion of one (1) portion of a project, a master
plan for which is submitted at the time of the application for Special Use
Permits. Each application for a Special Use Permit shall be evaluated as
to its probable effect on the adjacent property, the neighborhood and on
the community and may be approved or denied as the findings indicate
appropriate. Among, but not limited to, are the following items which are
to be considered when granting a Special Use Permit: the desired use will
not be detrimental to the surrounding area, adequate protection is afforded
to the surrounding property by the use of open space and planting, control
of vehicular lot access and parking is provided for, control of noise, smoke,
odors, lighting and any other objectionable feature is provided for, solar
rights of the abutters to be provided for.
Special Use Permits are further governed by the provisions of Article VII of
this Ordinance.
4. A use listed in Section B of this Article is not permitted in any district
under which it is denoted by the letter "N".
CHARTER Section E
C:603
5. Access to lots located in a C-1 District must be other than from a street
located in an "R" District.
PRINCIPAL USES DISTRICTS
A.
RESIDENTIAL R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
(Note: Please also
refer to
definitions of
'dwelling unit',
'family', and
'household'.)
1. One detached
dwelling unit on a
separate lot
occupied by not
more than one
household.
Y Y Y Y Y N* S S S N
2. One two-family
or one duplex
structure on a
separate lot.
Y Y Y Y Y N* S S S N
3. Motels and
Hotels (See
Article VII.)
N N N N N S S S S S
4. Renting of
rooms in an
existing dwelling
unit to not more
than four (4)
persons provided
there are no
separate cooking
facilities and no
separate means of
ingress or egress.
Y Y Y Y Y N* N N S N
5. Renting rooms
in an existing
dwelling unit to
more than four (4)
persons.
N N N N N S N N S N
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:604
PRINCIPAL USES DISTRICTS
A.
RESIDENTIAL R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
6. Conversion of
an existing
dwelling unit to
accommodate not
more than two (2)
households
provided there is
no external
evidence of
occupancy by
more than one (1)
household and
provided the
dimensional
requirements for
a two-family
dwelling are met.
Y Y Y Y N N* S S S N
7. Conversion of
an existing
dwelling unit to
accommodate
more than two (2)
families.
S S S S N N* S S S N
8. Trailer or
mobile home,
except in a trailer
or mobile home
park.
N N N N N N N N N N
9. Trailer park or
mobile home park.
N N N N N N N S N N
10. Apartments,
Condominiums,
Cluster and Town
Houses or Multifamily
development (See
Article VII.)
S S S S N N N N S N
11. Mixed
Residential and
Commercial Uses,
except Home
Occupations.
N N N N N S S S S S
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:605
PRINCIPAL USES DISTRICTS
A.
RESIDENTIAL R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
12. Community
Residences (See
definition.)
Y Y Y Y Y Y S S S S
13. Planned
Marina Village
Development
(PMVD), as
approved by the
Planning
Board159 [Added
9-19-2006]
14. Planned
Resort
Development
(PRD), as
approved by the
Planning Board *
160 [Added
9-19-2006;
amended
5-26-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-05-26]
N Y* Y* Y* N N N Y* N N
* Lots directly abutted on both sides by residential uses may apply for a special use permit for said
residential use.
* Planned Resort Development (PRD) is permitted within the R20, R40 and HI Zones limited to the
area bounded by Willow Lane, West Main Road, Bristol Ferry Road and the Mount Hope Bridge.
Planned Resort Development (PRD) is permitted within the R30 Zone limited to Map 55, Lot 1A.
[Amended 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05-26]
159. Note: All "Planned Unit Developments" are subject to Article VIII, and are approved by the
Planning Board.
160. Note: Adopted 9-19-2006 with respect to R20, R40 and HI zones. Adopted 5-26-2015 with
respect to the R30 Zone. All "Planned Unit Developments" are subject to Article VIII, and
are approved by the Planning Board.
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:606
B.
INSTITUTIONAL,
RECREATIONAL
AND
EDUCATIONAL
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
1. Place of
worship.
S S S S S S S S S N
2. Private or
public school not
conducted as a
private business
for gain.
S S S S S S S N N N
3. Cemeteries or
mausoleums.
S S S S S S S S N N
4. Public park or
playground,
public
recreational
building or
facility.
S S S S S S S S S S
5. Public utilities,
limited to
electrical,
telephone, water,
gas, cable
television and
sewer.
S S S S S S S S S N
6. Private nonprofit
libraries or
museums.
S S S S N Y S S S S
7. Private nonprofit
community
center building,
settlement house,
adult education
center or other
similar facility.
S S S S S S N N N S
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:607
B.
INSTITUTIONAL,
RECREATIONAL
AND
EDUCATIONAL
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
8. Hospital, clinic,
infirmary, nursing
home,
convalescent
home,
institutional
residence group
homes or other
congregate care
facility not
qualifying as a
community
residence.
S S S S N S S N N S
9. Day Care
Center: provided
any outdoor play
area is screened
by fence, wall, or
planting line from
any neighboring
residential
structure and is
not detrimental to
the neighborhood
by reason of
noise. (Formerly
Day nursery.)
[Amended
3-13-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-03-13]
S S S S N S S S S S
9a. Family Day
Care Home
Y Y Y Y Y S N N S N
10. Trade,
professional or
other for profit
school for gain.
N N N N N S S S Y S
11. Private nonprofit
membership
or social club or
lodge.
N N N N N S N N N N
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:608
B.
INSTITUTIONAL,
RECREATIONAL
AND
EDUCATIONAL
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
12. Country club,
golf, swimming,
tennis or other
outdoor
recreational
facility.
S S S S S S S S Y S
13. Indoor
entertainment and
recreational
facilities operated
as a business for
gain, provided
that such use is
housed indoors in
sound-insulated
structures that
protect the
neighborhood.
N N N N N S S S Y S
C.
AGRICULTURE
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
1. Farmsagricultural,
orchard,
horticultural or
silvicultural.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N
2. Farmslivestock,
fish and
shellfish, or
poultry but not
swine, provided
that any building
housing livestock
or poultry is not
less than fifty feet
(50') from the
property
boundary.
[Amended
9-9-1997161]
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:609
C.
AGRICULTURE
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
3. One roadside
stand per farm for
the sale of
agricultural or
horticultural
products the
major portion of
which are grown
or produced on
the premises or
an adjacent
parcel; must
provide off-street
parking.
[Amended
10-25-2010162]
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y S
4. Agriculture-
Promotion Uses
[Added 6-8-2015
by Ord. No.
2015-06-08]
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N
5. Agriculture-
Special Events
[Added 6-8-2015
by Ord. No.
2015-06-08]
S S S S S S S S S N
6. Farm brewery
[Added
10-9-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-10-09]
S S S S S S S S S S
161. Note: The words: "fish and shellfish" were added to the ordinance as adopted 9-9-1997.
162. Note: "or an adjacent parcel" adopted 10-25-2010.
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:610
D. OFFICES AND
LABORATORY
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
1. Business,
financial or
professional
offices with no
retail,
manufacturing or
processing.
N N N N N Y Y Y Y S
2. Offices and
clinics for
medical,
psychiatric, or
other health
services for the
examination or
treatment of
persons as outpatient,
including
laboratories that
are part of such
office or clinic.
N N N N N Y S S N S
3. Laboratory or
research facility.
N N N N N S S S S N
4. Radio,
television or
recording studio.
N N N N N S S S S S
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:611
E. RETAIL
BUSINESS AND
CONSUMER
SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENTSR10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
1. Store for retail
sale of
merchandise,
provided all
display storage
and sales for
materials are
conducted within
a building and
there is no
manufacturing or
assembly on the
premises.
N N N N N Y S S Y S
2. Store for retail
sale or
merchandise, with
outside display
storage of wares
and merchandise,
provided there is
no manufacturing
or assembly on
the premises.
N N N N N S S S S S
3. Eating places
serving food and
beverages to be
consumed within
the building.
N N N N N Y S S Y S
4. Stores for sale
of marine supplies
and associated
items including
boats and trailers.
N N N N N Y Y Y Y N
5. Service
business serving
needs of local
residents.
N N N N N Y S S Y S
6. Marinas
including sales
and repair of
boats and related
supplies.
S S S S S S S S Y N
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:612
E. RETAIL
BUSINESS AND
CONSUMER
SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENTSR10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
7.1. Mortuary or
funeral
establishment
(crematorium not
permitted on the
premises).
[Amended
4-9-1996]
S S S S N Y S S N N
7.2. Mortuary or
funeral
establishment
(crematorium
permitted on the
premises).
[Amended
4-9-1996]
S S S S N S S S N N
8. Veterinary
establishment,
kennel or similar
establishment.
N N N N N S S S N N
9. Store for retail
sale of
merchandise such
as, but not limited
to, lumber yards
and building
supply yards,
wherein
merchandise is
stored in the open
provided that all
merchandise so
stored is screened
from ground level
view from any
abutting street or
property at the
property line
where such
materials are
stored.
N N N N N S S S S N
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:613
E. RETAIL
BUSINESS AND
CONSUMER
SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENTSR10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
10. Dispatch
facility for
transportation
company
providing bus
transportation
services to Town
of Portsmouth
schools with
associated
parking of buses
but no repair
facilities.
N N N N N N S S N N
11. Telephone
exchanges, but
not including
service or storage
yards, or
microwave
transmission
facilities.
S S S S S S S Y Y N
12. "Outdoor
Trade Shows"
which includes
those events in
which
manufacturers,
wholesalers and/
or retailers shall
assemble to
display their
wares and
merchandise for
promotion and
sale to the general
public, including
but not limited to
Art Shows, Boat
Shows, Antique
Shows and the
like.
N N N N N N S S Y S
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:614
E. RETAIL
BUSINESS AND
CONSUMER
SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENTSR10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
13a. Itinerant
vendors as
defined by Rhode
Island Statutes.
N N N N N S N N N S
13b. All other
vendors from
temporary fixed
locations except
as otherwise
allowed by this
Ordinance.
N N N N N N N N N S
14. New retail
business, office or
consumer service
development of
over 5,000 gross
square feet of
floor area or over
20,000 square
feet of total land
area. (See Article
VII. Section G.)
N N N N N S S S S S
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:615
E. RETAIL
BUSINESS AND
CONSUMER
SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENTSR10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
14.1. Addition to
new retail
business, office or
consumer service
complex, as in 14,
provided the
additions increase
the size of the
buildings by no
more than 30%
over the size of
the buildings as
constructed under
the first
application
approved under
Section 14. Such
additions need not
be constructed at
the same time.
[Added
10-15-1996]
N N N N N Y Y Y Y S
14.2 Addition to
existing retail
business, office or
consumer service
complex provided
the addition
increases the
existing buildings
by no more than
30% over the size
of the buildings as
existing at the
time of the
enactment of this
amendment. Such
additions need not
be constructed at
the same time.
[Added
10-15-1996]
N N N N N Y Y Y Y S
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:616
E. RETAIL
BUSINESS AND
CONSUMER
SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENTSR10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
14.3 Addition to
new or existing
retail business,
office or consumer
service complex of
more than 30%
over the size of
the buildings as
existing at the
time of the
enactment of this
amendment, or a
Substantial
Improvement, as
defined in Article
II. Such additions
need not be
constructed at the
same time.
[Added
1-21-2004]
N N N N N S S Y Y S
14.4 New or
expanded retail
business, office or
consumer service
development
totaling over
25,000 square
feet building
gross floor area of
the first floor in
one or more
buildings as
approved by the
Planning Board as
a Planned Retail/
Service
Development (See
Article VIII.
Section D).
[Added
2-4-2008]
N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:617
E. RETAIL
BUSINESS AND
CONSUMER
SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENTSR10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
14.5 New or
expanded single
use retail business
of over 45,000
square feet
building
foundation area in
one building
abutting the
Traffic Sensitive
District. [Added
2-4-2008]
N N N N N N N N N N
15. Sales places
for flowers,
garden supplies,
agricultural
produce partly or
wholly outdoors
including
commercial
greenhouses.
S S S S S Y S S N S
16. Place for
exhibition,
lettering or sale of
gravestones.
N N N N N Y Y Y N N
17. Marine Trade
Development as
approved by the
Planning
Board.163
N N N N N N Y Y Y N
18. Planned
Retail/Service
Development as
approved by the
Planning
Board.164
N N N N N Y Y N N S
163. Note: "**" In use tables adopted 9-23-2002 as part of Planned Unit Development
provisions. All "Planned Unit Developments" are subject to Article VIII, and are approved
by the Planning Board.
164. Note: "**" in use tables adopted 7-14-2003 as part of Planned Unit Development
provisions. All "Planned Unit Developments" are subject to Article VIII, and are approved
by the Planning Board.
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:618
** Provided the development is approved by the Planning Board pursuant to Article VII. (Op. Cit.
Planned Unit Development)
F. AUTOMOTIVE
SERVICE AND
DRIVE-IN
RETAIL
SERVICE R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
1. Automobile fuel
service stations.
N N N N N S N S Y N
2. Sale or rental
of boats and
rental of other
motor vehicles
and accessory
storage.
N N N N N S S S Y N
2a. Sale or rental
of automobiles.
N N N N N Y N N N N
3. Automobile
repair shops,
provided all work
is carried out
within the
building.
N N N N N S S N N N
4. Boat Repair
Shops.
N N N N N S S S Y N
5. Car washing
establishments.
N N N N N S S S N N
6. Paint and body
shops, provided
all work is carried
out within the
building.
N N N N N S S S S N
7. Free standing
drive-in or drivethrough
facility,
whether attended
by an employee or
unattended.
N N N N N S S S S N
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:619
G. INDUSTRIAL,
WHOLESALE AND
TRANSPORTATION
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
1. Laundries and dry
cleaning plants.
N N N N N S S S S N
2. Printing, binding,
publishing and
related arts and
trades.
N N N N N S Y N N
3. Bottling of
beverages.
N N N N N S Y Y N N
4. Plumbing,
electrical or
carpentry shop or
other similar service
or repair
establishment.
N N N N N S Y Y Y N
5. Place of
manufacturing,
assembly or
packaging of goods,
provided that all
resulting cinders,
dust, flashing, fumes,
gases, odors, refuse
matter, smoke and
vapor be effectively
confined to the
premises or be
disposed of in a
manner that does not
create a nuisance or
hazard to safety or
health, provided that
food or animal waste
processing is not less
than fifty feet (50')
from the property
boundary. [Amended
9-9-1997165]
N N N N N N S Y Y N
165. Note: The words: "provided that food or animal waste processing is not less than fifty feet
(50') from the property boundary" were added.
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:620
G. INDUSTRIAL,
WHOLESALE AND
TRANSPORTATION
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
6. Place of
manufacturing,
assembly or
packaging of goods,
provided that all
resulting cinders,
dust, flashing, fumes,
gases, odors, refuse
matter, smoke and
vapor be effectively
confined to the
premises or be
disposed of in a
manner that does not
create a nuisance or
hazard to safety or
health with no
outside storage of
goods or materials.
N N N N N N S Y Y N
7. Wholesale
business and storage
in an enclosed and
roofed structure.
N N N N N S S Y Y N
8. Wholesale
business, including
outdoor storage.
N N N N N N S S S N
9. Trucking
terminals.
N N N N N N S S N N
10. Extractive
industries and earth
removal. (See
Ordinance No.
107.166)
N N N N N N S S N N
11. Planned
Corporate
Development as
approved by the
Planning Board.167
N N N N N N Y Y Y N
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Earth Removal.
167. Note: Op. Cit. Planned Unit Development.
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:621
G. INDUSTRIAL,
WHOLESALE AND
TRANSPORTATION
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
12. Planned
Industrial
Development as
approved by the
Planning Board.168
N N N N N N N Y N N
13. Mass Storage of
fuel in tanks
exceeding 50,000
gallons. [Added
6-17-2002]
N N N N N N N N N N
14. Mass Storage of
fuel in tanks not
exceeding 50,000
gallons. [Added
6-17-2002]
N N N N N N S S N N
H. OTHER
PRINCIPAL
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
1. Any use that is
hazardous,
offensive or
noxious by reason
of potential of fire,
noise or vibration,
dust, gas, fumes,
odor, smoke,
cinders, flashing
or excessively
bright light,
refuse matter or
electromagnetic
radiation.
N N N N N N N N N N
2. Open lot
storage, including
unused vehicles
not held for sale.
N N N N N N N N N N
3. Sale of junk or
salvage materials.
N N N N N N N N N N
168. Note: Op. Cit. Planned Unit Development.
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:622
H. OTHER
PRINCIPAL
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
4. Any use
hazardous to
health because of
danger of
flooding,
inadequacy of
drainage or
inaccessibility to
fire fighting
apparatus or
other protective
service or any use
which creates
excessive noise
beyond the
property line.
N N N N N N N N N N
I. ACCESSORY
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
1. A private
garage for
residents of an
existing dwelling
on the same
premises.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y S
2. More than one
(1) commercial
vehicle per lot in
excess two (2)
tons capacity.
N N N N N Y Y Y Y S
3. A storage shed
with a maximum
of 120 square feet
area and no more
than 12 feet in
height. Storage
sheds of over 120
square feet shall
meet all
dimensional
requirements of
the zoning use
district in which it
is located.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y S
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:623
I. ACCESSORY
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
4. Private
greenhouse,
tennis court, or
other similar
building or
structure for
domestic use.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y S
5. Swimming pool
enclosed by a six
foot (6') fence and
the pool area
locked when not
in use.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y S
6. The raising or
keeping of
animals, livestock
or poultry as pets
or for use by
residents of the
premises provided
that no buildings
or enclosure
(including
fencing) for any
animal may be
less than fifty feet
(50') from side,
rear or front lot
line. Provided,
however, the
raising or keeping
of swine shall
comply with all
R.I. Department
of Health rules
and regulations
not inconsistent
with the
provisions hereof.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:624
I. ACCESSORY
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
7. Home
occupation of a
resident provided
that not more
than three (3)
persons shall
practice or be
employed on the
premises at any
one time and
further provided
that not more
than 20% of the
floor area is so
used. (See
Definition of
Home
Occupations)
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y S
8. Restaurants
inside a building
for the use of the
primary
occupants of the
building provided
there is no
exterior evidence
of same.
N N N N N Y Y Y Y S
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:625
I. ACCESSORY
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
9. Restaurants
primarily for the
use of residents of
an apartment
building or group
of apartment
buildings provided
there is no
exterior evidence
of same and
further provided
the apartment
building or group
of buildings is
under one
management and
contains not less
than one hundred
(100) dwelling
units. (Leasing of
the restaurant is
permitted.)
S S S S N N N Y Y S
10. The storage of
one (1)
recreational
vehicle and one
(1) boat and
trailer, meeting
the Yard
requirements as
set forth in the
Land Space
Requirements
Table, except that
in R-10 the yard
requirements for
this use shall be
fifty percent
(50%) of those set
forth in the Land
Space
Requirements
Table.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N
11. Construction
equipment,
storage of.
N N N N N S S Y Y N
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:626
I. ACCESSORY
USES R10 R20 R30 R40 R60 C-1 I-L I-H WD TC
12. Windmills and
other wind power
generating
devices, whether
commercial or
otherwise.
S S S S S S S S S N
13. Drive-in or
drive-through
facility, whether
attended or
unattended by an
employee, that is
accessory to the
primary
commercial use.
N N N N N S S S S S
14. Day Care
conducted in
one's own home,
but otherwise
meeting the
definition of 'Day
Care-Family Day
Care Home',
provided there is
no exterior
signage.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N
15. Accessory
Family Dwelling
Unit, providing
there are no
separate cooking
facilities and no
separate means of
ingress or egress.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N
16. Private school
conducted as an
accessory to the
principal use. (See
also parking
requirements,
Article IX.)
N N N N N Y Y Y Y S
Section E CHARTER Section E
C:627

ARTICLE VI
Non-Standard Development
Section A. Substandard lots of record.
1. Applicability. For the purpose of this section a substandard lot of record
lot is a lot which does not meet one (1) or more of the minimum
dimensional requirements for size or frontage required in the zoning
district in which it is located and which is a lot of record the dimensions
of which have not been altered since its creation by a voluntary
conveyance which rendered such lot more substandard and which was:
a) Approved by the Planning Board and duly recorded after August 3,
1959; or
b) Approved by the Zoning Board of Review and duly recorded after
June 13, 1965; or
c) Certified by the Planning Board as "approval not required" and duly
recorded after August 3, 1959; or
d) Created by a deed or plat duly recorded prior to August 3, 1959.
2. Continuance of a use on a substandard lot of record. Any legal use shall
be permitted to continue in the manner and extent existing as of the
effective date of enactment or amendment of this ordinance, subject to
the provisions of this ordinance regarding discontinuance, destruction
or demolition, change of use, and extension or alterations.
3. Single substandard lots of record.
a) A lot or parcel of land having a frontage or lot area that is less than
required by Article IV. may be considered buildable for single
family residential purposes regardless of the lot frontage or lot
area.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as exempting single
family substandard lots of record from complying with the
maximum percentage of lot coverage of principal and accessory
buildings, maximum height or building setback requirements of
Article IV. Any lot meeting those requirements shall be considered
as a conforming lot of record for single family residential purposes.
b) If a non residential structure can be extended or enlarged in any
lawful manner without increasing the extent of its nonconformity,
then any extension or enlargement thereof shall only be permitted
in such lawful manner upon the granting of a special use permit by
the Zoning Board of Review.
4. Dimensional variances on substandard lots of record. In appealing for
dimensional variances to build a new or enlarge an existing structure
on a substandard lot, in addition to the requirements for variances in
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:629
Section B. Nonconforming development.
Article VI. Section D., the Zoning Board of Review shall consider
whether such variance:
a) Would allow adequate space for fire protection;
b) Provide adequate light and air between buildings;
c) Would alter the character of the neighborhood, or adversely affect
neighboring property;
d) Would create lot coverage and setbacks less than the average lot
coverage and setbacks of adjacent properties;
e) Would impose a substantial detriment to the public or to immediate
neighbors.
1. A non-conforming use of land lawfully existing at the time of the
passage of this Ordinance may be continued provided that such nonconforming
use of land shall not in any way be expanded or enlarged,
except as provided in this Section.
2. A building or structure which is devoted to a non-conforming use
existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance that is lawfully
destroyed or involuntarily destroyed, such as by fire or natural
catastrophe, shall be completely repaired or completely reconstructed
within two (2) years, provided it is devoted to the same use as was made
of it before such partial or total destruction, in order to maintain legal
non-conforming status.
3. When a non-conforming use has been abandoned for more than one (1)
year, the building or structure or land that was devoted to such nonconforming
use shall not thereafter be returned to such non-conforming
use. Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of some overt
act, or failure to act, which would lead one to believe that the owner of
the nonconforming use neither claims nor retains any interest in
continuing the nonconforming use unless the owner can demonstrate
an intent not to abandon the use. An involuntary interruption of
nonconforming use, such as by fire and natural catastrophe, does not
establish the intent to abandon the nonconforming use. However, if any
nonconforming use is halted for a period of one (1) year, the owner of
the nonconforming use will be presumed to have abandoned the
nonconforming use, unless that presumption is rebutted by the
presentation of sufficient evidence of intent not to abandon the use.
4. A building or structure that exists as a non-conforming use at the time
of passage of this Ordinance, may continue to function as a nonconforming
use of the same type or any other use that is permitted by
this Ordinance, or other such use may be added to the existing use
within the confines of the existing building, with the approval of the
Zoning Board of Review.
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:630
Section C. Alteration of nonconforming development.
Section D. Variances.
1. With Board of Review approval as a special use permit, a building or
structure which is devoted to a non-conforming use lawfully existing at
the time of the passage of this Ordinance may be added to or enlarged
provided that the front, side and rear yards, lot coverage, height of such
enlarged building or structure and parking requirements meet the
zoning requirements of the district in which is located.
2. No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other
open spaces or total lot area shall be smaller than prescribed by this
Ordinance, unless the reduction in area is due to the taking of a portion
of the lot for public use.
3. A legally non-conforming use shall not be changed to a use other than a
conforming use. The Zoning Board of Review may permit a change in
use as a special use permit. Any change in use shall be more in keeping
with the characteristics of the neighborhood.
4. Any alteration or change in use permitted herein shall adhere more
closely to the intents and purposes of this Ordinance.
1. An application for relief from the literal requirements of this zoning
ordinance because of hardship may be made by an applicant by filing
with the Zoning Enforcement Officer an application describing the
request and supported by such data and evidence as may be required
by the Zoning Board of Review or by the terms of this ordinance. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall immediately transmit each
application received to the Zoning Board of Review and shall transmit a
copy of each application to the Planning Board.
a) All appeals including appeals involving applications for variances
shall be made on forms as provided by the rules of the Zoning
Board of Review, and the written ruling or decision of the
enforcement official together with all other papers, plans and data
constituting the record of the case shall be transmitted to the
Zoning Board of Review.
2. The Zoning Board of Review, immediately upon receipt of an application
for a variance in the application of the literal terms of the zoning
ordinance, may request that the Planning Board and/or staff shall
report its findings and recommendations, including a statement on the
general consistency of the application with the goals and purposes of
the comprehensive plan of the Town, in writing to the Zoning Board of
Review within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application from that
board.
3. The Zoning Board of Review shall hold a public hearing on any
application for variance in an expeditious manner, after receipt, in
Section C CHARTER Section D
C:631
proper form, of an application, and shall give public notice pursuant to
the provisions of Article XIII.
4. A variance shall be defined as: Permission to depart from the literal
requirements of a zoning ordinance. An authorization for the
construction or maintenance of a building or structure, or for the
establishment or maintenance of a use of land, which is prohibited by a
zoning ordinance. There shall be only two (2) categories of variance, a
use variance or a dimensional variance.
a) Use variance. Permission to depart from the use requirements of a
zoning ordinance where the applicant for the requested variance
has shown by evidence upon the record that the subject land or
structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is to conform to the
provisions of the zoning ordinance.
b) Dimensional variance. Permission to depart from the dimensional
requirements of a zoning ordinance, where the applicant for the
requested relief has shown, by evidence upon the record, that there
is no other reasonable alternative way to enjoy a legally permitted
beneficial use of the subject property unless granted the requested
relief from the dimensional regulations. However, the fact that a
use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more
valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief.
5. In granting a variance, the Zoning Board of Review shall require that
evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into
the record of the proceedings:
a) That the hardship from which the applicant seeks relief is due to
the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure and not
to the general characteristics of the surrounding area; and is not
due to a physical or economic disability of the applicant, excepting
those physical disabilities addressed in Section 45-24-30(a)(16)
General Laws of Rhode Island (amended 2003-04-28);
b) That the hardship is not the result of any prior action of the
applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the
applicant to realize greater financial gain;
c) That the granting of the requested variance will not alter the
general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or
purpose of the zoning ordinance or the comprehensive plan upon
which the ordinance is based; and
d) That the relief to be granted is the least relief necessary.
e) That any relief granted is in accordance with the definition of
variance provided in this ordinance.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:632
6. The Zoning Board of Review shall, in addition to the above standards,
require that evidence be entered into the record of the proceedings
showing that:
a) In granting a use variance the subject land or structure cannot
yield any beneficial use if it is required to conform to the provisions
of the zoning ordinance. Nonconforming use of neighboring land or
structures in the same district and permitted use of lands or
structures in an adjacent district shall not be considered in
granting a use variance; and
b) In granting a dimensional variance, that the hardship suffered by
the owner of the subject property if the dimensional variance is not
granted amounts to more than a mere inconvenience, (amended
2003-04-28) The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a
structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not
be grounds for relief.
7. Expiration. Any variance which is not utilized within a period of one (1)
year from the date of the signing of the decision granting said variance
shall be void unless, upon written request of the applicant and good
cause shown, the Zoning Board of Review, following a public hearing
thereon, grants an extension of not more than one (1) year. Not more
than a single, one (1) year extension may be granted following any one
(1) public hearing. The Board of Review shall not grant successive
extensions which total more than two (2) years on any project,
(excluding any extensions granted prior to enactment of this
amendment). [Amended 7-12-2002; 8-10-2004]
a) If written proof from the Portsmouth Water and Fire District is
provided showing that the applicant is unable to secure a tie-in to
the Portsmouth Water and Fire District's water supply, then the
Zoning Board of Review shall grant an extension for a period of one
(1) year, provided that the applicant demonstrates reasonable
diligence in attempting to secure such tie-in.
b) In the event an application for extension is filed prior to the
passage of one (1) year from date of authorization, or the end of any
subsequent extension term thereof, the variance shall remain in
force and effect until the Board of Review has acted on said
application for extension.
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:633

ARTICLE VII
Special Use Permits
Section A. General.
1. A Special Use Permit is required for the following uses:
a) Uses in Flood Hazard Areas designated by the letter "R" in Article
III, Section E.
b) Uses designated by the letter "S" in the Tables of Use Regulations,
Article V, Section B.
c) Enlargement of a structure on a substandard lot of record
according to the provisions of Article VI, Section A.
d) Alterations to or change in use of non-conforming uses according to
the provisions of Article VI, Section B and C.
e) Signs requiring a Special Use Permit as specified in Article IX,
Section B.
f) Apartments, condominiums, cluster development or townhouses,
as further defined in Section C. herein.
g) Hotels and Motels, as further defined in Section D. herein.
h) Antennas, as further defined in Section E. herein.
i) Light Industry, as further defined in Section F. herein.
j) Retail, Office or Consumer services Complex, as further defined in
Section G. herein.
k) All proposed uses in the Town Center District that are not
prohibited per Article V, Section B. [Added 10-27-2004]
l) Agriculture - special events. [Added 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-06-08]
2. Designation as a special use permit does not constitute an authorization
or an assurance that such use will be permitted. Rather, each
application for a special use permit shall be evaluated as to its probable
effect on the adjacent property, the neighborhood and on the
community and may be approved or denied as the findings indicate
appropriate.
3. Nothing herein contained shall preclude the Zoning Board of Review
from granting multiple special use permits for a single project or
proposal or to condition the granting of one (1) or more special use
permits upon the implementation or completion of one (1) portion of a
project, a master plan for which is submitted at the time of the
application for special use permits. (See also Article X, Special
Conditions.)
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:635
4. In granting a special-use permit, the Zoning Board of Review may grant
one (1) or more dimensional variances, per the provisions of Article VI,
Section D. Variances. [Added 2-4-2008]
a) Dimensional variances granted in conjunction with a special-use
permit shall be supported by independent evidence on the record
satisfying each of the requirements for a dimensional variance, and
the Board shall vote on each dimensional variance before voting on
the special-use permit.
5. Items to be considered when granting a special use permit include, but
are not limited to, the following:
a) The desired use will not be detrimental to the surrounding area;
b) It will be compatible with neighboring land uses.
c) It will not create a nuisance or a hazard in the neighborhood.
d) Adequate protection is afforded to the surrounding property by the
use of open space and planting;
e) Safe vehicular access and adequate parking are provided;
f) Control of noise, smoke, odors, lighting and any other objectionable
feature is provided;
g) Solar rights of the abutters are provided for;
h) The proposed special use will be in conformance with the purposes
and intent of the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance of
the Town of Portsmouth; and
i) The health, safety and welfare of the community are protected.
j) It is consistent with the Purpose of Design Standards set forth in
Article IX. Section D. and, for developments within the Town Center
District, the purpose of that district as expressed in Article III.
[Added 10-27-2004]
6. The Zoning Board of Review may, at its option, impose special
conditions on any Special Use Permit, as further defined in Article X.
Special Conditions.
7. Where these regulations may conflict with other regulations, the more
stringent regulation shall prevail.
8. Expiration. Any special use permit which is not utilized within a period
of one (1) year from the date of the signing of the decision granting said
Special Use Permit1 shall be void unless, upon written request of the
applicant and good cause shown, the Zoning Board of Review, following
a public hearing thereon, grants an extension of not more than one (1)
year. Not more than a single, one (1) year extension may be granted
following any one public hearing. The Zoning Board of Review shall not
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section A
C:636
Section B. Procedures.
grant successive extensions which total more than two (2) years on any
project, (excluding any extensions granted prior to enactment of this
amendment).
a) If written proof from the Portsmouth Water and Fire District is
provided showing that the applicant is unable to secure a tie-in to
the Portsmouth Water and Fire District's water supply, then the
Zoning Board of Review shall grant an extension for a period of one
(1) year, provided that the applicant demonstrates reasonable
diligence in attempting to secure such tie-in.
b) In the event an application for extension is filed prior to the
passage of one (1) year from date the signing of the decision
granting said Special Use Permit, or the end of any subsequent
extension term thereof, the special use permit shall remain in force
and effect until the Zoning Board of Review has acted on said
application for extension. [Amended 8-10-2004]
1. The applicant shall, on a form prescribed by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer together with a proposed site plan, as required for the pertinent
types of special use permits in this article, submit an application
describing the request, supported by such data and evidence as may be
required by the Zoning Board of Review or by the terms of this
ordinance, the need and justification for the requested Special Use
Permit.
2. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall immediately transmit said
completed application to the Zoning Board of Review and, if required by
the provisions of this Article, shall transmit a copy of each application to
the Planning Board and the Design Review Board. Planning Board and
Design Review Board review and procedures for this purpose are
further defined in Article XI. Development Plan Review.
a) This provision shall apply to all non-residential developments and
multi-family developments designated with an "S" (Special Use
Permit) in the C-1, TC-C and I-L Zones in Article V herein.
[Amended 10-27-2004]
3. The Zoning Board of Review shall hold a public hearing on any
application for Special Use Permit in an expeditious manner, after
receipt, in proper form, of an application, and shall give public notice
pursuant to the provisions of Article XIII.
4. In its decision, the Zoning Board of Review shall provide, in writing,
findings of fact and decisions, and conclusions of law.
5. Appeals from the decision of the Zoning Board of Review may be taken
pursuant to Article XVII.
Section A CHARTER Section B
C:637
Section C. Apartments, condominiums, cluster or town houses.
6. For each proposed development the applicant shall submit a filing fee
payable to the Town of Portsmouth per the Town of Portsmouth
Ordinance on fees.
7. Preliminary plans may be submitted to the Planning Board and the
Design Review Board, as applicable, for informal discussion for the
following types of Special Use Permits only. Any tentative advisory
opinion on a preliminary plan by the Planning Board or the Design
Review Board shall not be binding upon the Planning Board, Design
Review Board or Zoning Board of Review:
a) Apartments, Condominiums, Cluster or Town Houses.
b) Retail Business, Office or Consumer Service Complex: New,
Substantial Alteration or Substantial Improvement.
c) All uses designated as a special use permit within the Town Center
District. [Added 10-27-2004]
1. An apartment, condominium, cluster or town house may be permitted
as a special use permit in districts as specified in Article V. Permitted
Uses, provided that the Zoning Board of Review, in accordance with this
Ordinance, finds that the establishment of the same meets the
standards and requirements of this section.
2. The purpose of these regulations is to encourage the appropriate use of
land for the development of multi-family housing taking into
consideration the natural amenities of the site. No multi-family
structure or structures or apartment houses or group of apartment
houses shall be erected unless in accordance with the standards set
forth in this section.
3. In granting any such special use permit or in permitting any
modification of the regulations set forth herein, the Zoning Board of
Review may prescribe such conditions and safeguards, as further
described in Article X. Special Conditions, as it may deem necessary to
prevent nuisance to and promote harmony with nearby property.
4. The disregarding of any such condition or safeguard, when made a part
of the terms under which a special use permit is granted, shall be
deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
5. A Performance Bond or cash surety in the name of the Town of
Portsmouth and in the amount of five percent (5%) of the estimated cost
of development shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer
prior to the start of construction. Such Performance Bond or cash
surety must be maintained in effect until a Certificate of Occupancy is
issued.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:638
6. No proposed development shall be approved by the Zoning Board of
Review unless it is served by an adequate sewerage treatment system,
as certified by RIDEM, or public sewer, when the same becomes
available, and that the sewer line(s) to which it shall be connected, have
adequate capacity to carry the additional effluent created by the
development. Should the line(s) be determined to be inadequate, only
such portion of the development as can be accepted by the sewer line(s)
shall be approved for development, provided it meets all other
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
a) In the event a private sewage treatment plant is to be constructed,
it shall be approved by the State of Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management and it shall meet the standards of any
federal or state legislation regarding water pollution control before
a building permit may be issued.
7. In granting a special use permit for a development under this section
the Zoning Board of Review shall, immediately upon receipt of an
application hereunder, refer the site plan and related documents to the
Portsmouth Planning Board for review and advice, per the stipulations
of Article XI. Development Plan Review. Plans for apartment,
Condominium and Town House developments within or adjacent to
commercial zones shall also be referred to the Design Review Board
review and advice, per the stipulations of Article XI. Development Plan
Review.
8. The Zoning Board of Review shall require that the developer provide
affidavits or statements prior to final approval signed by the
Department of Environmental Management and the Coastal Resources
Management Council that the proposed site does not violate any
portion of the Wetlands Act or CRMC regulations, plus permits for curb
cuts and connections to State road drainage systems, if applicable.
9. Application shall include eleven (11) full sets of building and site
drawings including, but not limited to, sewerage, other utilities,
topographical plans, plumbing, heating and electrical plans, etc., as set
forth below, and shall, as a condition precedent to the granting of said
special use permit, require full adherence to said plans without
deviation at any later construction date. The site plan shall conform to
the development standards set forth in paragraph 10 below and shall
contain the following:
a) A location map showing the location of the proposed site in relation
to the Town of Portsmouth.
b) A plot plan showing the entire area to be developed as well as any
abutting land under control of the applicant or owner of the land
shown on the plan.
c) The site plan shall:
Section C CHARTER Section C
C:639
(1) Be drawn at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40') and
be thirty-two inches (32") long and twenty-two inches (22")
wide and contain a North arrow in the upper left corner (A
master plan may be of other scale).
(2) Contain a title block in the lower right corner including the
name of the surveyor, designer and engineer, the name of the
development, owner and applicant if other than owner, the
date and scale, the acreage and the number of efficiency or one
(1) bedroom units, the number of two (2) bedroom units and
the number of units containing three (3) or more bedrooms.
(3) Show both existing and proposed contours at two foot (2')
intervals, by the use of solid and dotted lines.
(4) Show size and location of all underground utilities within and
abutting the site.
(5) Show location and width of all proposed vehicular and
pedestrian interior ways.
(6) Show location and number of spaces of proposed parking.
(7) Show location of all proposed buildings by type (i.e. Apartment,
townhouse, recreation, etc.) with the number of units by
bedroom distribution.
(8) Show location and size of all proposed utilities, as approved by
the installing authority.
(9) Show location and type of retention/erosion control areas if
necessary to meet drainage requirement.
(10) Show location of all monuments.
(11) Show the names of all abutters as determined from the most
recent tax list.
(12) Show the proposed treatment of all open spaces.
(13) Show on a separate sheet building elevations.
(14) Show on a separate sheet preliminary layout of building
interiors.
d) Submittal shall also include items required in Article IX Section D.
Design Review Standards, as applicable.
(1) The above elements may be shown on separate sheets.
10. Development standards. All developments proposed under this Section
shall conform to the following standards:
a) Minimum Frontage: one hundred ten feet (110').
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:640
b) Minimum Front Yard: thirty feet (30').
c) Minimum Side Yard: twenty-five feet (25').
(1) Driveways may not be counted as side yards.
d) Minimum Rear Yard: twenty-five percent (25%) or thirty feet (30')
whichever is lesser.
e) Maximum Lot Coverage by Buildings: twenty-five percent (25%)**.
** Does include accessory structures such as swimming pools,
cabanas, recreational buildings, etc. used exclusively for the
residents of the development.
f) Maximum building and parking area coverage: forty percent (40%).
g) The following are the minimum required buildable land area per
unit in square feet. In determining buildable land area, not more
than ten percent (10%) of the area that is subject to periodic or
seasonal flooding, per the most recent FEMA maps, shall be
counted. (Example: total land area twenty (20) acres of which five
(5) acres are subject to flooding net buildable land for determining
density is fifteen point five (15.5) acres.) The provisions of this
Subparagraph shall supersede the provisions of Article IV, Section
B. Land Space Requirements Table.
(1) If served by an on site sewer system with effluent being
discharged into an on site absorption field, the minimum
buildable land area per unit in square feet is as follows:
ZONE 1 BEDROOM 2 BEDROOM 3 BEDROOM
EACH
ADDITIONAL
BEDROOM
R-10 5,000 8,000 10,000 3,000
R-20 & WD 10,000 16,000 20,000 6,000
R-30 15,000 24,000 30,000 9,000
R-40 20,000 32,000 40,000 12,000
(2) If served by sewer system plant or public sewer system with
effluent being discharged into an offsite absorption field the
minimum buildable land area per unit in square feet is as
follows:
ZONE
1
BEDROOM
2
BEDROOM
3
BEDROOM
EACH
ADDITIONAL
BEDROOM
R-10 3,750 5,600 7,500 2,000
R-20 &
WD
7,500 11,000 15,000 4,000
Section C CHARTER Section C
C:641
ZONE
1
BEDROOM
2
BEDROOM
3
BEDROOM
EACH
ADDITIONAL
BEDROOM
R-30 11,250 17,000 22,500 6,000
R-40 15,000 22,500 30,000 8,000
NOTE: Any room such as a den, playroom, etc. is to be
considered as a bedroom for this purpose.
h) Due to the wide range of soil content in the Town of Portsmouth, no
on site sewerage system shall be considered completely adequate
without attention being given to the existing soil analysis map as
prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service. No opinion pertaining to the adequacy of the proposed
system can be given without written evidence of on-site soil
exploration tests as required by the R.I. Department of
Environmental Management. On site sewerage systems shall be
approved by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management.
i) Maximum Building Height: two and one-half (2 1/2) Stories, not to
exceed thirty-five feet (35').
j) Drainage.
(1) The developer shall provide for adequate drainage and shall
further provide that the rate of runoff from the property shall
not increase during construction or after completion of the
development to the detriment of surrounding properties. If the
retention of water is deemed necessary, then the retention
areas shall be provided prior to construction of any buildings
or the surfacing of any areas. The engineer shall submit on
separate sheets all computations in determining rates of runoff
and shall base all calculations on a ten (10) year storm
frequency using the TR-55 method for determining total storm
water runoff. These computations shall be prepared by an
engineer registered in the State of Rhode Island and he shall
affix his seal to the required documents.
k) Sewage System.
(1) Public sanitary sewers shall be designed so as to ensure a selfcleaning
velocity of not less than two and one half feet (2.5')
per second nor more than ten feet (10') per second.
Computation of sewage and sewage flow calculation shall be
submitted.
l) Water.
(1) Computation of water usage and a statement of water
availability shall be submitted. Written evidence of permission
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:642
to connect to a public water supply shall be delivered to the
Building Inspector prior to issuance of a building permit.
m) Parking.i
n) Open space.
(1) Open space shall be provided in appropriate places and every
effort shall be made to preserve wooded areas or other site
amenities.
o) Building design and location.
(1) Where more than one (1) building is erected on a lot it shall be
separated from any other building by a minimum of one
hundred feet (100') and all buildings shall be set back a
minimum of fifty-five feet (55') from the centerline of any
interior way and thirty feet (30') from any parking area.
(2) Town House or attached dwelling: No row of attached
buildings shall contain less than three (3) nor more than eight
(8) units and the minimum width between party walls shall be
not less than eighteen feet (18').
(3) No apartment building shall be less than sixty feet (60') in
length. No facade or any apartment building shall exceed one
hundred sixty linear feet (160') without a building jog of at
least forty-five degrees (45°) for a two (2) wing building or
thirty degrees (30°) for a three (3) wing building.
(4) No one building shall contain more than twenty-four (24) units.
p) All interior roadways and parking areas shall be constructed in
accordance with the "Construction Standard for Streets" of the
"Rules and Regulations Regarding the Platting or other Subdivision
of Land" of the Town of Portsmouth.169
q) Access and egress.
(1) For each lot there shall be not more than one (1) entrance and
exit driveway for each five hundred feet (500') of the street on
which the lot faces. Said entrance and exit shall meet the
requirements of the State of Rhode Island Department of
Roads and Bridges and the Portsmouth Police and Highway
Departments.
r) Acceptable engineering standards shall prevail where no standards
are specified.
s) Fire lanes shall be provided for and approved by the Fire
Department.
169. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section C CHARTER Section C
C:643
Section D. Motels and hotels.
Section E. Antennas.
11. The foregoing Development Standards including but not limited to the
parking, open space, building design and location and other standards
set forth herein and in Article IX may be modified and/or varied by the
Zoning Board of Review upon a finding that such modifications or
variations comply with the requirements set forth in of Section A
paragraph 4 herein.
12. Where these regulations may conflict with other regulations, the more
stringent regulation shall prevail.
1. No motel or hotel shall be constructed on a lot having less than two
hundred feet (200') frontage, nor less than forty thousand square feet
(40,000 ft.2) of lot area.
2. On each lot used for motel or hotel purposes there shall be provided
front, rear and side yards each not less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
3. A space not less than twenty feet (20') shall be maintained open with
grass, bushes, flowers or trees all along each side yard, rear yard and
front yard except for entrance and exit driveways and such open space
shall not be built on, not paved nor used for parking.
4. No space within the required front yard depth shall be used for parking
except as a temporary nature such as for registering.
5. Each motel or hotel site shall be provided with not more than two (2)
motor vehicle driveways for each abutting street which shall intersect
the abutting street or streets at ninety degrees (90°).
6. Each rental unit shall contain not less than two hundred ten square feet
(210 ft.2) of habitable floor area.
7. Height restrictions as set forth in Article IV. may be varied subject to
Zoning Board of Review for motels containing one hundred (100) or
more units.
8. Subject to Zoning Board of Review approval, uses such as, but not
limited, to restaurants, convention facilities, health clubs, retail shops,
beauty and barber shops are permitted within motels containing one
hundred (100) or more units.
9. In granting a special use permit for a development under this section
the Zoning Board of Review shall, immediately upon receipt of an
application hereunder, refer the site plan and related documents to the
Portsmouth Planning Board for review and advice, per the stipulations
of Article XI. Development Plan Review. Plans shall also be referred to
the Design Review Board review and advice, per the stipulations of
Article XI. Development Plan Review.
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:644
Section F. Limited light industry.
Map 38, Lots 5, 6, 7, 7B, 7C, 7D, 7E, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 and 32 are to be considered "Limited Light Industry"
and are, in addition to other provisions of this ordinance, subject to the
following regulations:
1. Antennas proposed to extend over a height of thirty-five feet (35') from
existing grade may be permitted by special use permit.
2. Each and every antenna proposed to be installed utilizing an individual
support structure shall not be allowed within the confines of the
designated front, side or rear yards and shall not be installed or erected
without the prior approval of the Building Inspector and the acquisition
of a lawfully issued building permit therefor.
3. Each such antenna shall be provided with a free-fall radius of one
hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of its height, which radius shall be
clear of any structure designed for residential use or commercial/
industrial occupancy.
1. All structures erected on these lots shall not exceed thirty feet (30') or
one (1) story in height. Uses permitted hereunder must be so located
that each part thereof is set back at least the following distances:
a) Fifty feet (50') from any street or road on which the structure in
question fronts.
b) Fifty feet (50') from any other property line.
2. Building lot coverage shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of total lot
area.
3. Permitted uses. No lot within the district shall be used or occupied at
any time for other than the purpose of "Limited Light Industrial Uses",
which is defined as follows:
a) A limited light industrial use is one of such a nature and so
designed, constructed and operated that there is no production of
sound, heat or glare perceptible at any lot line, and which emits no
vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, toxic or offensive odors or gases,
electromagnetic or atomic radiation.
b) Without limiting the foregoing, uses specifically prohibited within
these lots are residential and commercial usages of a retail nature,
except facilities expressly designed for the use and benefit of the
occupants of a site. In addition, no site shall be used for any
industry whose primary business requires industrial sewage
disposal facilities, unless the governing municipal and state bodies
authorize the use of the available sewage disposal facilities. All
liquid or solid wastes must be treated to conform with applicable
Section E CHARTER Section F
C:645
standards of the Rhode Island Department of Health and any other
regulations of any governing municipal or state agency.
4. All outside storage shall be screened from abutting properties by the
erection and maintenance of an opaque fence, not less than six feet (6')
in height or a double row of compact evergreen screen not less than six
feet (6') in height.
5. (Reserved)170
6. Any and all loading, unloading or deliveries shall be "off street" and the
facilities therefor shall be located at the rear or sides of buildings which
do not face the roadway. All loading and unloading areas shall have a
minimum surfacing of asphaltic concrete with curbing. Curbings shall
be installed in all loading and unloading areas.
7. The area between buildings and property lines is to be used either for
open landscape and green areas, or for off-street parking.
8. Fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, not to
exceed the maximum height as follows:
LOCATION MAXIMUM HEIGHT
Front and side yards 6 feet
Rear yards 10 feet
Hedges No restrictions
9. Signs for advertising purposes shall be prohibited, except that one (1)
sign flush with an exterior wall or a structure on each building site shall
be permitted, as stipulated in Article IX. Section B. Signs. This sign
shall indicate no information other than the name of the industry
occupying the building site. Sign illumination shall not flash, blink, vary
in intensity, revolve or otherwise be or appear to be in motion. Free
standing information and directional signs shall be permitted upon
approval of the Zoning Board of Review as stipulated in Article IX.
Section B. Signs.
10. An accessory use which is clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal permitted use of the premises or structure shall be allowed
provided that such accessory use shall be located on the premises to
which it applies and shall not be detrimental to or impair adjacent
properties.
11. Property and buildings to be used for light manufacturing purposes
shall be designed and laid out as to minimize disturbance to adjacent
170. Note: Effective 10-15-1997, Article VII Section F.5. is deleted. All parking requirements
related to limited light industrial development are in Article IX. Deleted wording was:
"Any and all parking, including parking for visitors, employees, or customers shall be "off
street" and there shall be no less than one parking space for each person to be employed
on a lot. All roads and parking areas shall have a minimum surfacing of asphaltic concrete
or approved equivalent. Curbings shall be installed in all parking areas."
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:646
Section G. New retail business, office or consumer service complex,
alteration or substantial improvement.
property by such features as buffer fences, planting, suitably located
points of traffic ingress and egress, and areas for loading and parking.
12. Structures permitted above height requirements on these lots include
roof structures for housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating
fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the
building, fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples flagpoles,
chimneys, smokestacks, wireless masts, antennas and water tanks,
provided that no roof structure of any space above the height limit shall
be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space.
1. A new retail business, office or consumer service complex use, or an
addition of more than thirty percent (30%) over the size of the buildings
as existing at the time of the enactment of this amendment, or a
Substantial Improvement, as defined in Article II., may be permitted as
specified in Article V. Section B. Permitted Uses, provided that the
Zoning Board of Review in accordance with this Ordinance, finds that
the establishment of the same meets the standards and requirements of
this section, and the intent of the use district in which it is located.
[Amended 10-27-2004171]
a) Multiple principal and/or accessory buildings may be permitted
within a single lot, subject to the provisions of Article VIII. Section
D. Planned Unit Developments. [Added 2-4-2008]
2. The purpose of these regulations is to encourage the appropriate use of
land for the development of new commercial areas taking into
consideration the natural amenities of the site. No structure or
structures shall be erected, added to or substantially improved as above
unless in accordance with the standards set forth in this section.
3. In granting any such special use permit or in permitting any
modification of the regulations set forth herein, the Zoning Board of
Review may prescribe such conditions and safeguards, as further
described in Article X. Special Conditions, as it may deem necessary to
prevent nuisance to and promote harmony with nearby property. The
disregarding of any such condition or safeguard, when made a part of
the terms under which approval is granted shall be deemed a violation
of this Ordinance.
4. A performance bond in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of
the cost of on site improvements including roads, parking and travel
areas, drainage and landscaping, but exclusive of buildings, and a
certificate of occupancy shall be required.
171. Note: "and the intent of the use district in which it is located" adopted 10-27-2004.
Section F CHARTER Section G
C:647
5. A Performance Bond or cash surety in the name of the Town of
Portsmouth and in the amount of five percent (5%) of the estimated cost
of development shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer
prior to the start of construction. Such Performance Bond or cash
surety must be maintained in effect until the requirements, in total or in
phases, as determined by the Zoning Board of Review, are completed.
6. No proposed development shall be approved by the Zoning Board of
Review unless it is served by an adequate sewerage system as approved
by the R.I. Department of Environmental Management or public sewer,
when the same becomes available, and that the sewer lines to which it
shall be connected, have adequate capacity to carry the additional
effluent created by the development. Should the lines be determined to
be inadequate, only such portion of the development as can be accepted
by the sewer lines, shall be approved for development provided it meets
all other requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
a) In the event that a private sewage treatment plant is to be
constructed, it shall be of a type approved by the State of Rhode
Island Department of Environmental Management and it shall meet
the standards of all Federal and State Legislation regarding water
pollution control before a building permit may be issued.
7. In granting a special use permit for a development under this section
the Zoning Board of Review shall, immediately upon receipt of an
application hereunder, refer the site plan and related documents to the
Portsmouth Planning Board for review and advice, per the stipulations
of Article XI. Development Plan Review. Plans shall also be referred to
the Design Review Board review and advice, per the stipulations of
Article XI. Development Plan Review.
8. The Zoning Board of Review shall require that the developer provide
affidavits or statements signed by the Department of Environmental
Management and the Coastal Resources Management Council that the
proposed site does not violate any portion of the Wetlands Act or CRMC
regulations prior to final approval, plus permits for curb cuts and
connections into State road drainage systems, if applicable.
9. Application shall include eleven (11) full sets of building and site
drawings including, but not limited to, sewerage, other utilities,
topographical plans, plumbing, heating and electrical plans, etc., as set
forth below, and shall, as a condition precedent to the granting of said
special use permit, require full adherence to said plans without
deviation at any later construction date. The site plan shall conform to
the development standards set forth in paragraph 10 below and shall
contain the following:
a) A location map showing the location of the proposed site in relation
to the Town of Portsmouth.
b) A plot plan showing the entire area to be developed as well as any
abutting land under control of the applicant or owner of the land
Section G PORTSMOUTH CODE Section G
C:648
shown on the plan, and all parcels within five hundred feet (500')
of proposed development. [Amended 10-27-2004172]
c) The site plan shall:
(1) Be drawn at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40') and
be thirty-two inches (32") long and twenty-two inches (22")
wide and contain a North arrow in the upper left corner (a
Master Plan could be of other scale).
(2) Contain a title block in the lower right corner, including the
name of the surveyor, designer, and engineer, the name of the
development, owner and applicant if other than the owner, the
date and scale, the acreage and square footage of the
development.
(3) Show both existing and proposed contours at two foot (2')
intervals, by the use of solid and dotted lines.
(4) Show size and location of all underground utilities within and
abutting the site.
(5) Show location and width of all proposed vehicular and
pedestrian interior ways.
(6) Show location and number of spaces of proposed parking.
(7) Show location of all proposed buildings by type.
(8) Show location and size of all proposed utilities, as approved by
the installing authority.
(9) Show location and type of retention/erosion control areas if
necessary to meet drainage requirement.
(10) Show location of all monuments.
(11) Show the names of all abutters as determined from the most
recent tax list.
(12) Show the proposed treatment of all open spaces.
(13) Show on a separate sheet building elevations.
(14) Show on a separate sheet preliminary layout of building
interiors.
d) Submittal shall also include items required in Article IX Section D.
Design Review Standards, as applicable. [Added 10-27-2004]
The above elements may be shown on separate sheets.
172. Note: ", and all parcels within 500 feet of proposed development" adopted 10-27-2004.
Section G CHARTER Section G
C:649
10. Development standards. All developments proposed under this Section
shall conform to the following standards:
a) Minimum frontage: one hundred ten feet (110').
b) Minimum front yard: thirty feet (30').
c) Minimum side yard: twenty-five feet (25').
(1) Driveways may not be counted as side yards.
d) Minimum Rear Yard: thirty feet (30').
e) Maximum lot coverage by buildings: twenty-five percent (25%).
f) Maximum Building, parking and travelway coverage: seventy
percent (70%); eighty-five percent (85%) in the Town Center
District.173
g) Due to the wide range of soil content in the Town of Portsmouth, no
on site sewerage system shall be considered completely adequate
without attention being given to the existing soil analysis map as
prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service. No opinion pertaining to the adequacy of the proposed
system can be given without written evidence of on-site soil
exploration tests as required by the R.I. Department Of
Environmental Management. On site sewerage systems shall be
approved by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management.
h) Maximum Building Height: two and one-half (2 1/2) Stories, not to
exceed thirty-five feet (35').
i) Drainage. The developer shall provide for adequate drainage and
shall further provide that the rate of runoff from the property shall
not increase during construction or after completion of the
development to the detriment of surrounding properties. If the
retention of water is deemed necessary, then the retention areas
shall be provided prior to construction of any buildings or the
surfacing of any areas. The engineer shall submit on separate
sheets all computations in determining rates of runoff and shall
base all calculations on a ten (10) year storm frequency using the
TR-55 method for determining total storm water runoff. These
computations shall be prepared by an engineer registered in the
State of Rhode Island and he shall affix his seal to the required
documents.
j) Sewage system. Public sanitary sewers shall be designed so as to
ensure a self-cleaning velocity of not less than two and one half feet
(2.5') per second nor more than ten feet (10') per second.
173. Note: 85% in the Town Center District adopted 10-27-2004.
Section G PORTSMOUTH CODE Section G
C:650
Computation of sewage and sewage flow calculation shall be
submitted.
k) Water. Computation of water usage shall be submitted and a
statement of water availability shall be submitted. Written evidence
of permission to connect to a public water supply shall be delivered
to the Building Inspector prior to issuance of a building permit.
l) (Reserved)174
m) Open space shall be provided in appropriate places and every effort
shall be made to preserve wooded areas or other site amenities.
n) All interior roadways and parking areas shall be constructed in
accordance with the "construction standards for streets" contained
in Land Development and Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Portsmouth.175 [Added 10-27-2004]
o) Access and egress. There shall be not more than one (1) entrance
and one exit for every five hundred feet (500') or less of frontage.
Said entrance and exit shall meet the requirements of the State of
Rhode Island Department of Roads and Bridges and the Portsmouth
Police and Highway Departments.
p) Acceptable engineering standards shall prevail where no standards
are specified.
q) Fire lanes shall be provided for and approved by the Fire
Department.
r) Outdoor display areas. Exterior display areas shall be permitted
only where clearly depicted on the approved site plan. All exterior
display areas shall be adequately separated from motor vehicle
routes by a physical barrier visible to drivers and pedestrians.
Display areas on building aprons must maintain an adequate
minimum walkway width between the display items and any vehicle
drives. [Added 2-4-2008]
174. Note: Effective 10-15-1997, Article VII Section G.10.l) is deleted. All parking requirements
related to retail development are in Article IX. Deleted wording was: "Parking shall be
provided for in accordance with Article IX. Section A, Parking. There shall be no parking
within 25' of any lot line. Cross-section of travel and parking areas shall be provided on
the site plan."
175. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section G CHARTER Section G
C:651
Merchandise may not be displayed or stored in parking areas or
on sidewalks adjacent to facade walls, except in screened display,
sales, and storage areas, except short term seasonal events as
approved by the Building Inspector.
Display, sales, and storage areas, such as nursery departments,
must be enclosed by screening with a solid base with a minimum
height of three feet (3') under a wrought iron or tubular steel fence
(black or green vinyl coated only) with a minimum height of five
feet (5'). The screening may also be composed of materials and
colors matching the main building. No merchandise other than
trees may be visible above the screening from eye level at grade.
These provisions shall not be applicable where the sale of nursery
and agricultural products are the principal use of the building.
11. The foregoing development standards including but not limited to
parking, open space, building design and location and other standards
set forth herein and in Article IX may be modified and/or varied by the
Zoning Board of Review upon a finding that such modifications comply
with the requirements set forth in Section A paragraph 4 herein.
Section G PORTSMOUTH CODE Section G
C:652
ARTICLE VIII
Land Development Projects
Section A. Applicability.
A project as provided for in the Zoning Ordinance as a Land Development
Project, in which one (1) or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land are to be
developed or redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex of uses, units,
or structures, including, but not limited to, Planned Unit Development and/
or Residential Open Space Development, as defined herein, for residential,
commercial, institutional, recreational, open space, and/or mixed uses shall
be subject to the provisions of this section as a "Land Development Project."
Section B. Procedure.
Section C. Residential open space development. [Added 2-25-1997]
1. Any land development project application referred to the Planning
Board for approval shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures
and requirements established herein, including those for appeal and
judicial review, whether or not the land development project constitutes
a "subdivision," as defined herein, as well as the procedures and
requirements established in Article VIII of the Zoning Ordinance. No
land development project shall be initiated until a plan of the project
has been submitted and approved by the Planning Board. The Planning
Board shall have full review and approval authorities for land
development project applications.
2. All land development projects shall be reviewed in accordance with
procedures and regulations established for major subdivisions in Article
VI of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.176
3. The Planning Board may, at its option and at the applicant's sole
expense, retain independent expert consultants to evaluate specific
portions of the proposal. [Added 9-19-2006]
4. In case of conflict between this article and the Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations,177 the provisions of this article shall prevail.
5. In reviewing, hearing, and deciding upon a land development project,
the Planning Board is empowered to allow zoning incentives within the
project as provided for in the zoning ordinance, and is empowered to
apply such special conditions and stipulations to the approval as may, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, be required to maintain harmony
with neighboring uses and promote the objectives and purposes of the
comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance.
1. Purpose.
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section A CHARTER Section C
C:653
a) Residential Open Space Development, as used herein, is the use of
a parcel of land for residential purposes which allows (amended
2-23-2004) smaller lots than would otherwise be permitted in the
zoning district, provided that open space on the parcel is set aside
for recreation, conservation, agriculture, and/or the preservation of
sensitive or valuable features or structures. The overall residential
density on the Residential Open Space Development parcel may not
exceed that which is otherwise permitted in the zoning district.
b) Residential Open Space Developments are intended to achieve the
following:
(1) Maximize open space and encourage the preservation of
features and sites that have natural, ecological, cultural,
historical, agricultural, scenic, or other significant interest or
value;
(2) Facilitate the economical and efficient provision of necessary
public streets and utilities, community facilities, recreation,
and open space;
(3) Encourage the development of harmonious, efficient, and
convenient living environments and communities.
2. Applicability and procedure.
a) Residential Open Space Developments (amended 2-23-2004) shall
be permitted in residential zoning districts R-20, R-30, R-40, and
R-60, pending approval of the Planning Board per the procedures
established in this article.
b) The Planning Board shall not approve a Residential Open Space
Development which in its determination will have a detrimental
effect upon the natural characteristics of the parcel of land or on
the property surrounding the parcel.
c) No Residential Open Space Development shall be undertaken, nor
any lots sold, nor any portion of such development constructed
until a subdivision plan for such development has been approved by
the Planning Board in accordance with the procedures established
by:
(1) The Land Development and Subdivision Regulations for Major
Land Development and Major Subdivision Review.178
(2) The additional requirements for Residential Open Space
Developments established in this article.
d) Because it is considered in its entirety, a Residential Open Space
Development shall be approved and developed as a whole,
178. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:654
including all infrastructure and required open space, with phasing,
if applicable, as approved by the Planning Board.
3. Number of permitted lots.
a) The total building lot yield shown on the Conventional Yield Plan,
submitted in accordance with Section 4 herein, shall determine the
maximum number of lots permitted in the Residential Open Space
Development.
b) In the case of a parcel which is in two (2) separate zoning districts,
the maximum number of lots shall be the sum of the numbers which
would be allowed in each by the Conventional Yield Plan.
4. Submission requirements. In addition to the submissions required as
part of a major subdivision, the following submissions are required:
a) Accompanying any Master Plan application for a Residential Open
Space Development, the applicant shall submit a plan for a viable
conventional subdivision (the "Conventional Yield Plan") on the
parcel. The Conventional Yield Plan shall identify:
(1) The location of all developable land, as defined in Article IV,
Section A, Subparagraph 4 of this ordinance, on the parcel;
and
(2) The placement of housing lots, each of which meet the
minimum lot size and frontage requirements of the base zoning
district, on the parcel's developable land.
b) At the time of the Master Plan Application, the applicant shall
include an Open Space Use Plan which includes the following
information about the parcel proposed for Residential Open Space
Development:
(1) The location of all areas of undevelopable land on the parcel;
(2) The location of all unique features and sensitive natural areas,
as defined in Section 7 of this section;
(3) The general location and area of all proposed open spaces;
(4) The general proposed use(s) of the open space;
(5) Existing ground cover of open space areas;
(6) Areas of open space from which existing vegetation will be
removed or altered and areas which are proposed to be
disturbed or otherwise graded, excavated, or altered from
their existing natural state;
(7) Generalized proposals for the regrading, revegetating, and/or
landscaping of proposed disturbed areas;
Section C CHARTER Section C
C:655
(8) The location of areas proposed to be left in their existing
natural states without any disturbance;
(9) The location of significant views into and/or out of the site.
c) At the time of the Preliminary Plan Application, the applicant shall
include in the Proposed Conditions Map(s) the following
information:
(1) The approximate footprints of all houses. For this purpose, all
footprints shown must be at least two thousand one hundred
square feet (2,100 ft.2) including a house and two (2) car
garage, an approved septic system location, and a private well,
if applicable.
(2) The configuration and placement of houses, lots, and septic
systems. This configuration must demonstrate that all of the
dimensional requirements for Residential Open Space
Developments, as established by Section 5 of this section, will
be met by every house and lot.
(3) The location of access points to Common Lands, as required by
Section 7.d) of this section.
(4) More detailed specifications of the Open Space Use Plan
required at the time of Master Plan Review, including:
(i) The location of all areas of undevelopable land on the
parcel;
(ii) The location of all unique features and sensitive natural
areas, as defined in Section 7 of this section;
(iii) The exact location and area of all proposed open spaces;
(iv) The proposed use(s) of the open space;
(v) The existing ground cover of open space areas;
(vi) The location of areas of open space from which existing
vegetation will be removed or altered and areas which are
proposed to be disturbed or otherwise graded, excavated,
or altered from their existing natural state;
(vii) Specific proposals for the regrading, revegetating, and/or
landscaping of proposed disturbed areas;
(viii) The location of areas proposed to be left in their existing
natural states without any disturbance; and
(ix) The location of significant views into and/or out of the site.
5. Dimensional requirements for housing.
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:656
a) The following table prescribes the minimum dimensional
requirements for individual lots and for the placement of houses
upon lots in a Residential Open Space Development:
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Front
Setback
(feet)
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Side
Setbacks
(feet)
Max. %
Lot
Coverage
R-20 17,000 30' 30' 15' 20%
R-30 17,000 30' 30' 20' 20%
R-40 17,000 30' 30' 20' 20%
R-60 25,000 30' 50' 50' 10%
Note: All setbacks above are the same as the base zoning district
in which the parcel is located.
b) Every lot in a Residential Open Space Development shall have a
minimum road frontage of thirty-five feet (35').
c) The maximum lot coverage percentage shall be the lesser of the
above and the requirements of overlay districts as provided per
Article III of this ordinance.
d) Any portion of a lot that is less than thirty-five feet (35') in width or
depth shall not be counted toward the minimum lot size or setback
requirements. This provision shall not apply to corners of lots.
6. Development design and layout. The design and layout of a Residential
Open Space Development shall follow the provisions of the Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations, Article X., Design and
Improvement Standards,179 with the additional requirements set forth
in this section. In cases of conflict, the requirements in this section shall
supersede the requirements of the Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations. The Planning Board shall determine on a case-by-case
basis whether the design and layout of a proposed Residential Open
Space Development are acceptable according to the provisions herein
and per the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
a) Protection of unique features and sensitive natural areas.
The lots and dwelling units shall be sized and arranged in a way
which maximizes adherence to the Site Design Criteria for
Preservation of Unique and Natural Features, Land Development
and Subdivision Regulations Article X, Section C, Subparagraph 2.
Said subparagraph sets forth criteria by which the Planning Board
shall judge whether or not a proposed development will be able
"to preserve the natural features of the site, to avoid areas of
179. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section C CHARTER Section C
C:657
environmental sensitivity, and to minimize impacts and alteration
of natural features, historic and cultural resources, and areas of
scenic value which contribute to the Town."
Residential Open Space Developments will limit housing lots to
a smaller portion of the parcel than would a conventional
development. They therefore have a greater opportunity to site
those lots away from the following sensitive areas:
(1) Unique and/or fragile areas, including freshwater wetlands
and coastal features;
(2) Significant trees or stands of trees, or other vegetative species
that are rare to the area or are of particular horticultural or
landscape value;
(3) Lands in the flood plain, as defined in Article II of the Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations;
(4) Steep slopes in excess of twenty percent (20%) grade as
measured over a ten-foot (10') interval unless appropriate
engineering measures concerning slope stability, erosion, and
resident safety are taken;
(5) Habitats of endangered wildlife, as identified on applicable
federal or state lists;
(6) Historically significant structures and sites, as listed on federal
or state lists of historic places;
(7) Agricultural lands;
(8) Timber production lands;
(9) Vegetated and/or forested buffers protecting sensitive
environmental features.
b) Perimeter development. In no case shall the minimum distance
between any house in a Residential Open Space Development and
the nearest lot line of an adjacent parcel outside the subdivision be
less than the number of feet required by the zoning setback plus an
additional fifty feet (50').
c) Street and open space parking requirements.
(1) All streets in a Residential Open Space Development which are
intended or required for dedication to the Town of Portsmouth
shall be improved in accordance with the requirements and
specifications contained in the Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations.180
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:658
(2) Where development design creates streets which are likely
never to become through roads, the Planning Board may allow
the construction of narrower pavement widths than the
minimum of twenty-eight feet (28') established by the Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations Article X, Section D,
Subparagraph 8. The Planning Board may vary road
dimensional requirements from those established by the Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations Article X, Section D.
All streets within a Residential Open Space Development shall
maintain a right-of-way width of no less than fifty feet (50').
Where narrower streets are permitted, the Planning Board
may require sidewalks on one (1) or both sides of the street.
(3) Common parking spaces on Common Lands, as defined in
Section 7, shall not be closer than twenty-five feet (25') from all
property lines or street right-of-way lines. The Planning Board
may require the provision of landscape materials, screen
planting, fences, or other materials designed to provide a
buffer between parking areas and adjacent streets or property.
7. Common lands and open space.
a) Definitions.
(1) "Common Lands" shall be defined as all land on the parcel that
is not included in building lots, paved roadway, and road rights
of way. All Common Lands are subject to the provisions herein.
(2) "Open Space" shall be defined as that portion of the Common
Lands that meets the provisions of Developable Land Area, as
defined in Article IV, Section A of this ordinance.
b) Minimum open space size requirements.
(1) In a Residential Open Space Development, a minimum
percentage of the parcel's developable land must be open
space. The minimum percentage shall vary by zone, according
to the following table:
Zone
% of Developable Land which
must be Open Space
R-20 10%
R-30 25%
R-40 35%
R-60 45%
(i) Where a parcel is located in two (2) or more zoning
districts, the overall percent open space required shall be
based on the percent of the parcel located in each zone.
The actual open space provided may be located in one (1)
or more of the zones.
Section C CHARTER Section C
C:659
(2) Total open space in a Residential Open Space Development
shall not be less than one (1) acre.
c) Open space land qualifications.
(1) Undevelopable land, per the definition of "Developable Land
Area" in Article IV, Section A of this ordinance, may not count
toward the minimum open space size requirement.
(2) Land which has been deemed by the Planning Board to be
disturbed from its natural state prior to final approval of the
development as a result of soil-removal operations, harvesting
of trees or other natural features or refuse disposal or other
causes shall not count toward the minimum open space size
requirement unless and until the land is restored to a condition
which the Planning Board determines to be reasonable and
appropriate to effect the purposes of this article. The Planning
Board may grant final approval for a Residential Open Space
Development subject to such restoration of the disturbed land,
provided an appropriate performance bond is posted.
(3) Areas proposed to fulfill the minimum open space size
requirement shall not be excavated or regraded nor shall any
disturbance be made to the natural contours of the land nor
shall any existing natural vegetation be removed or any natural
or man-made features altered in any way except as is needed
for recreation or conservation purposes or for drainage
facilities as specifically authorized by the Planning Board.
d) Size and shape of open space. Open space shall be designed to
provide maximum preservation and enhancement of natural areas.
To the maximum extent possible, open space shall be preserved in
compact shapes, and not as mere extensions of building lots.
(1) To the maximum extent reasonably possible, open space
parcels shall be contiguous with protected undeveloped land
on adjacent parcels, in order to make the open space part of a
larger unified open space system.
(2) To the maximum extent reasonably possible, open space
parcels shall be located so as to be convenient to the dwelling
units they are intended to serve. However, because of noise
generated by some permitted uses, open space parcels shall be
sited with sensitivity to surrounding development.
(3) To the maximum extent reasonably possible, each group of
house lots in a Residential Open Space Development shall be
adjacent and accessible to the open space proportional to the
number of houses in the development. (For example, if there
are one hundred (100) houses in the development and each of
four (4) groups of lots contains twenty-five (25) houses, about
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:660
twenty-five percent (25%) of the open space shall be adjacent
to each group.)
(4) A minimal number of narrow strips of not less than twenty-five
feet (25') in width of Common Lands shall be permitted only as:
(i) Access corridors between residences, streets, and larger
Common Lands parcels.
(ii) Drainage areas.
(iii) Buffers.
(5) Reasonable access to open space shall be made readily
available to residents of the Residential Open Space
Development.
(6) The area of each parcel of open space designed for a permitted
use or community facility shall be of such minimum size,
dimensions, and characteristics as to be functionally usable for
that use or facility.
e) Permitted common lands uses.
(1) Permitted Common Lands uses are chosen because they
preserve the land in its current state, which is consistent with
the Town's rural character. Only the following uses of the
Common Lands shall be permitted, and use thereof shall be
limited to the residents of the Residential Open Space
Development.
(i) Recreation.
(ii) Conservation.
(iii) Wildlife Management.
(iv) Agriculture, as permitted in Article V of this ordinance.
(v) Forest Management.
(vi) Utility lines, as a special use permit.
(vii) Drainage facilities and drainage easements.
(2) Common Lands may not be used for commercial or revenueenhancing
purposes, with the exception of agriculture and
outdoor golf courses, but not including miniature golf or
driving ranges, which may be provided for by permanent
easement or long-term lease.
(3) Any change of the proposed Common Lands uses must be
approved by the Zoning Board of Review as a Special Use
Permit.
Section C CHARTER Section C
C:661
f) Improvements to common lands.
(1) As a general principle, Common Lands not developed for
community facilities should be left in their natural state.
(2) The Planning Board may require a developer to make
improvements such as removing dead or diseased trees,
planting or thinning of trees or other vegetation, and grading
or seeding.
(3) The Planning Board may require special provisions for the
maintenance of Common Land, private improvements,
drainage systems, and utilities, including requirements for
security, including a maintenance bond, as provided in Article
X of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.181
(4) The Planning Board may require the installation of any of the
community facilities permitted in Subparagraph g of this
section.
(5) The Planning Board may allow improvements for agricultural
uses, provided that ecologically sensitive land, drainage
facilities, and other public improvements remain undisturbed
and protected.
g) Procedures for approval of community facilities in common lands.
(1) Community facilities to be constructed by the applicant shall
be submitted as part of the overall Residential Open Space
Development plan.
(2) The construction of any community facilities subsequent to the
approval of a Residential Open Space Development shall be
considered as a Special Use Permit and reviewed by the
Planning Board per the provisions of Article XI, Development
Plan Review, of this ordinance. All community facilities shall be
a part of the final submission plans approved by the Planning
Board.
(3) Subsequent to final plan approval but prior to the conveyance
of at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the lots, community
facilities may only be permitted after the granting of a Special
Use Permit per the provisions of Articles VII and XI of this
ordinance.
(4) Following the conveyance of at least fifty-one percent (51%) of
the lots, community facilities may only be permitted with the
permission of the homeowners' association membership and
after the granting of a Special Use Permit per the provisions of
Articles VII and XI of this ordinance.
181. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:662
h) Design criteria for community facilities in common lands.
(1) The Planning Board may permit the following types of
community facilities to be developed in the Common Lands,
consistent with the requirements of this ordinance:
(i) Community Structures may include but are not limited to
community meeting centers, community art centers, and
amphitheaters.
(ii) Active Recreational Community Facilities provide
recreational or community group opportunities for
Residential Open Space Development residents. They may
include but are not limited to sports facilities,
playgrounds, equestrian centers, pools, beaches, tennis
courts, playing fields, and the minimum amount of parking
required for these facilities.
(iii) Passive Recreational Community Facilities promote human
enjoyment of the natural environment. They may include
but are not limited to nature parks, nature centers, nature
trails, hiking trails, equestrian trails, wildlife observation
towers or blinds, and educational displays.
(iv) Structures Accessory to Conservation to promote
environmental preservation and enhancement. They may
include but are not limited to nature preserves, wildlife
habitat areas, wildlife nesting platforms or boxes, and
wildlife feeders.
(v) Structures Accessory to Agriculture may include but are
not limited to barns, greenhouses, and silos.
(vi) Structures Accessory to Golf Courses may include
necessary maintenance facilities for use exclusively on the
course and a clubhouse, provided it does not serve food or
beverage and is used exclusively for golfers.
(2) In addition to the criteria for the granting of Special Use
Permits as established by Article VII, Section A of this
ordinance, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
(i) Any community facilities which are permitted in the
Common Lands must conserve and enhance the natural
features of the Common Lands having regarded their
topography and unimproved condition.
(ii) Community facilities shall be designed and located so as to
be easily accessible and visible from public rights-of-way.
All community facilities shall be accessible to the units in
the Residential Open Space Development so that all
Section C CHARTER Section C
C:663
development residents have ready access to, and use of,
such facilities.
(iii) In total, community facilities which create impervious
surfaces shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) coverage
of the open space.
(iv) Community facilities shall be located at least one hundred
feet (100') from the nearest house.
(v) Dimensional requirements for community facilities shall
be the same as those established by this ordinance for the
base zoning district of the Residential Open Space
Development.
i) Deed restrictions. Any lands dedicated for Common Lands shall
contain appropriate covenants and deed restrictions approved by
the Planning Board in consultation with the Town Solicitor and duly
recorded in the land evidence records, ensuring that:
(1) The Common Lands will not be further subdivided or
developed in the future;
(2) The Common Lands will remain open space;
(3) Appropriate provisions will be made for the maintenance of the
Common Land; and
(4) Common Lands shall not be used for a commercial enterprise,
with the exception of agriculture and outdoor golf courses, but
not including miniature golf or driving ranges, as provided
herein.
8. Common lands ownership. Ownership of the Common Lands shall be
vested in a legally constituted organization which shall be responsible
for its use and maintenance. The Planning Board shall have the right to
approve, modify, or reject the proposed form of ownership if, in its
opinion, it does not adequately provide for controls over use and
maintenance. As a minimum, the following standards of ownership and
management shall be met:
a) The Common Lands shall be separate and distinct lot(s) owned in
common by all the landowners in the development. The deed to
each house lot shall include a fractional interest in the Common
Lands in an amount proportional to the number of house lots in the
development. The deed shall also include all covenants,
restrictions, or easements which shall be imposed upon the use,
management, or maintenance of the Common Lands in order to
provide for the necessary control and requisite upkeep of the
Common Lands, including requirements for liability insurance.
b) The developer shall provide for and establish a homeowners'
association which shall be responsible for the use, care, and
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:664
maintenance of all Common Lands and any improvements thereon.
Unless otherwise allowed by the Planning Board, membership in
the homeowners' association shall be mandatory for all landowners
within the Residential Open Space Development. The homeowners'
association bylaws shall entitle the owner of each lot equal
representation.
c) For the purposes herein, the applicant or his successors or assigns
shall have the same rights and responsibilities as the owners of
individual lots.
d) The Planning Board may permit the ownership of Common Lands
by a public, quasi-public, or private non-profit organization
qualified to maintain such Common Lands. In the event of the
failure of a non-profit to maintain the Common Lands, ownership of
the Common Lands shall revert to the homeowners' association.
9. Required certificates or documents. An applicant for a final plan
approval of a Residential Open Space Development must submit, in
addition to the materials required by Section 4 of this section and
Article X of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations,182 the
following certificates or documents for approval by the Planning Board:
a) A development agreement to be executed between the developer
and the Town, to be recorded in the Land Evidence Records,
stating:
(1) That the owner or developer will construct the development
and install improvements both public and private in
accordance with the approved plan. Surety shall be posted to
guarantee completion and compliance.
(2) That in the event of a failure of the applicant, lot owners,
successors, or assigns to maintain any Common Lands,
community facilities, landscaping features, or other required
improvements, the Town may enter the development to
perform the necessary maintenance work and assess the cost,
including attorney's fees, to the applicant, lot owners,
successors, or assigns.
(3) That individual lot deeds will include an undivided proportional
interest in the Common Lands; that the obligation for
maintenance of Common Lands and improvements thereto
shall be imposed upon the owners of the lots in the
development; and that the Town will not be requested to
accept or maintain any portion of Common Lands or
improvements thereto.
(4) That every owner of a lot within such development shall be
deemed a member of the homeowners' association.
182. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section C CHARTER Section C
C:665
(5) That the restrictions set forth in this agreement shall run with
the property and be binding upon the applicant, lot owners,
heirs, successors, assigns or other receivers of the
development and shall constitute a lien on the property in the
development.
(6) Any other conditions required by the Planning Board.
(7) That uses of the Common Lands shall be only those permitted
by Section 7.e) of this section.
(8) That the development will meet all the requirements of this
article.
b) A perpetual easement and covenant to the Town over the Common
Lands, prohibiting further development and imposing use
restrictions upon the Common Lands.
c) A sample deed which includes or refers to a recorded document
which stipulates all covenants, restrictions, or easements which
shall be imposed upon the use, management, or maintenance of the
Common Lands in order to provide for the necessary control and
requisite upkeep of the Common Land, including requirements for
liability insurance, and which states that each housing lot shall
include an undivided proportional interest in the Common Lands. If
not owned by the lot owners, documents specifying ownership of
the Common Lands.
d) A declaration and a legal description of easements, deed
restrictions and/or covenants running with the land in the
development, and an instrument conveying any easements
required as a condition of approval, which shall be recorded in the
Land Evidence Records.
e) Copies of any proposed management policies.
f) All other procedural requirements or supporting material set forth
in the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations183 not
heretofore mentioned in this article, which are applicable to any
Residential Open Space Development.
g) The following disclosures to buyers are required and must be
approved by the Planning Board prior to final approval:
(1) A sample purchase and sale agreement which shall be used for
the purchase of individual lots and dwellings. Such agreement
shall include in conspicuous type the following: That the
property is part of a Residential Open Space Development
subject to Article VIII of the Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance;
that the purchaser and subsequent owners of the property are
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:666
Section D. Planned unit developments. [Added 9-23-2003]
subject to the requirements therein contained, as well as any
conditions set by the Planning Board, which shall be
enumerated; that the purchaser and subsequent owners of the
property shall be required to be a member of the Homeowners'
Association, shall be subject to the rules and regulations of
such association, and shall be liable for any applicable
assessment made by or against such association. The purchase
and sale agreement shall further contain a statement by the
seller that purchaser has been provided with a copy of the
rules and regulations of the Homeowners' Association, copies
of any management policies, copies of restrictions or covenants
running with the land in the development, and a prospectus
which shall be a summarization in layman's terms of the
information contained in other documents.
(2) Copies of the documents creating the Homeowners'
Association, the bylaws and the rules and regulations of the
Homeowners' Association, any management policies or
proposed management policies, copies of any restrictions or
covenants running with the land in the development and a
prospectus which shall be a summarization in layman's terms
of the information contained in filed documents.
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure for the evaluation
and approval of integrated developments focused on planned
employment uses, including industrial, light industrial, office and
research and development uses, retail/service developments, marina
and resort-style development, and addressing the particular needs of
marine trade uses. [Amended 10-27-2004;184 2-4-2008185]
The regulations are intended to foster developments which are
compatible with surrounding areas and which incorporate buffers or
transition areas to reduce potential negative impacts on single family
residential areas. The regulations are intended to encourage a mixture
of compatible uses to create a sustainable and attractive environment
for a wide variety of trades and businesses. The regulations are
intended to be flexible, to allow for innovative design techniques,
accommodate unique land uses and encourage creative approaches to
development issues.
184. Note: "and retail/service developments" added.
185. Note: "marina and resort-style development" added.
Section C CHARTER Section D
C:667
A coordinated design approach with an emphasis on compatibility with
the natural environment and surrounding land uses and the allowance
of a sufficient mix of uses and accessory uses to create a self-contained
or self-sustained development park is encouraged. Planning of a
project and calculation of densities over the entire project rather than
on an individual lot-by-lot basis is permitted. A coordinated design
approach should: [Amended 2-4-2008186]
• Break up the apparent mass and scale of large structures,
as well as large paved areas, in order to ensure that such
development is compatible with and does not detract from
Portsmouth's character, scale, and sense of place;
• Help integrate large-scale development with its surroundings;
• Promote and facilitate a safe and comfortable pedestrian scale
environment;
• Encourage a mixture of uses and sizes of structures; and
• Reduce the visual impact of large areas of parking.
The regulations are intended to be flexible, to allow for innovative
design techniques, accommodate unique land uses and encourage
creative approaches to development issues. It is anticipated that public
officials will have considerable involvement in determining the nature
of the development through the development plan review process
which will include consideration and application of aspects of both
subdivision and zoning regulations. [Added 2-4-2008]
Where the requirements of any part of this section may conflict with
any other section, this section shall prevail. [Added 2-4-2008]
2. Applicability and procedure.
a) Planned Unit Developments are permitted in Districts as set forth
in Article V, and Article III Section K (redevelopment district) of
this ordinance with the approval of, and subject to conditions and
restrictions imposed by the Planning Board pursuant to this
section. [Amended 3-15-2010]
b) No Planned Unit Development shall be undertaken, nor shall any
lots therein be sold, nor any portion of such development be
constructed until a plan for such development has been approved
by the Planning Board in accordance with the procedures
established by:
(1) The Land Development and Subdivision Regulations of the
Town of Portsmouth for Major Land Development and Major
Subdivision Review.187
186. Note: Last sentence and bullets added.
187. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:668
(2) Additional procedures and requirements set forth herein for
Planned Unit Developments.
c) Compatibility and interrelation of uses within the Planned Unit
Development and coordination of traffic, utilities, parking, storm
water management, security, sewage disposal, storage, open space,
infrastructure and other needs, as well as the entire development's
impact on the surrounding area and roadways mandates that the
development be considered in its entirety and approved, if
appropriate, as a whole and developed as a whole. Phasing of
construction may be permitted or required by the Planning Board.
d) In granting a planned unit development under this section the
Planning Board shall, immediately upon receipt of an application
hereunder, refer the site plan and related documents to the Design
Review Board, as well as to the Portsmouth Redevelopment Agency
for proposals in the Redevelopment District, for review and advice,
per the stipulations of Article XI. Development Plan Review. The
Redevelopment District Performance Standards shall be used to
help evaluate proposals in the Redevelopment District. [Amended
2-4-2008; 3-15-2010]
e) "Performance Standards for Planned Unit Developments", adopted
by the Planning Board, hereinafter referred to as "Performance
Standards", shall be utilized, as applicable, for evaluating Planned
Unit Development proposals. The Redevelopment District
Performance Standards shall be used to help evaluate proposals in
the Redevelopment District. [Amended 9-19-2006]
3. Minimum land area.
a) A Planned Unit Development shall consist of not less than two
hundred thousand square feet (200,000 ft.2), except Planned Retail/
Service Developments which shall consist of not less than one
hundred thousand square feet (100,000 ft.2) or eighty thousand
square feet (80,000 ft.2) in the Town Center District, or twenty (20)
acres in the Redevelopment District of developable land area which
may be subdivided into lots as set forth in section 6 hereof.
[Amended 10-27-2004; 2-4-2008; 3-15-2010]
b) Once a planned unit development has been approved, all land area
shown on the plan submitted as part of said development, including
those designated as reserved for future development, shall be
dedicated to the development and may not be withdrawn from said
development plan or devoted to any other use without the express
consent of the Planning Board. The Board may allow subsequent
withdrawal of land from a development, after hearing, when such
withdrawal will not violate the purpose and intent of this
ordinance, impair the previously approved plan of coordinated
development or deprive the public or the development of benefits
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:669
or amenities in exchange for the provision of which the applicant
was previously granted zoning incentives or modifications.
4. Uses.
a) Uses - generally. [Added 9-19-2006]
(1) Uses are categorized as "permitted", "conditional", and
"prohibited". (Consideration of "conditional" is similar to that
for special use permits in zoning, but adds a requirement that
the use fit the intent of the particular PUD.)
(2) Designation as a conditional use does not constitute an
authorization or an assurance that such use will be permitted.
Rather, each application for a conditional use shall be
evaluated as to its internal consistency with the intent of the
proposed PUD, its probable effect on the intent of said
development, the adjacent property, the neighborhood, and on
the community and may be approved or denied as the findings
indicate appropriate.
(3) Nothing herein contained shall preclude the Planning Board
from granting multiple conditional uses for a proposal or to
condition the granting of one (1) or more conditional uses upon
the implementation or completion of one portion of a project, a
master plan for which is submitted at the time of the
application for a planned unit development. (See also Article X.
Special Conditions.)
(4) Items to be considered when granting a conditional use
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(i) Conformance with the Performance Standards for Planned
Unit Developments, and/or the Redevelopment District
Performance Standards, as applicable.
(ii) The desired use will not be detrimental to the intent of the
planned unit development or to the surrounding area;
(iii) It will be compatible with existing and proposed uses
within the planned unit development, as well as
neighboring land uses.
(iv) It will not create a nuisance or a hazard in the
neighborhood.
(v) Adequate protection is afforded to the surrounding
property by the use of open space and planting, or by
decorative fencing, per the Performance Standards;
(vi) Safe vehicular access and adequate parking are provided;
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:670
(vii) Control of noise, smoke, odors, lighting and any other
objectionable feature is provided;
(viii) Solar rights of the abutters are provided for;
(ix) The proposed conditional use will be in conformance with
the purposes and intent of the comprehensive plan and the
zoning ordinance of the Town of Portsmouth, and/or the
Redevelopment District Performance Standards, as
applicable; [Amended 3-15-2010]
(x) The health, safety and welfare of the community are
protected.
(xi) It is consistent with the Purpose of Design Standards set
forth in Article IX. Section D. and/or the Redevelopment
District Performance Standards, as applicable.
(xii) Shared parking or joint use is encouraged, and for some
uses required, where it is likely that occupants of a vehicle
would visit more than one (1) use within a development
before departing. The Planning Board may, at its option,
waive certain requirements of Article IX. Section A.7.b),
provided adequate parking is provided.
Applicant shall demonstrate how the development will
utilize shared parking, including calculations, utilizing the
parking requirements of Article IX, Section A.
(5) The Planning Board may, at its option, impose special
conditions on any use, as further defined in Article X. Special
Conditions, wherein for these purposes the term Planning
Board is substituted for the term Zoning Board of Review.
b) Mixed uses.
(1) Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to
prevent or discourage the institution or maintenance of two (2)
or more uses on any one (1) lot or within any one (1) building in
a planned unit development and a mix of compatible uses are
to be encouraged.
c) Planned corporate development.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, all
office, management, regulatory and light industrial uses, (but
excluding mass storage of fuel), are permitted in a Planned
Corporate Development, including but not limited to:
(i) Manufacturing from previously prepared materials, of
non-hazardous, finished products or parts and including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging,
sale or distribution, incidental storage of such products or
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:671
parts and research and development, but excluding basic
industrial processing, provided such use produces no
noise, heat or glare perceptible at any lot line and emits
no vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, toxic or offensive odors or
gases.
(ii) Business, financial, or professional offices, medical,
dental, psychiatric, or other health service offices or
clinics, including laboratories.
(iii) Research and development facilities.
(iv) Radio, television, or recording studios.
(v) Antennas and communications towers.
(vi) Public or private utilities including telephone exchanges.
(vii) Printing, binding, publishing, graphic arts, and related
trades.
(viii) Plumbing, electrical, carpentry shop or other similar
service or repair establishment.
(ix) Day care center.
(x) Public or private trade schools, (but not those including
vocational or trade skills in automotive, construction,
metallurgical, chemical or similar industrial operations,
operation of heavy equipment or vehicle repair).
(xi) Restaurants without drive through facilities provided that
the gross floor area shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of
the development's gross floor area.
(xii) Indoor entertainment and recreational facilities in a
suitably sound insulated structure.
(xiii) Catering or food processing or preparation at wholesale.
(xiv) Wholesale storage in an enclosed and roofed structure.
d) Planned industrial development.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, all
industrial uses, (but excluding mass storage of fuel), are
permitted in a Planned Industrial Development, including but
not limited to:
(i) Processing and manufacturing from raw or extracted
materials, of non-hazardous finished or unfinished
products or parts and including processing, compounding,
stamping, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging,
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:672
sale or distribution, and incidental inside storage of such
products or parts.
(ii) Research and development facilities.
(iii) Business, financial or professional offices.
(iv) Public or private utilities including telephone exchanges.
(v) Printing, binding, publishing, graphic arts, and related
trades.
(vi) Plumbing, electrical, carpentry shop, or other similar
service or repair establishment.
(vii) Day care center as an accessory use serving employees of
a businesses within the development.
(viii) Public or private trade schools offering vocational or trade
skills including automotive, construction, metallurgical,
chemical, or similar industrial operations, operation of
heavy equipment or vehicle repair.
(ix) Restaurants without drive through facilities provided that
gross floor area may not exceed ten percent (10%) of the
development's gross floor area.
(x) Trucking terminals.
(xi) Antennas and communications towers.
(xii) Wholesale business and storage in an enclosed and roofed
structure.
(xiii) Commercial parking structure.
(xiv) Bottling of beverages.
(xv) Laundries and dry cleaning plants.
(xvi) Paint and auto body shops provided all work is carried on
within the building.
(xvii) Construction business and storage of construction
equipment.
(xviii) Extractive industries and earth removal.
(xix) Ship building and repair.
e) Planned marine trade development.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance all
marine trade uses and multifamily residential uses subject to
conditions and limitations prescribed herein, are permitted in
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:673
a Planned Marine Trade Development, including but not
limited to18:
(i) Design, manufacture, repair, renovation, or rebuilding of
commercial, military, government or recreational boats.
(ii) Support industries for boat manufacture or repair,
including the design, manufacture, repair, and installation
of all boating systems and accessories.
(iii) Marinas and accessory uses thereto.
(iv) Stores for sale of marine supplies and associated items,
including boats and trailers.
(v) Restaurants without drive through facilities, provided that
gross floor area may not exceed ten percent (10%) of the
development's gross floor area.
(vi) Commercial parking structures.
(vii) Research and development facilities.
(viii) Antennas and communications towers.
(ix) Storage in an enclosed and roofed structure.
(x) Outdoor storage of boats, and other equipment utilized in
boat storage such as cradles, but not materials, parts,
supplies, etc., unless such items are in the process of
installation or other active use in the repair or service of
boats.
(xi) Schools.
(xii) Day care centers.188
f) Planned Marina Village Development (PMVD). [Added 9-19-2006]
(1) Proposed uses not listed below may be presented to the
Planning Board for review. Such uses shall be evaluated by the
Planning Board for similarity to below listed uses and
consistency with the intent of the PUD. The Planning Board
may approve or deny the proposed use, or may approve the
proposed use subject to conditions.
(2) Permitted uses: The following uses are appropriate for the
Planned Marina Village Development (PMVD) including:
188. Note: Deleted 9-19-2006: “multi-family housing provided said residential component,
including required parking, open space and amenities, shall not exceed 50% of the
developable land area of the total development.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:674
(i) Marinas including sale of boats and related supplies,
fueling and pumpout facilities, minor boat repair and
servicing, with shared or joint use parking required.
(a) A marina is a required element of a PMVD, shall be of
proportional size and integral to the land-side
development, and shall be integrated and phased with
the development as a whole.
(ii) Residential limited to condominiums, apartments, multifamily
homes, and attached townhomes, provided that at
least ten percent (10%) of all units within each phase of
the development are "affordable" according to the terms of
the Town's Low and Moderate Income Housing Plan. Such
Affordable Units shall be provided by bedroom size in the
same proportion as the applicable phase of the
development. If provided for in this or another Town
ordinance relating to low and moderate income housing,
such units may be provided off-site or by payment in lieu of
according to the terms of such ordinance.
(iii) Retail and service businesses not to exceed five thousand
square feet (5,000 ft.2) each.
(iv) Restaurants not to exceed five thousand square feet (5,000
ft.2) each.
(v) Small offices and clinics with public service component
encouraged on ground floor, not to exceed five thousand
square feet (5,000 ft.2) each.
(vi) Civic uses; public services uses encouraged on ground
floor.
(vii) Daycare centers.
(viii) Parks and other small scale public spaces.
(ix) Lodging such as hotels, bed and breakfasts, and spas.
(x) Short-term or seasonal storage outdoor storage of boats
and boating equipment directly associated with the
development, provided that proper screening from the
street and adjacent properties is provided.
(xi) Active outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses
and tennis courts.
(xii) Yacht club, country club, and other recreational facilities
and accessories.
(3) Conditional uses: The following uses may be allowed in a
PMVD as conditional uses:
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:675
(i) Large scale retail and service businesses in excess of five
thousand square feet (5,000 ft.2) each.
(ii) Large scale Office - second floor and above only, in excess
of five thousand square feet (5,000 ft.2) each.
(iii) Places of worship and assembly with shared or joint use
parking required.
(iv) Large Scale institutional uses (public service uses only) in
excess of five thousand square feet (5,000 ft.2) each.
(v) Laboratories and medical research as a principal use (not
allowed on ground floor).
(vi) Short-term open storage of boats and other equipment
utilized in boat storage that is not directly associated with
the marina.
(vii) Commercial parking structures.
(viii) Restaurants in excess of five thousand square feet (5,000
ft.2) each, shared or joint parking required.
(ix) Drive through facilities as an accessory to a primary use.
(x) Storage in an enclosed and roofed structure.
(xi) Antennas and communication towers.
(xii) Single family detached units, limited to ten percent (10%)
of the total units in the development.
(4) Prohibited uses: The following uses are not allowed within a
PMVD:
(i) Automotive uses including gas stations, auto sales, open
storage, parts or maintenance, or car wash.
(ii) Self Storage or Long-term storage facilities.
(iii) Outdoor storage, except as provided in permitted and
conditional uses above.
(iv) Kennels (exterior yards).
(v) Food manufacturing or processing except that consumed
on site.
(vi) Manufacturing and Industrial uses.
(vii) Major boat repair, boat painting facilities and other
operations causing cinders, dust, flashing, fumes, gases,
odors, refuse matter, smoke or vapor.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:676
(viii) Free-standing drive through facilities.
g) Planned Resort Development (PRD). [Added 9-19-2006]
(1) Proposed uses not so listed below may be presented to the
Planning Board for review. Such uses shall be evaluated by the
Planning Board for similarity to below listed uses and
consistency with the intent of the PUD. The Planning Board
may approve or deny the proposed use, or may approve the
proposed use subject to conditions.
(2) Permitted uses: The following uses are appropriate for the
Planned Resort Development (PRD) including:
(i) Retail and service businesses not to exceed five thousand
square feet (5,000 ft.2) each.
(ii) Restaurants not to exceed five thousand square feet (5,000
ft.2) each.
(iii) Civic uses; public services uses encouraged on ground
floor.
(iv) Daycare centers.
(v) Residential including single-family dwellings,
condominiums, apartments, multi-family homes, and
attached townhomes.
(vi) Parks and other small scale public spaces.
(vii) Lodging such as hotels, bed and breakfasts, and spas.
(viii) Short-term or seasonal storage outdoor storage of boats
and boating equipment directly associated with the
development, provided that proper screening from the
street and adjacent properties is provided.
(ix) Active outdoor/indoor recreational facilities such as golf
courses and tennis courts.
(x) Yacht club, country club, and other recreational facilities
and accessories.
(3) Conditional uses: The following uses may be allowed in a
PRD as conditional uses:
(i) Marinas including sale of boats and related supplies,
fueling and pumpout facilities, minor boat repair and
servicing, shared or joint parking required.
(ii) Places of worship and assembly, with shared or joint use
parking required.
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:677
(iii) Commercial parking structures.
(iv) Restaurants in excess of five thousand square feet (5,000
ft.2) each, shared or joint parking required.
(v) Drive through facilities as an accessory to a primary use.
(vi) Storage in an enclosed and roofed structure.
(vii) Antennas and communication towers.
(viii) Satellite parking facilities.
(4) Prohibited uses: The following uses are not allowed within a
PRD:
(i) Automotive uses including gas stations, auto sales, open
storage, parts or maintenance, or car wash.
(ii) Self Storage or Long-term storage facilities.
(iii) Outdoor storage, except as provided in permitted and
conditional uses above.
(iv) Kennels (exterior yards).
(v) Food manufacturing or processing except that consumed
on site.
(vi) Manufacturing and Industrial uses.
(vii) Large Scale office uses in excess of five thousand square
feet (5,000 ft.2) each.
(viii) Large Scale institutional uses in excess of five thousand
square feet (5,000 ft.2) each.
(ix) Laboratories and medical research.
(x) Major boat repair, boat painting facilities and other
operations causing cinders, dust, flashing, fumes, gases,
odors, refuse matter, smoke or vapor.
(xi) Free-standing drive through facilities.
h) Planned retail/service development. [Amended 10-27-2004189]
(1) Retail business and consumers services.
(2) Business, financial, or professional offices, medical, dental,
psychiatric, or other health service offices or clinics, including
laboratories.
189. Note: “research and development facilities” and “antennas and communications towers”
deleted 10-27-2004.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:678
(3) Radio, television, or recording studios.
(4) Printing, binding, publishing, graphic arts and related trades.
(5) Plumbing, electrical, or carpentry shop, or other similar
service or repair establishment.
(6) Day care Center.
(7) Public or private trade schools, (but not those including
vocational or trade skills in automotive, construction,
metallurgical, chemical or similar industrial operations,
operation of heavy equipment or vehicle repair).
(8) Restaurants.
(9) Indoor entertainment and recreational facilities in a suitably
sound insulated structure.
(10) Catering or food processing or preparation.
(11) Stores for sale of marine supplies and associated items,
including boats and trailers.
(12) Commercial parking structure.
(13) Schools.
(14) Multi-family housing provided said residential component,
including required parking, open space and amenities, shall
not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the developable land
area of the total development. [Amended 7-14-2003]
(i) Except that, in the Redevelopment District, multi-family
housing shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the
developable land; of which at least ten percent (10%) must
be affordable Low and Moderate Income Housing. [Added
3-15-2010]
(15) In the Town Center District, the more restrictive of the above
list of uses and the uses permitted in Article V under TC shall
apply. [Added 10-27-2004]
5. Submission requirements. In addition to the submissions required as
part of a major subdivision, the following submissions are required:
a) At the time of the master plan application, the applicant shall
include the following on the plan or in the supporting materials:
(1) Location, proposed size and height of all buildings;
(2) Proposed general use category of each lot, building or portion
thereof, i.e. office, manufacturing, retail, residential, public,
semi public, light industrial, industrial, etc.;
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:679
(3) General parking plan including arrangements for shared
parking or parking removed from the building to be served;
(4) Arrangements or reservations for expansion onto or
connection to adjoining properties, including utility and facility
connections, traffic connections, etc.;
(5) Designation of all areas reserved for future development;
(6) All areas proposed to be reserved for open space or recreation;
(7) A description of all zoning incentives and/or modifications
sought and justifications therefor.
b) At the time of the preliminary plan application the applicant shall
include the following on the plan or in the supporting materials:
(1) Building elevations and preliminary general layout of building
interiors;
(2) Location and number of proposed parking spaces with
calculations of parking needs as set forth in Article IX hereof;
(3) Location of all vehicular and pedestrian ways, designation of
private and public ways and provisions for use and
maintenance of all private ways;
(4) As to residential units, building and site plans conforming to
the requirements of Article VII, Section C.9.c);
(5) As to retail and service developments, building and site plans
conforming to the requirements of Article VII, Section G.9.c).
(amended 2003-07-14);
(6) For each lot or building, a schematic setting forth total land
area, frontage, lot coverages by impervious surface and
buildings, building height and setbacks, available parking and
loading areas with contrast to allowed maximum and minimum
requirements.
(7) For Planned Retail/Service Development proposals,
submissions shall also include those items shown in Article IX.
Section D. Design Review Standards, and/or the
Redevelopment District Performance Standards, as applicable.
[Amended 10-27-2004; 3-15-2010]
6. Development/performance standards.
a) General intensity regulations.190
190. Note: Table revised to include PMVD and PRD adopted September 19, 2006.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:680
Min.
lot
size
Min.
frontage*
Min.
front
setback
Min.
side
setback
Min.
rear
setback
Max.
Lot/
Bldg
coverage
Max.
Bldg.
height
PID 40,000 200 60 30 50 40% 40'**
PCD 40,000 200 50 30 50 40% 40'**
PMTD 30,000 110 30 20 30 40% 40'**
PMVD 20,000 110 30 15 20 50% 40'***
PRD 20,000 110 30 15 20 50% 40'
PRSD 20,000 110 30 25 30 25% 35'
PRSD
in TC
zone
[Added
2-4-2008]
20,000 110' 5' 15' 20' 35% 35'
Maximum Building, parking and travelway coverage: seventy
percent (70%) eighty-five percent (85%) in the Town Center
District (same as Special Use Permit) [Added 2-4-2008]
* Frontage may be on private streets approved pursuant to
section 6.B.1)(e) hereof. Frontage on any street may be
waived in its entirety in special circumstances in which
provision of such frontage would result in an inefficient use of
land or development resources without countervailing benefit
to the public or development and adequate vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, off street parking and loading and
perpetual routine and emergency access are provided.
** In Planned Marine Trade Developments, if the applicant
demonstrates a functional need for additional height the
maximum height limit shall be sixty feet (60').
Notwithstanding that provision however, in all districts the
maximum height limit for any structure containing a
residential dwelling unit shall be thirty-five feet (35').
*** In Planned Marina Village Developments [Added
9-19-2006]
In order to encourage smart growth and sustainable development
patterns integrating architectural and design interest in Planned
Marina Village Developments, the maximum height of residential
or mixed use structures may be increased to sixty feet (60') to
include a maximum of four (4) stories of residential and/or
commercial use plus one (1) story of parking, provided that the
following objectives as defined in the Portsmouth Comprehensive
Community Plan, West Side element are met:
• Connectivity with transit and alternate transportation modes;
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:681
• Mixed Use Development;
• Maximize preservation of coastal vistas and open space areas;
• Maximize public recreation and coastal access
• At least ten percent (10%) affordable Low and Moderate
Income Housing is provided per the provisions of Section
D.4.f) above.
• Shared Use Parking;
• Public infrastructure improvements;
• Remediation and reuse/redevelopment of former
underutilized and/or environmentally challenged sites.
In Planned Marine Trade Developments and Planned Retail/
Service Developments (amended 2003-07-14) the minimum
developable land area per unit for multi family housing shall be:
Served by onsite sewer
system effluent
discharged into an on
site absorption field
Served by sewer system
plant or public sewer
system with effluent
discharged into an off-site
absorption field
1 bedroom** 10,000 square feet 7,500 square feet
2 bedroom** 16,000 square feet 11,000 square feet
3 bedroom** 20,000 square feet 15,000 square feet
Each
additional
bedroom**
6,000 square feet 4,000 square feet
** Any room in excess of sixty-nine square feet (69 ft.2), such
as a den, playroom, study, library, etc. is to be considered a
bedroom for the purposes of this section
In Planned Marina Village Developments (PMVD) the minimum
density shall be thirty (30) units per acre. [Added 9-19-2006]
In Planned Resort Developments (PRD) the minimum developable
land area per residential unit shall be two (2) units per acre.
[Added 9-19-2006]
*Shown for reference purposes:
PID = Planned Industrial Development
PCD = Planned Corporate Development
PMTD = Planned Marine Trade Development
PMVD = Planned Marina Village Development
PRD = Planned Resort Development
PRSD = Planned Retail/Service Development
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:682
PRSD in Town Center Zone corrects an earlier omission.
(1) The Board shall have the power to modify the above provisions
to a degree not to exceed ten percent (10%) in the event the
Board finds that granting such modification allows the
applicant to provide other amenities or features in furtherance
of the purposes and intent of this section such as, but not
limited to, preservation of existing trees, groves, water bodies
or scenic points; public access to the coastline, coordinated
access to utilities, facilities and roadways by neighboring
property owners, or protection of proximate residential areas
or, if necessary, to accommodate the particular need of a use
allowed hereunder.
(2) In all districts, off-street parking provided and maintained as
paved/impervious surface shall be counted as part of the
allowable lot coverage as defined and specified herein and in
Articles IV of these regulations. [Added 2-4-2008]
(3) Parking areas composed of pervious surfaces are encouraged
for all land uses and lots, unless there are overriding
environmental limitations, and may be provided to meet part of
any required parking spaces on a lot. Twenty percent (20%) of
such pervious surfaces which provide for grass surface shall be
counted as part of the overall allowable lot coverage; otherwise
sixty percent (60%) of such pervious surfaces shall be counted.
[Added 2-4-2008]
(i) Pervious surfaces shall not be used in travel lanes, fire
lanes, or within sixty feet (60') [two (2) parking lanes plus
aisle] of any building except for employee parking.
(4) Measures that shall be considered to reduce the amount of
impervious surfaces in all proposed parking lots include:
[Added 2-4-2008]
• Provide pervious parking stall surfaces
• Provide pervious overflow parking
• Provide pervious snow-storage space
• Conserve existing natural areas, including trees on-site
• Minimize clearing to the extent practicable while
retaining access, sight distances, and safe vehicle flows.
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:683
Minimum side and rear building setbacks for a Planned Retail/
Service Development not in the Town Center Zone may be
increased by the Planning Board for developments that abut
residential zones and contain any building greater than
twenty-five thousand SF (25,000 ft.2) gross area. Increase in
such setbacks shall be intended to mitigate negative impacts
on abutting properties, and shall be based upon: [Added
2-4-2008]
1. Size and intensity of proposed use;
2. Relative topography of the proposed development to
adjacent residential development;
3. Placement of parking, loading and service areas;
4. Landscaped and/or solid screening.
In no case may the minimum distance between any
principal building in a PUD and the nearest lot line of
an adjacent parcel outside the PUD and located in a
residential district, be less than the rear yard setback
required in Article IV. for the respective, adjacent
residential district.
b) Design and layout.
(1) Streets and ways.
(i) Arrangement - arrangement of buildings should provide
more economy of roads and internal parking than normally
associated with conventional development. All streets and
ways, public and private, shall be coordinated with each
other and designed and laid out in accordance with the
appropriate requirements and specifications contained in
Article X, Section D of the Town of Portsmouth Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations.191
(ii) Public streets and ways - all streets which are intended or
required to be dedicated to the Town of Portsmouth as
public streets shall be constructed in accordance with
Article X, Section E of the requirements and specifications
contained in the Town of Portsmouth Land Development
and Subdivision Regulations.192
(iii) Private streets and ways - All streets and ways which are
intended to remain under the control of private entities
shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements
and specifications contained in Article X. Section E. of the
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
192. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:684
Town of Portsmouth Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations.193
(iv) Standards of design and construction for roadways, either
public or private, within a planned unit development may
be modified as deemed appropriate by the Planning Board,
(including the reduction of right of way and roadway
widths). In considering an application to modify standards
the Board shall take into consideration the particular
natural characteristics of each site, the existence of other
design factors such as the separation of pedestrian and
vehicular circulation patterns and the location and
adequacy of off-street parking and loading facilities and
the impact of any modification on circulation, safety,
maintenance, storm water drainage. The Board shall
consult with the Fire Department, Police Department, and
Public Works Department, and if, after such consultation,
the Planning Board finds that the design of the proposed
streets and common vehicular ways is adequate to protect
the public health, safety and welfare and will promote the
purposes and intent of this ordinance, the Board may
modify such standards.
(v) Private streets and ways may only be approved upon the
submission of instruments granting the appropriate
occupants of the development and state and municipal
government and regulatory agencies satisfactory access
over and across said streets and ways and setting forth the
responsibilities of the occupants or owners of the
development or development association or management
committee, if any, regarding maintenance, repair and
control of said streets and ways and the arrangements for
financing same, and setting forth the rights of public and
private utilities and the Town of Portsmouth.
Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, the Board may
require any particular street or way within the
development to be dedicated to the public if such
dedication is deemed necessary to allow safe and
convenient access to neighboring parcels.
(2) Parking areas.
(i) Parking areas shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements and specifications contained in the Town of
Portsmouth Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations194 and shall conform to the requirements of
Article IX, Section A of this ordinance.
193. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
194. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:685
(ii) The Planning Board may allow satellite parking on lots
other than lots abutting the lot to be served and may allow
shared parking or either shared or satellite parking and
allow such modification to the provisions of Article IX as it
may deem appropriate without Board of Review approval.
(3) Storm water management.
(i) Storm water management and drainage plans and
facilities shall be designed and installed in accordance
with the requirements of Article X, Section F, of the Town
of Portsmouth Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations195 and said plans and facilities shall be
evaluated and approved or disapproved in accordance
with the criteria set forth therein.
(4) Utilities.
(i) Utilities shall be provided, located, and installed in
accordance with the requirements of Article X, Section H,
of the Portsmouth Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations,196 as said requirement may need to be
modified to allow for the installation and utilization of
private streets and ways.
c) Site design criteria.
(1) Generally - arrangement of buildings should provide more
economy of roads and internal parking than normally
associated with conventional development. Buildings and
structures shall be located with consideration given to the
topography of the development and shall be adapted to the
terrain, the size and shape of the lot, the character of adjoining
properties and existing structures in the immediate vicinity
which have a visual relationship with the development.
Environmentally sensitive areas shall be avoided and
neighboring properties shall be buffered from objectionable
features. Factors such as drainage, noise, odor, and the
character of surrounding properties shall be considered in
location of buildings and structures. All buildings shall be set
back a minimum of fifty-five feet (55') from the centerline of
any interior way, provided that such restriction shall not apply
to PMTD or PRSD (amended 2003-07-14) and building in those
developments shall be set back from the centerline such
distance as the Planning Board may determine is necessary
and prudent for installation and access to utilities and the
maintenance of safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic patterns,
taking into consideration the nature of the interior way and
195. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
196. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:686
surrounding buildings and improvements. In no case may the
minimum distance between any principal building in a PUD
and the nearest lot line of an adjacent parcel outside the PUD
and located in a residential district, be less than the rear
yard setback required in the respective, adjacent residential
district. The Board may not grant modifications or waivers of
this requirement.
(2) Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent or
discourage the erection or maintenance of two (2) or more
buildings on any one (1) lot in a planned unit development,
notwithstanding the fact that both of said buildings are of such
character, size or use that they would otherwise be
characterized as "principal buildings" under other provisions
of this ordinance.
(3) To the extent reasonably possible, structures within the
development shall be compatible in architectural
characteristics such as proportion, scale, roofline, general
style, patterns, and proportion of windows and architectural
details and features.
(4) Building materials shall be compatible to neighboring sites and
structures. A finished texture, pattern, or a quality of detailing
shall be depicted on plans for all proposed building materials.
(5) Uses and structures shall be dispersed throughout the
development so that the uses which are least intensive in terms
of noise, traffic, odor, hours of operation, etc., and those uses
that by their nature may be conducted in structures that are
more architecturally compatible with surrounding properties
shall be located on the perimeter of the development. Those
uses which are most intensive in terms of noise, smoke, odor,
vibration or traffic or possess other potentially objectionable
features and those uses which by their nature require
buildings, and structures of a more standard industrial design,
shall be confined to the interior of the development or to an
area of the development abutting similar uses on abutting
properties.
(6) The Board may require the reservation or dedication of
easements for the benefit of land reserved for future
development or land outside the development to allow those
parcels to enjoy access to waterways, rail lines, highways,
utility lines and facilities where such reservation or dedication
is reasonably necessary to allow the coordinated, efficient and
beneficial development and use of such properties and does
not severely impair the value of the development or hinder the
development or use of the subject parcel. Reservation or
dedication of such areas may be cause for grant of modification
or incentives pursuant to section 8 hereof.
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:687
(7) Parking in the front yard or in view of properties outside the
development shall be discouraged and may be denied.
Consolidated curb cuts for access to the development or to
secondary roads within the development are encouraged and
may be required by the Board.
(8) In a Planned Corporate Development and Planned Retail/
Service Development (amended 2003-07-14) all areas not
covered by buildings/structures, parking, and travel, areas
shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubs, flowers, or
ground cover indigenous to the area. Along the length of the
front wall of each principal building there shall be a
landscaped area with bushes, shrubs, or flowers indigenous to
the area.
(9) Any outdoor storage allowed in a Planned Corporate
Development and Planned Retail/Service Development
(amended 2003-07-14) shall be screened from view by an
opaque screen architecturally compatible with the principal
structure. After consideration of factors such as the use,
topography, natural or proposed vegetation and the nature of
surrounding property, the Board may require such screening in
any Planned Unit Development.
(10) In any PID, PCD, or PRSD not in the Town Center District,
where any facade of any building over twenty-five thousand SF
(25,000 ft.2) faces any adjacent residential parcel within one
hundred feet (100'), a permanent berm containing at a
minimum evergreen trees or arborvitae at least six feet (6') in
height when planted, planted at intervals of twenty feet (20')
on center. Height and width or berm as well as type and
locations of plantings shall be designed by a registered
landscape architect or certified arborist, and shall be designed
to create an effective visual screen from said residential use.
Depending upon the size and nature of the development, the
Board may require up to a double row of six foot (6') high
evergreen trees planted at minimum intervals of ten feet (10')
on center or in clusters or clumps shall be provided. Existing
trees and shrubbery, or other suitable visual barrier, may
substitute for this requirement, at the discretion of the Board.
[Added 2-4-2008]
(11) Planned Retail/Service Developments shall adhere to the
requirements of Article VII. Section G. Planned Retail/Service
Development. In case of conflict, this section shall prevail, but
in no case shall the standards herein be less stringent than that
section. [Added 2-4-2008]
d) Traffic impact. Subparagraph d) is applicable to PRSD only.
[Added 2-4-2008]
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:688
(1) The principal vehicular access to the site shall be directly from
an arterial street. The Board may waive this requirement if
there is no reasonable alternative or it is deemed
advantageous to the Town, and a traffic impact study
demonstrates that the Level of Service on collector road or
residential street(s) serving as the principal access will not be
reduced below level C weekdays 7-9 AM or 4-6 PM, or
Saturdays noon to 5:00 PM.
(2) Vehicle access shall be designed to accommodate peak on-site
traffic volumes to minimize traffic impact on public streets and
maximize pedestrian safety. This shall be accomplished
through adequate parking lot design and capacity; access drive
entry throat length, width, design, location, and number; and
traffic control devices.
(3) The site design shall provide, or make provisions for, direct
connections to adjacent land uses in locations used or likely to
be used for parking unless expressly waived by the Board.
(4) For proposed retail developments with greater than twentyfive
thousand SF (25,000 ft.2) of gross floor area of the first
floor, the Board may, at its option and at the expense of the
applicant, employ a transportation planner or transportation
engineer to determine the traffic impact of the proposed
development through a traffic impact analysis using the
Institute of Transportation Engineers' trip generation
guidelines. In no instance may a proposed development reduce
1) the existing Level of Service on the adjacent arterial road, or
2) below Level C on the nearest non-arterial through streets
weekdays 7-9 AM or 4-6 PM, or Saturdays noon to 5:00 PM.
7. Inspections and construction or improvement guarantees. The
provisions of Sections N, O, P, and Q of Article X of the Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Portsmouth197
shall be applicable to all improvements for which the Town will
ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance or operation
including, but not limited to, public roads and drainage facilities. The
Planning Board, in its judgment, may require inspections and approvals
and impose the fees associated therewith, pursuant to Sections N, O
and Q of Article X, for any private improvement which could
detrimentally impact the operation or useful life of any public
improvements, if not properly installed or maintained.
8. Incentives and modifications. In addition to the modifications allowed
pursuant to Section 6.a) hereof the Board shall further be empowered
to modify or vary any provisions hereof upon a finding that such
variance or modification will be conducive to an integrated
development, will not be inimical to public health, safety and welfare,
197. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:689
and that the applicant is establishing an amenity or feature of
significant value to the Town and/or general public, such as, but not
limited to, public open space, public recreational facilities, access to the
coastline, accommodation for mass transportation, or the like.
9. Ownership and control. Prior to approval, the applicant must designate
an entity, whether a management or condominium association, fee
simple owner, partnership, corporation or other entity which will have
direct control and responsibility for the installation and maintenance of
all common areas such as parking facilities, private roadways, open
space, buffer strips, and utilities, joint storm water and/or wastewater
facilities and public facilities. Applicant must submit for approval
documents which govern the existence and operation of such entity,
vest management rights in such entity and set forth the procedure, if
any, for substitution of any party for such entity.
10. Changes to plan.
a) Proposed changes to an approved PUD shall be considered in
accordance with Portsmouth Subdivision Regulations Article XIII.
Section G.198
b) In addition, the basis for acceptance of a proposed change shall
include a finding that the public benefits and mitigation provided
improves or remains equal to those originally approved, and that
the change in the approved building and development program is
sustainable and retains the character of the original concept. The
Planning Board shall have the authority to declare that proposed
changes, taken as a whole, are a significant departure from the
original approval and constitute a new proposal.
11. Procedure and decision.
The Planning Board shall conduct public hearings on the application in
accordance with the procedures established by the Portsmouth Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations for Major Land Development
and Major Subdivision Review199 regardless of whether the project
constitutes a subdivision. The Board may require a personal inspection
of the site by some or all Board members as a condition of Master Plan
approval or at any time prior to final approval. During the course of said
hearings the Board may require the applicant to produce, at applicant's
sole cost and expense, such further information, plans, studies or data
not specifically required by this ordinance or the Board's regulations if
the Board deems such information or data is reasonably necessary to
enable the Board to make the determinations with which it is charged
hereunder. In the event the Board determines that independent,
professional expertise is necessary to ensure proper and thorough
investigation of the project or interpretation of data, plans, information
198. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
199. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:690
or studies provided by applicant that the Board may engage the
services of such expert.
The Planning Board, may, at its discretion, establish a Technical Review
Committee to conduct technical reviews of specific applications subject
to their jurisdiction on an as-needed basis. This committee shall operate
per the provisions of the Subdivision Regulations, Article XII, Section B.
[Added 9-19-2006]
At the conclusion of said hearings, the Board may approve said
application, deny the application, approve the application in part and
deny the application in part or approve it with modifications and/
or subject to conditions and restrictions. In the course of granting
any approval, the Board shall have the power to restrict or limit the
potential uses of land within the development which the application
designates as reserved for future development.
The Board shall approve a planned unit development as defined herein
if, after the review provided for herein, it finds:
a) That the development promotes the efficient use of land by
providing a well coordinated and integrated development
arrangement capable of accommodating varied but compatible
land uses within the development and does not create any lot
unsuitable for development except those reserved or dedicated to
open space.
b) That any adverse impacts to surrounding properties shall be
mitigated by use of appropriate design techniques, open space,
screening, etc.
c) That the development as proposed complies with the standards and
provisions of the zoning ordinance, except as the same are
specifically modified by the Board.
d) That there will be no significant, negative environmental impacts
from the proposed development as shown on the plan with all
conditions for approval.
e) That the proposed development and its location are consistent with
the Portsmouth Comprehensive Community Plan.
12. Development agreement. [Added 9-19-2006]
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:691
Within sixty (60) days of approval by the Planning Board, or such
further time as granted by the Planning Board, the parties shall enter
into a Development Agreement which shall include agreements on
phasing of the development and/or major portions of the development,
including any provisions, as applicable, whereby Applicant agrees to
provide certain benefits within the development or off-site that
contribute to public infrastructure beyond those needed for the
development, public capital facilities, land dedication and/or
preservation, affordable housing, community or recreational facilities,
or any other benefit intended to serve the proposed development or
the Town.
Development agreements shall be issued in a form suitable for
recording in the Portsmouth Land Evidence Records and, upon
approval of the Town Solicitor and the Planning Board, shall record the
development agreement therein. The applicant shall bear the expense
of recording.
Said Development Agreement may, at the option of the Planning Board,
grant to the Town the right of self-help for the Town to complete public
infrastructure and/or other agreed upon improvements on or off-site
that are designed to protect adjacent properties, mitigate traffic, or
provide other public benefit or protections, together with lien rights
as provided under RIGL Chapter 34-28 with respect to all work or
improvements performed by or on behalf of the Town. The Planning
Board may also require the Applicant to provide the Town with a
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, escrow account or other
security in the form and amount the Planning Board deems necessary
to guarantee the full performance of the Applicant's obligations under
the Development Agreement. [Added 2-4-2008]
a) The Development Agreement shall contain a clause defining the
duration of the Development Agreement.
b) The Development Agreement shall contain a clause providing that
should any building greater than twenty-five thousand SF (25,000
ft.2) in area become vacant, it shall be maintained on the exterior as
if it is occupied, including such activities as cleaning the windows
regularly.
c) The Development Agreement shall contain a clause requiring
landscaping to be continuously maintained. It shall provide: that
vegetation planted in accordance with an approved site plan shall
be maintained by the owner, any heir, or assignee; plants or trees
that die or are damaged shall be replaced within thirty (30) days;
and that such replacement landscaping shall be equivalent in
species and size to the original landscaping, or with another
acceptable replanting plan.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:692
d) The Tax Assessor shall review the development agreement prior to
execution in order to ensure that it is clear who is responsible for
payment of property taxes on commonly held or shared ownership
property. [Added 3-15-2010]
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:693

ARTICLE IX
Specific Development Regulations
Unless otherwise noted, parking requirements apply to all developments
regardless of size or type. Requirements for parking lots greater than one
hundred (>100) spaces are so noted.
Section A. Off-street parking and loading. [Amended 9-9-1997]
1. Definitions.
Capacity — The capacity of a facility or space as calculated by the
applicable building code.
Employee — The regular working staff (paid, volunteer or otherwise)
at maximum strength and in full-time equivalent numbers necessary
to operate, maintain or service any given facility or use under normal
levels of service.
Gross Floor Area — The term "gross floor area" (GFA) as used in
this document shall mean the total floor area, including the exterior
building walls, of all floors of a building or structure. GFA shall include
all occupyable areas minus the following deductions:
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The term "gross leasable area" (GLA)
as used in this document shall mean the gross floor area minus the
following floor area deductions:
a) Vehicular parking and loading areas within the structure.
Floor area occupied by HVAC (heating, ventilating and air
conditioning), mechanical, electrical, communications and security
equipment or apparatus.
b)
a) Elevator shafts and stairways.
b) Public restrooms.
Public lobbies, common mall area, atriums and courtyards provided
solely for pedestrian access to the building from the exterior, and/
or for aesthetic enhancement or natural lighting purposes.
c)
Permanently designated corridors (i.e., not subject to relocation by
the requirements of a specific lease).
d)
2. General.
a) No land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected,
enlarged or used unless the off-street parking space requirements
are provided as specified in this section. For the purpose of this
section, an enlargement of any building by thirty percent (30%) or
more shall require the provision of off-street parking for the
existing building as if it were newly constructed. Whenever any
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:695
building, improvement or use of land may be changed to a new use,
whether conforming or nonconforming, the provision for parking
and loading spaces shall be as required for the new use so
approved.
b) Where the computation of required parking spaces results in a
fractional number, fractions of one-half (1/2) or more shall be
counted as one (1).
c) Required off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the same
lot as the principal use they are designed to serve or as provided in
paragraph 6. Satellite Parking, herein.
d) Each required car space shall be not less than ten feet (10') in
width and twenty feet (20') in length exclusive of drives and
maneuvering space. Where more than five (5) spaces are required,
they shall be paved, except as may be required by environmental
regulatory agencies.
e) Handicapped parking spaces accessible to disabled persons shall
be provided as may be applicable under the Americans With
Disabilities Act and any federal regulations promulgated
thereunder.
f) All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be suitably sloped
and drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to
abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, so as not to
cause any nuisance to adjacent or public property. In no case shall
an off-street parking area exceed five percent (5%) in slope. The
design of all parking lot drainage shall conform to the drainage
requirements herein, and utilize the Town of Portsmouth
Subdivision Design Standards and the Rhode Island Stormwater
Design and Installation Standards Manual, as applicable.
[Amended 2-4-2008]
g) All off-street parking and loading facilities shall maintain distances
from buildings, fire hydrants, post indicator valves and emergency
access ways as required by the applicable Fire Code.
h) Where one (1) building is used for more than one (1) use, parking
requirements shall be computed for each use, except as provided in
the parking requirements table below or under Satellite Parking or
Shared Parking below. Where space within a building is shared, the
more stringent requirements shall apply.
i) No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be
permitted in conjunction with parking or loading facilities provided
in commercial districts, except emergency repair service necessary
to start vehicles.
j) No existing parking facility which is a part of any building,
improvement or use of land, whether on the same lot as the
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section A
C:696
principal use or on a separate lot, shall be reduced in size below
the number of spaces required for such principal use, and for any
and all accessory uses. This section shall not be construed to mean
that parking facilities may not be reconfigured.
k) Any parking area and loading space as defined in this Ordinance
shall be continually maintained in satisfactory condition so as to be
safe and attractive and free of hazard, nuisance or other unsafe
condition.
l) Overnight parking of RV's, mobile homes and other vehicles
providing transient residency is prohibited. [Added 2-4-2008]
3. Minimum parking requirements.
a) Minimum parking requirements table.
USE
REQUIRED
SPACES
OTHER
REQUIREMENTS
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single Family 2/unit
Mobile home parks 2/unit
Multi-family
Residential
Studio and 1 bedroom 1/unit plus 1 guest/5 units
Two bedrooms 1.75/unit plus 2 guest/5 units
Three or more
bedrooms
2/unit plus 3 guest/5 units
Senior citizen
apartments
Senior - efficiency 1/unit plus 1 guest/5 units
Senior - 1 bedroom 1/unit plus 1 guest/5 units
Senior - 2 bedroom 1.5/unit plus 2 guest/5 units
Senior - 3 bedroom 2/unit plus 3 guest/5 units
Assisted Living/
Congregate Care
1/10 regular
beds, 1/5 special
care
plus 1/250 gla office,
medical, other, + 5
for kitchen &
maintenance
TEMPORARY RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY USES
Hotels/motels/inns 1/unit plus 50% of
requirements for
related uses, + 2 for
manager's unit.
Sanitariums/nursing
homes
1/5 beds or State requirement
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:697
USE
REQUIRED
SPACES
OTHER
REQUIREMENTS
RESIDENTIAL USES
Rooming and lodging
houses
2 + 1/rental unit
Group Home 1/3 beds may be less if
residents unable to
drive
RETAIL, OFFICE AND SERVICES
Shopping Center 4/1,000 sf of gla
under 400,000
gla
See also offices and
restaurants
Grocery Store 6 + 5/1,000 gla
General Retail 4/1,000 gla
Offices, general:
gla up to 7,500 sf 4/1,000 gla
7,501 to 40,000 sf 3.3/1,000 gla
40,001 sf and greater 3/1,000 gla
Office in Shopping
Center:
10% or less of center gla no added space
beyond that for
general retail
over 10% of gla for that portion
over 10%, add as
required beyond
general retail by
type of office use
Office, medical/dental 4/1,000 gla plus 1/100 sf waiting
room
Office in residence Determined at
project review
Services
Bank, S&L, Credit Union 5/1,000 gla
ATM 2/machine
Unspecified Services 4/1,000 gla
EATING/DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
Restaurants, cafes, bars 13/1,000 gla
Restaurant - Fast Food 17/1,000 gla
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section A
C:698
USE
REQUIRED
SPACES
OTHER
REQUIREMENTS
RESIDENTIAL USES
Restaurant in Shopping
Center of 25,000 to
100,000 gla
10/1,000 gla
Restaurant in Shopping
Center of 100,000 to
200,000 gla
6/1,000 gla
AUTOMOBILE RELATED
Gas Station*, Vehicle
Repair*
1/pump + 3/
service bay
plus 1/250 sf of gla
office and sales
Carwash 2/drying bay plus stacking area**
* A service bay or pump is not a parking stall
** Stacking area is not parking.
A washing space is not a parking or stacking space.
RECREATION
Health clubs 1/200 sf of gla plus 50% of required
for incidental uses
Amusement Center 5/1,000 gla plus 50% of required
for incidental uses
Night Club 20/1,000 gla
Golf Driving range 3, plus 1/tee plus 50% of required
for incidental uses
Golf course 4/green plus 50% of required
for incidental uses
Miniature golf course 1.25/hole plus 50% of required
for incidental uses
Tennis/racquetball 2/court plus 50% of required
for incidental uses
OUTDOOR, PARTLY
OUTDOOR USES
Retail nursery/garden
shop
1/1,000 sf indoor
+ 1/2,000 sf
outdoor or
greenhouse sales
Produce stand 6/1,000 gla
Lumber yard 2/1,000 SF lot
area
Parking for major
machinery may not
fill required spaces.
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:699
USE
REQUIRED
SPACES
OTHER
REQUIREMENTS
RESIDENTIAL USES
Marina 1/2 slips if a launch ramp is
provided, 20% of all
spaces shall be 35
feet or longer to
accommodate boat
trailers.
Retail outdoor other 1.5/1,000 sf lot
used for display
SCHOOLS
Business, professional,
trade schools
1/1.5 students
Art, dance, music studio 1/2 students at
maximum
capacity
Nursery/day care/preschool
required staff +
1/10 capacity
number of staff as
regulated by State
INSTITUTIONAL USES AND PLACES OF ASSEMBLY
Church, synagogue* 1/4 seats
capacity
Club, lodge 1/4 capacity
Other places of assembly 1/4 capacity
* Parking spaces for public religious assembly may also be double
counted for affiliated office, school and related activities.
INDUSTRIAL AND STORAGE USES
Self-service storage 3/100 units no added spaces for
sales area related to
storage.
Warehouse 0.75/1,000 gla
Research and
Development
2/1,000 gla
Manufacturing
1 - 3,000 sf 4/1,000 sf of gla
3,001 - 5,000 sf 2/1,000 sf of gla
5,001 - 10,000 sf 1.3/1,000 sf of
gla
10,001 - 50,000 sf 1/1,000 sf of gla
50,001 + sf 0.8/1,250 sf of
gla
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section A
C:700
USE
REQUIRED
SPACES
OTHER
REQUIREMENTS
RESIDENTIAL USES
DRIVE UP STACKING LANE SPACE
Banks, S&L 8 vehicles for 1st
drive-up lane, 6
for 2nd and
subsequent
lanes
Restaurants with driveup Stacking for 11
vehicles, of
which at least 6
before menu
board
Carwash - self service* 2 queuing lane
in front of each
stall
Carwash - full service* 2 times the
capacity of the
washing
operation
(length of the
conveyor divided
by 20)
* A stacking lane shall be
at least 10 feet wide and
each stacking space shall
be 20 feet long. Stacking
shall not interfere with
parking nor travel lanes,
nor protrude into the
street.
b) Requirements for uses not specifically listed herein shall be
determined by the Building Inspector based upon the requirements
for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the
use.
c) In all cases in which parking of large vehicles or of more than one
(1) company vehicle is part of the business, additional spaces shall
be provided for such vehicles.
4. Stacking spaces for drive-through services Uses which have drivethrough
window services shall provide queuing spaces. The minimum
number of queuing spaces required shall be determined by the Zoning
Board of Review. Where such queuing spaces are provided, they shall
conform to the following standards:
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:701
a) No queuing space may occupy any portion of a public right-of-way;
b) Each queuing lane shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') in width;
and
c) Queuing spaces may not be used to satisfy any of the off-street
parking or loading requirements of these regulations.
5. Aisles, driveways and maneuvering space
a) Each access driveway shall be located and designed so as to cause
the least practical interference with the use of adjacent property
and with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
b) Access driveways shall be curbed.
c) All parking facilities shall be arranged so that any vehicle entering
a public right-of-way can do so while traveling in forward motion,
and a vehicle entering the parking facility shall not be required to
enter a street to move from one (1) location to any other location
within the parking facility.
d) All parking facilities shall be arranged so that parking maneuvers
can be accomplished without driving, maneuvering or encroaching
into or upon any public right-of-way, walk-way, or unpaved
landscaped area within or adjoining the parking facility. All parking
stalls shall open directly upon a maneuvering or turn around area
or an aisle leading to an access driveway and shall be individually
and continuously accessible.
e) As feasible, in traffic sensitive areas adjacent commercial parking
lots shall be connected by driveways in order to lessen traffic
congestion.
f) The radius of entrance drives shall be fifteen feet (15').
g) Access driveway widths shall have the following dimensions:
(1) A minimum of eleven feet (11') for all one-way driveways.
(2) A minimum of twenty feet (20') for all two-way driveways.
h) Parking area aisle widths shall conform to the following table,
which varies the width requirement according to the angle of
parking:
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width 45° 60° 90°
One-Way Traffic 11' 13' 18'
Two-Way Traffic 20' 21' 23'
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section A
C:702
6. Satellite parking. Parking may be permitted by the Zoning Board of
Review on an abutting lot or, if not in a traffic sensitive district, directly
across the street from the principal building, provided that:
a) Said satellite parking area is subject to a recorded easement; and
b) Said satellite parking area is not to be used or counted for parking
for any other use, except as permitted under paragraph 8. Shared
Parking Facilities below.
7. Parking lot location and orientation for parking lots greater than one
hundred (100) spaces. [Added 2-4-2008]
a) Parking areas should provide safe, convenient, and efficient access
for vehicles and pedestrians. They should be distributed around
large buildings in order to shorten the distance to other buildings
and public sidewalks and to reduce the overall scale of the paved
surface. If buildings are located closer to streets, the scale of the
complex is reduced, pedestrian traffic is encouraged, and
architectural details take on added importance.
b) No more than sixty percent (60%) of the off-street parking area for
the entire property shall be located between the front facade within
the front yard of the principal building(s) and the primary abutting
street unless the principal building(s) and/or parking lots are
screened from view by out-lot or pad development (such as
restaurants) or additional tree plantings and/or berm.
c) Smaller retail/service buildings less than twenty thousand square
feet (20,000 ft.2) and located within a large retail complex as a
separate building pad(s) should incorporate into their design
structural enhancements similar to the principal structure in order
to provide visual consistency and a greater sense of place within
the center.
d) The location of all off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot
as the principal use or not over four hundred feet (400') from the
principal use, unless permitted under "shared parking" or satellite
parking provisions.
e) A designated Park and Ride area may be required. If required, Park
and Ride areas shall be a minimum of ten (10) parking spaces (not
to be included in satisfying minimum parking lot space
requirements), and shall be located as near to the principal
vehicular access and public transit facilities as possible.
f) An off and/or on-street bus stop for customers and employees shall
be provided when the site is located on an established or planned
transit route.
g) Cart Returns. Where shopping carts are to be provided, a minimum
of one (1) two hundred square foot (200 ft.2) cart return area shall
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:703
be provided at suitable intervals within the parking area for every
one hundred (100) parking spaces. Cart corrals shall be of durable,
non-rusting, all season construction, and shall be designed and
colored to be compatible with the building and parking lot light
standards. There shall be no exterior cart return or cart storage
areas located in the parking lot within twenty-five feet (25') of the
building.
(1) Shopping cart storage areas adjacent to facade walls (not in
parking lots) must be screened with landscaping or materials
matching the materials of the primary facade wall. No more
than two (2) shopping cart storage areas (one (1) on each side
of an entrance) may be provided on any facade wall. Shopping
cart storage areas may not exceed twenty feet (20') in length.
8. Shared parking facilities.
a) Required off-street parking for any number of separate uses may be
combined in a shared parking facility under the conditions of this
section, subject to the approval by the Zoning Board of Review.
Such parking space shall be established by a recorded covenant or
agreement as parking space to be used in conjunction with the
principal use and shall be reserved as such through an
encumbrance on the title of the property to be designated as
required parking space. Removal of such encumbrance may be
permitted only by the Zoning Board of Review or Planning Board,
as applicable.
b) The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum
of the individual requirements for all uses, unless otherwise
permitted as follows:
(1) Up to seventy-five percent (75%) of the parking spaces
required for theaters, public auditoriums, banquet facilities,
and church auditoriums may be provided and used jointly by
offices, retail, service establishments, schools, and similar uses
not normally open, used, or operated during the same hours as
those uses listed above.
(2) Up to thirty percent (30%) of the parking spaces required for
the predominant use on a site may be shared with other uses
operating during the same time of day and days of the week.
The predominant use is considered to be that which requires
the most parking of those sharing the parking facilities.
[Amended 2-4-2008]
9. Off-street loading requirements.
a) Adequate off-street loading shall be provided for each use. Loading
bays shall be located at the side or rear of the building they are
intended to serve. Off-street loading facilities required by this
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section A
C:704
section shall be maintained as long as the building, use or structure
remains.
b) Off-street loading spaces shall not be used to meet off-street
parking requirements, nor shall off-street parking facilities be used
to meet off-street loading requirements.
c) No loading bay shall be located within fifty feet (50') of a residential
district. Trash collection or compaction areas shall not be located
within twenty feet (20') of any public street, public sidewalk.
d) Staging, loading, or idling of commercial vehicles in a service area
is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Signs
prohibiting staging, loading, or idling of commercial vehicles
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. must be posted every
one hundred feet (100') adjacent to the service area. [Added
2-4-2008]
10. Landscaping requirements. It is intended that the application of the
landscape standards set forth below will reduce the visual and
environmental impacts of large expanses of parking areas. Breaking up
of paved parking areas with plantings will provide improved aesthetics
and enhance both the development and the community.
a) A landscaping and lighting plan to be submitted as part of the
development application is required for all parking areas.
(1) The plan will specify plant materials and will illustrate how
landscape provisions will visually screen and divide parking
areas.
(2) Illumination levels and placement of light sources will be
shown.
(3) Lighting must be full cut-off lighting directed away from
residential uses and no more than twenty feet (20') high at the
perimeter of the parking area, with a brightness of no more
than one-half (1/2) foot-candle at any property line with the
exception of vehicular entrances and exits. [Added 2-4-2008]
b) Where a parking area is altered or expanded to increase the size to
fifteen (15) or more vehicular parking spaces, interior landscaping
for the entire parking area shall be provided and not merely to the
extent of its alteration or expansion.
c) Landscaped areas shall not count toward the seventy percent
(70%) Maximum Building, parking and travelway coverage in
Article VII Section G. Retail Business, Office or Consumer Service
Complex herein (that is they are counted as unpaved open areas).
d) Interior parking area landscaping. For the purposes of this section,
the "interior parking area" shall include parking stalls, access
drives, aisles, walkways, dead spaces, and required separations of
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:705
parking from structures, but shall not include required setbacks,
access driveways or walkways within such setbacks, or areas
between buildings.
(1) The following percentages of interior parking area shall be
suitably landscaped as described below:
Size of Parking Lot
% of Interior Area to be
Landscaped
< 15 spaces 0%
15 - 50 spaces 5%
50 - 100 spaces 7%
> 100 spaces 10%
e) Landscaping dimensions and material. Parking lots containing
fifteen (15) or more spaces shall be planted with at least one (1)
tree per twelve (12) spaces, no smaller than two-inch (2") caliper
(trunk diameter at four-foot (4') height), each tree being
surrounded by no less than fifty square feet (50 ft.2) of permeable,
unpaved area.
(1) All landscaping shall be contained in planting beds. Each
planting bed shall have a minimum area of fifty square feet (50
ft.2) and shall be enclosed by appropriate curbing or similar
device at least six inches (6") wide and six inches (6") in height
above the paving surface. Planting beds may be located below
the grade of the paved lot in order to absorb some surface
water runoff.
(2) Interior landscaping features shall be arranged in a linear
manner in order to provide a consistent pattern of parking. On
each end of a landscaped feature shall be planted either a tree
with a minimum vertical clearance of branches six feet (6')
from the ground or one (1) or more shrubs not less than two
feet (2') in height nor more than four feet (4') in height.
(3) Interior landscaping features containing trees shall be
contained in peninsulas or islands having a minimum width of
eight feet (8') and a minimum length of eighteen feet (18').
There shall be a minimum of four feet (4') to the center of all
trees from the edge of paving where vehicles overhang.
(4) Grass, ground cover or mulch with a growth-preventing
pervious underlayment shall be planted on all portions of the
landscape area not occupied by other landscape material.
(5) In order to provide that the required landscape areas be
properly dispersed, no required landscape area shall be larger
than the following:
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section A
C:706
(i) Three hundred fifty square feet (350 ft.2) in parking areas
under thirty thousand square feet (30,000 ft.2).
(ii) One thousand five hundred square feet (1,500 ft.2) in
parking areas over thirty thousand square feet (30,000
ft.2).
(iii) Landscape areas larger than the above are permitted as
long as the additional area is in excess of the required
minimum.
(6) All landscaped islands shall be situated below the grade of the
parking spaces and driving aisles such that stormwater runoff
flow is directed to and trapped by such islands. [Added
2-4-2008]
f) Perimeter buffer and screening. The intent of perimeter buffers and
screening is to minimize, to the greatest extent practicable, visual
and noise impacts on abutting residential properties from
buildings, parking lots, and accessory uses and equipment
(lighting, loading, traffic, etc.). For parking lots over one hundred
(100) spaces, the intent is to screen such items from view from
adjacent residential properties, to the greatest extent practicable,
and from the street, while still allowing sufficient visibility for the
intended use of the property.
Perimeter buffer and screening should be minimized for
developments within the Town Center Zoning District, except
within rear setbacks that abut residential zones. [Added
2-4-2008]
(1) Parking areas must be screened along lot lines bordering
institutional or residential uses or residential zones and along
street frontages. A landscaped buffer area at least twenty feet
(20') wide to the rear lot line and ten feet (10') wide to the side
lot lines is required. The front landscaped buffer along a public
street shall be the depth of the required front yard or twenty
feet (20'), whichever is less. For parking lots over one hundred
(100) spaces, the Zoning Board of Review or Planning Board,
as applicable, may require a landscaped buffer up to fifty feet
(50') wide. Such width shall be based upon: [Amended
2-4-2008]
• Size and intensity of proposed use;
• Relative topography of the proposed development to
adjacent residential development;
• Placement of parking, loading and service areas;
• Landscaped and/or solid screening.
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:707
(2) All trees shall be a minimum of two-inch (2") caliper (trunk
diameter) when planted. Native trees and shrubs shall be
planted wherever possible, in order to capture the "spirit of the
locale" through indigenous species. Trees shall be of a type
that will survive urban conditions with little or no
maintenance.
(3) For parking lots over one hundred (100) spaces, up to seventyfive
percent (75%) of the lot frontage adjacent to any arterial
street, not including vehicular and pedestrian entrances, may
be required to include screening of on-site parking by means of
on-site buildings, which may include the primary structure, as
well as dense landscaping, or a combination. [Added
2-4-2008]
(4) For parking lots over one hundred (100) spaces, seventy-five
percent (75%) of the lot frontage adjacent to all other streets
shall provide screening of on-site parking. [Added 2-4-2008]
(5) Lot frontage adjacent to residential use or residential zoning
districts shall provide screening of on-site parking by means of
walls, landscaping, landscaped berms, or buildings. [Added
2-4-2008]
(6) Upon variance, a landscaped buffer of not less than at least six
feet (6') wide, may be permitted provided it is densely planted
with a mixture of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs to
create an effective visual barrier.
(7) Any fire lane and setback of the fire lane from a building
required by the Portsmouth Fire Department may not count
toward the landscaped buffer requirement. [Added 2-4-2008]
(8) Maintenance of significant trees. [Added 2-4-2008]
(i) Removal of viable live trees greater than twelve inches
(12") in caliper is expressly prohibited within any required
landscaped buffer, except invasive species that tend to
choke out other growth. An area of six feet (6') on all sides
of such trees may not be paved.
(ii) Removal of viable live trees greater than twelve inches
(12") in caliper within the proposed building footprint or
within the parking area may be approved by the Board if
no reasonable alternative is available.
(iii) A tree deemed "destroyed" by a certified arborist chosen
by the Town at the applicant's expense may be removed
with the approval of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
g) Screening material. [Added 2-4-2008]
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section A
C:708
(1) Suitable temporary visual screening at least six feet (6') in
height shall be installed within any required buffer prior to the
commencement of any other construction, excavation, land
clearing or grading activities.
(2) Where any parking lot or section of a parking lot greater than
one hundred (100) spaces faces residential uses on adjacent
lots within one hundred feet (100'), a permanent berm
containing at a minimum evergreen trees or arborvitae at least
six feet (6') in height when planted, planted at intervals of
twenty feet (20') on center. Height and width or berm and
locations of plantings shall be designed by a registered
landscape architect or certified arborist to meet the intent of
this section. Depending upon the size and nature of the
development, the appropriate Board may require up to a
double row of six foot (6') high evergreen trees planted at
minimum intervals of ten feet (10') on center or in clusters or
clumps shall be provided. Existing trees and shrubbery, or
other suitable visual barrier, may substitute for this
requirement, at the discretion of said Board. At its option, said
Board may require a solid wood fence of six feet (6') in height
in addition to or in place of said berm, but not in place of the
evergreen trees or arborvitae. Wood fences on the perimeter of
a lot shall be installed with the finish side of the fence slats
facing toward the neighboring property.
(3) Chain link or wire mesh fence may not be used as a screening
material.
h) Landscaping for service structures.
(1) In all non-industrial zones, outdoor storage areas, exposed
machinery, service structures including propane tanks,
dumpsters and outdoor areas used for the storage and
collection of rubbish, air conditioning units and condensers,
electrical transformers, and other equipment or elements
providing service to a building or a site must be visually
screened from roads and surrounding land uses. Suitable types
of screening include opaque wood fences and dense evergreen
hedges of five feet (5') or more in height. Service structures in
an industrial zone shall be fully screened when located within
thirty-five feet (35') of any zone other than industrial.
(2) A continuous planting, hedge, fence, wall, or earth mound shall
enclose any service structure on all sides unless such structure
must be frequently moved, in which case screening on all but
one (1) side is required. The average height of the screening
material shall be one foot (1') more than the height of the
enclosed structure, but shall not be required to exceed eight
feet (8') in height. If service structures are screened by plant
material, such material may count towards the fulfillment of
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:709
Section B. Signs.
perimeter landscaping. In locations where potential health or
safety hazards may arise (such as rubbish storage/collection
areas), a solid wooden fence, six feet (6') in height is required
(to deter children and animals from entering the premises).
i) Vision clearance. All developments, signs, landscaping and other
improvements shall provide for clear, unobstructed vision for
pedestrians and motorists entering, exiting or moving within any
development.
(1) Pertaining to street intersections, entrances or exits from
parking lots, and intersections of parking lot aisles and
driveways, there shall be a three (3)-dimensional area between
the height of three feet (3') and seven feet (7') from the ground
for a distance of thirty feet (30') from the corner in which
nothing exists, is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in
such manner as to materially impede vision.
1. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated in this Ordinance, the
following definitions shall apply to this section:
a) Announcement or Bulletin Board — Signs containing written or
printed notices for public, fraternal, charitable, civic or religious
institutions that contain no commercial advertising.
b) Billboard — An outdoor sign advertising products or services not
made, sold, used or served on the premises on which the sign is
located.
c) Erect — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix a
sign, or to paint a wall sign or to do anything else which causes a
sign to be visible to the general public.
d) Frontage - Building — The length of a building, at ground level, that
faces a public street or parking area.
e) Frontage - Street — The distance, measured along a straight line
connecting the point of intersection of the side lot lines with a
public street.
f) Sign — Any object, device, or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination, or projected images. Excluded from this definition are
the actual products or merchandise being marketed, and pavement
markings or driveway directional arrows painted on the ground
that contain no advertising.
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:710
g) Sign Area — The area of a sign is the total area within a line
circumscribing all surfaces or structures used or employed or
designated for use as a sign or for sign purposes including spaces
between or within letters and/or pictorial matter, slates and panels.
(1) Spaces between major supports or frames required for
clearance between sign and ground shall be excluded. Frames
and structural members that do not meet the definition of a
sign shall not be included in the computation of sign area.
(2) All visible faces of a multi-faced sign shall be counted
separately and then totaled in calculating sign area, except
that on dual-faced signs where the two (2) faces are parallel
and opposite, only one (1) side shall be counted. Three (3)
dimensional signs shall be treated as dual-faced and the total
area shall be two (2) times the area of the line circumscribing
all surfaces or structures used or employed or designated in
the plane of the largest dimension.
h) Sign, Freestanding — A sign supported by a pole, uprights, braces
or frame or similar device on the ground and not supported by any
walls, building or similar structure.
i) Sign Height — The height of a sign shall be the vertical distance
measured from the ground at the base of the sign to the highest
point of any portion of the sign or supporting structure.
j) Sign, Illuminated — A sign illuminated with an artificial light
directed from an exterior source or illuminated from within as an
integral part of the construction of the sign, including neon signs.
k) Sign, Off-Site Directional — Any sign giving directions to the
location of any use or activity not located upon the property upon
which the sign is erected, and which may contain only the name of
the use and necessary information giving directions to the use;
provided however that no advertising shall be contained in such
sign.
l) Sign, Portable — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground
or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported,
including, but not limited to: signs designed to be transported by
means of wheels; signs converted to A or T-frames; menu and
sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for
advertising; satellite dishes which display advertising; and signs
attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the
public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-today
operations of the business.
m) Sign, Projecting — A sign erected so as to project approximately
perpendicular from the exterior of any building or wall.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:711
n) Sign, Roof Mounted — A sign placed upon the roof of any building
or portion thereof, or erected on a vertical framework supported by
the roof of a building.
o) Sign, Wall-Mounted — A sign erected against, painted on or
attached to the wall of any building or structure (except a
freestanding sign support) including by illustration and not
limitation, signs affixed to fences, screens and freestanding walls.
p) Sight Distance Triangle — The land adjoining a street intersection
that is kept clear of obstructions between three (3') and seven feet
(7') above the ground to protect the visibility and safety of
motorists and pedestrians. The protected sight distance area is the
triangle with legs that are the intersecting flowlines of two (2)
streets at an intersection. The legs shall extend thirty-five feet (35')
away from the intersection of the flowlines.
2. Building permit required/safety and materials.
a) Except as provided herein, no sign shall be erected, installed,
displayed, kept, modified, repaired, placed or replaced unless a
building permit is issued therefor.
b) No provision of this Ordinance shall be construed to prohibit the
painting, repainting, varnishing, etc. of a lawfully existing sign. No
provision of this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
building inspector from issuing a permit for the repair, replacement
or resurfacing of any preexisting, nonconforming sign, lawfully
existing on the 23rd day of October, 1989, provided that there is no
change in the height, location, or shape of said sign or increase in
sign area (unless the change in the shape of the sign is due to a
decrease in sign area, in which case change in the shape of said
sign is permissible).
c) The Building Inspector may require the following information to be
submitted along with the application for a building permit:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) A drawing of the proposed sign, giving dimensions, colors,
materials and details about the proposed lighting.
(3) A drawing of the building or lot showing where the proposed
sign is to be located in relation to the building, property lines
and streets, including heights.
(4) A drawing of the plans and specifications and details of the
method of construction and attachment to the building or in
the ground.
(5) Any electrical permit required and issued for said sign.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:712
(6) Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land
to which or on which the sign is to be erected.
d) Every sign and all parts thereof, including without limitation, the
framework, supports, background wiring systems and anchors
shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with all
applicable building, electrical and fire prevention codes. All signs
and parts thereof shall be kept in good repair.
3. Permitted signs in any zoning district. The following signs are permitted
in any Zoning District. No sign shall be higher or wider than four feet
(4') exclusive of framework:
a) One (1) sign, no greater than one and one-half square feet (1 1/2
ft.2) in area displaying the name and address of the occupant and/or
identifying a permitted or accessory use.
b) Announcement or bulletin boards provided they are erected for a
period not to exceed two (2) weeks in conjunction with
advertisement of an upcoming event. No more than two (2) such
signs shall be permitted for any event and the total combined sign
area for all signs for any one event shall not exceed thirty-two
square feet (32 ft.2).
c) Temporary "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs no greater than six
square feet (6 ft.2) in area in a residential zone and no greater than
twelve square feet (12 ft.2) in area in any other zone that advertises
the sale, lease, rental, etc. of real property upon which the sign is
located. These signs shall not be illuminated.
d) Traffic signs or signs erected by a public or municipal agency in
discharge of its governmental functions.
e) Instructional or directional signs, identifying on-premise traffic,
parking or other functional activity, such as lavatory facilities,
telephone, sections of a building, entrances, offices, etc. bearing no
commercial advertising. Each sign shall not exceed two square feet
(2 ft.2) in area.
f) Accessory signs incidental to a business or a profession conducted
on the premises indicating hours of operation, credit cards,
business affiliations, and the like, provided the total area does not
exceed two square feet (2 ft.2); and accessory signs such as no
trespassing, or other such signs regulating the use of the property
upon which it is located, of no more than two square feet (2 ft.2) in
area per sign.
g) Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable
federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance.
4. Signs permitted in Residential and Open Space Districts.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:713
a) The following signs are permitted in Residential and Open Space
Districts:
(1) All signs permitted under Paragraph 3 above.
(2) One sign, no greater than twelve square feet (12 ft.2) in area,
identifying a legally maintained nonconforming use. The
location of such signs shall comply with the side yard setback
provisions of the Land Space Requirements Table in Article III.
for the zoning district in which it is located. Such sign shall be
placed no closer than ten feet (10') from the front lot line and
shall not project above the height of any principal building. The
overall height of a freestanding sign in these districts shall not
exceed ten feet (10').
(3) One sign, no greater than twelve square feet (12 ft.2) in area,
identifying a use permitted by special use permit or use
granted by variance proceeding. The location of such signs
shall comply with the side yard setback provisions of the Land
Space Requirements Table in Article III. for the zoning district
in which it is located. [Amended 8-15-1994200]
(4) Permanent signs at major entrances to residential
developments or open space entrances designed only to
identify such developments or spaces and do not exceed twelve
square feet (12 ft.2) in area.
b) Signs in these districts shall be lighted only by continuous, external
white light.
5. Signs permitted in Commercial, Industrial and Waterfront Districts. The
following signs are permitted in Commercial, Industrial and Waterfront
Districts:
a) On lots having one (1) establishment: On any lot upon which is
located only one (1) establishment, the following signs shall be
permitted:
(1) One freestanding sign, not to exceed fifteen feet (15') in overall
height including the space clearance between the ground and
the sign. The maximum area of said signs shall be equal to or
less than one square foot (1 ft.2) of sign area for each five lineal
feet (5') of street frontage of said lot, not to exceed thirty-two
square feet (32 ft.2). In instances where a lot fronts on more
than one (1) street, only the frontage on one (1) street may be
used for calculating sign area. That frontage shall be the
frontage upon which the signs are located.
200. Note: Change ARTICLE IX, Specific Development Regulations Section B.4.a)(3) and
Section B.6., the wording, from "special exception" to "special use permit" or any place it
may appear.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:714
(2) One (1) wall mounted sign, one (1) roof-mounted sign or one
(1) projecting sign. The maximum area of a wall-mounted sign
shall be equal to or less than one square foot (1 ft.2) for each
two lineal feet (2') of building frontage on which the signs are
attached, not to exceed fifty square feet (50 ft.2), provided that
the sign shall not extend beyond the top or side of the wall to
which it is attached. The maximum area of a roof-mounted or
projecting sign shall not exceed twelve square feet (12 ft.2).
The base of all projecting signs shall be no less than eight feet
(8') above the ground. Projecting signs shall not project more
than four feet (4') from the exterior wall of the building. Roof
mounted signs shall not extend above the peak of the roofline
of the roof upon which it is mounted or be attached in any way
which would increase the overall height of the structure on
which is located.
b) On lots having multiple establishments: On any lot upon which is
located more than one (1) establishment the following signs shall
be permitted:
(1) One (1) freestanding sign per lot not to exceed fifteen feet (15')
in overall height including the space clearance between the
ground and the sign. The maximum area of said sign shall be
equal to or less than one square foot (1 ft.2) of sign area for
each five lineal feet (5') of street frontage of said lot, not to
exceed thirty-two square feet (32 ft.2). In instances where a lot
fronts on more than one (1) street, only the frontage on one (1)
street may be used for calculating sign area. That frontage
shall be the frontage upon which the sign is located. and:
(2) One (1) wall mounted sign, one (1) roof mounted sign or one (1)
projecting sign per establishment. The maximum area of any
wall mounted sign shall be equal to or less than one square foot
(1 ft.2) for each two lineal feet (2') of building frontage on which
the sign is attached divided by the number of establishments
having signs on said wall, up to a maximum of forty square feet
(40 ft.2), provided that said sign shall not extend beyond the top
or side of the wall to which it is affixed. The maximum area of a
roof mounted or projecting sign shall not exceed twelve square
feet (12 ft.2). The base of all projecting signs shall be no less
than eight feet (8') above the ground. Projecting signs shall not
project more than four feet (4') from the exterior wall of the
building. Roof mounted signs shall not extend above the peak
of the roofline of the roof upon which it is mounted or be
attached in any way which would increase the overall height of
the structure on which is located. (NOTE: It is not clear if this
applies to each sign or all signs in total.)
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:715
c) Common signage plans. If the owner or owners of a lot with three
(3) or more establishments file with the Building inspector a
common signage plan conforming with the provisions below, a
twenty-five percent (25%) increase in the area of each freestanding
or wall mounted sign shall be allowed.
(1) The Common Signage Plan shall contain all information
required by paragraph 2.c) above, with the exception of
paragraph 2.c)(1), and specify standards for consistency
among all signs on the lot with regard to color scheme,
lettering or graphic style, lighting, location on buildings,
material and sign proportions.
(2) There shall be only one (1) freestanding sign for each lot
regardless of number of establishments and the common
signage plan shall provide for sale or shared usage of said sign.
(3) The Common Signage Plan shall be signed by all owners or
their authorized agents in such form as the building inspector
shall require.
(4) A Common Signage Plan shall be included in any development
plan, site plan, planned unit development plan, or other official
plan required by the Town for any proposed development
including those plans required to be filed pursuant to Article
VII, Section G. of this ordinance and shall be processed
simultaneously with that plan.
(5) A Common Signage Plan may be amended by filing a new
Common Signage Plan that conforms with all requirements of
the ordinance then in effect.
(6) After approval a Common Signage Plan, no sign shall be
erected placed, painted, or maintained, except in conformance
with such plan, and such plan shall be enforced in the same
way as any provision of this ordinance. In case of any conflict
between the provisions of such a plan and any other provision
of this ordinance, the ordinance shall control.
d) All signs permitted under paragraphs 3 and 4 above.
6. Signs permitted by special use permit. The following signs may be
permitted as a special use permit by the Zoning Board of Review:
a) Off-site directional signs where the location of a use requires such
signs in order to avoid confusion, traffic congestion or similar
inconveniences, and to facilitate travel to such location. The Zoning
Board of Review may permit signs as are reasonably necessary to
accomplish these objectives, but no more than two (2) such signs
shall be permitted for any one (1) use. The area of any such sign
shall be no more than four square feet (4 ft.2) and in all cases the
minimum number of signs and size necessary to accomplish any of
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:716
these objectives shall be authorized. The Zoning Board shall only
grant the minimum relief necessary to effect the purposes of this
section.
b) Signs, which by their content, design, shape or construction, are
representations of a trademark, logogram or symbol employed in
the advertising of any industrial use. No more than one (1) such
sign shall be permitted for each such use, and may be permitted
only in industrial zoning districts. The area of any such sign may
not exceed forty square feet (40 ft.2). Such sign shall only be wallmounted,
may be illuminated and shall be in addition to any
permitted signs. The Zoning Board shall only grant the minimum
relief necessary to effect the purposes of this section.
c) Any sign not in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance
in regards to permitted number of signs, sign area, height, or
location only, provided that no relief from this ordinance may be
granted to allow the lawful erection or maintenance of signs
prohibited by Paragraph 7 hereof.
7. Signs prohibited in all districts. The following signs are prohibited and
shall not be erected or maintained in any district:
a) Billboards or off premise signs ([except as permitted under
paragraph 6. a)].
b) Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing, moving or
oscillating illumination or illumination which varies in color, or
signs with audible sounds.
c) Signs which have visible moving parts, including signs which
achieve movement by action of wind currents.
d) Projecting signs with internal illumination.
e) Obsolete signs or obsolete supporting structures which no longer
advertise the bone fide business or use conducted on the premises.
f) Signs or supporting structures which constitute a hazard to public
safety or health.
g) Signs which by reason of size, location, content, coloring or manner
of illumination, obstruct, hinder or distract the vision of drivers or
obstruct or detract from the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic
sign or control device on public streets and roads or which
interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
h) Searchlights, pennants, spinners, banners and streamers.
i) Portable signs and trailer signs.
8. General provisions
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:717
Section C. Vision clearance.
All developments, signs, landscaping and other improvements shall provide
for clear, unobstructed vision for pedestrians and motorists entering or
exiting any development.
a) No sign shall extend onto or over a public right-of-way without
prior approval by the Town Council. The Town Council shall require
the applicant to maintain sufficient insurance coverage to protect
both the Town and the applicant from all claims from personal
injuries which may arise from said sign.
b) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as authorization for or
approval of the continuation of the use of signs in violation of any
ordinance in effect at the time of the passage of this section.
c) No sign shall be erected or placed within the sight distance triangle
defined in paragraph 1 herein which obstructs the visibility of a
motorist entering or leaving such establishment in the space
between three feet (3') and seven feet (7') above the ground.
9. Signs exempt from permit requirement. No permit shall be required for
signs defined in Subparagraphs a), b), d), e), f) and g) of paragraph 3
herein, provided said signs otherwise comply with the provision of this
ordinance.
10. Administration and enforcement. The Town Building Inspector shall
have the responsibility and authority for:
a) Determining conformance with this article for all proposed and
presently existing signs.
b) Issuing a permit for all signs which comply with this ordinance.
c) Issuing notice to any owner of a nonconforming or prohibited sign
or owner of land on which a prohibited sign exists that they are in
violation of this ordinance and to supply to said person a copy of
this ordinance.
d) Inventorying all signs presently in the Town.
e) Determining compliance with the state building and safety codes
and conducting periodic inspections of existing signs to ensure the
safety and continued compliance with state building and safety
codes.
f) Removing prohibited signs which are unsafe or unlawful as defined
under the state building code or signs determined to be prohibited
or not in compliance with this chapter.
1. Pertaining to street intersections and entrances or exits from parking
lots, a three (3)-dimensional area between the height of three feet (3')
and seven feet (7') for distance of thirty feet (30') from the corner
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:718
Section D. Design review standards.201 [Added 1-21-2004]
(measured along the property line at intersections and at the curb for
parking lots) in which nothing exists, is erected, placed, planted or
allowed to grow in such manner as to materially impede vision.
2. Pertaining to residential driveways, the clear vision distance from the
street shall be ten feet (10').
1. Pre-application meetings - concept plans.
a) One (1) or more pre-application meetings shall be held for all
developments to be reviewed by the Design Review Board
according to Articles VII and VIII of this ordinance. Pre-application
meetings may be held upon request of either the Zoning Officer or
the applicant. Pre-application meetings shall allow the applicant to
meet with the Design Review Board for advice as to the pertinent
Town plans, ordinances, regulations, rules and procedures and
standards which may bear upon the design of the proposed
development project.
b) The applicant may request the Design Review Board for an informal
concept plan review for a development. Such meetings are
encouraged. The purpose of the concept plan review is to provide
Design Review Board input in the formative stages of a
development concept design. (Note: a "concept plan" is not to be
confused with a full application.)
c) Applicants seeking a pre-application meeting or an informal
concept plan review shall submit materials at least two (2) weeks
prior to meeting with the Board.
d) Pre-application meetings shall aim to encourage information
sharing and discussion of project concepts. Pre-application
discussions are intended for the guidance of the applicant and shall
not be considered approval of a project or its elements. Any
tentative approval or acceptance of a pre-application concept plan
by the Design Review Board shall not be binding upon the Zoning
Board of Review. Pre-application discussions are not to be
considered as vesting of any sort in zoning or any other land use
ordinances of the Town. The Board shall not be required to hold a
public hearing on the pre-application concept plan filed.
e) Concept plan submittal contents.
(1) Plan drawn on sheet at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"
= 40') and be thirty-two inches (32") long and twenty-two
inches (22") wide on which shall be at least the following:
201. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 148, Design Review Guidelines. Note: Design Review along with
a separate document entitled "Design Review Guidelines" was adopted on 1-21-2004.
References to the Guidelines and the Design Review Board are contained in Articles VII,
IX, and XI.
Section C CHARTER Section D
C:719
(2) A plot plan showing the entire area to be developed as well as
any abutting land under control of the applicant or owner of
the land shown on the plan, and all properties within five
hundred feet (500') of proposed development. [Amended
10-10-2004202]
(3) A title block including the name of the designer and engineer,
the name of the development, owner and applicant if other
than owner, the date and scale.
(4) Show location of all proposed vehicular and pedestrian interior
ways.
(5) Show location of proposed parking.
(6) Show location of all proposed buildings (new and renovated) by
type.
(7) Show location of retention/erosion control areas if necessary to
meet drainage requirements.
(8) Show the proposed treatment of all open spaces.
(9) Show preliminary building elevations and exterior treatments.
(10) A one-page written description of the project.
2. Application submission requirements.
a) In addition to the submittals required in Article VII in this
Ordinance, seven (7) full sets of building and site drawings
including, but not limited to, building elevations, landscaping and
planting plans, signage, etc., as set forth below, and shall, as a
condition precedent to the granting of said special use permit,
require full adherence to said plans without deviation at any later
construction date. Said submissions shall be at the same size and
scale as required in Article VII, and shall conform to the
development standards set forth in the Design Review Guidelines,
and shall contain the following: [Amended 1-21-2004]
b) Architectural Submittals. On a separate sheet(s), architectural
submittals are required which shall include the following:
(1) Elevations, locations and dimensions of all wall openings,
including windows, doors, and vents; for all sides of any
proposed building or structure, including signs;
(2) Exterior lighting plans;
(3) Samples and/or descriptions and colors of all materials for
proposed exterior treatments.
202. Note: "and all properties within 500 ft. of proposed development" adopted 10-10-2004.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:720
(4) Indication of roof pitch and materials.
(5) Location of and screening method used for all roof mounted
mechanical equipment.
(6) Landscape plans. On a separate sheet(s), landscape plans are
required which shall include the following:
(i) Location of existing trees and major shrubs that will be
preserved. Proposed plantings and other landscape
material, shown by type, size and number;
(ii) Provisions for pedestrian circulation;
(iii) Site furnishings, including location of and screen
treatment for trash disposal and storage areas;
(iv) Location and appearance of all fences, walls, berms and
other screening features; and
(v) Location, dimension, slopes, and landscaping treatment of
all drainage facilities.
(vi) A written description of the project.
3. Design standards - purpose.
a) Architectural styles, design themes, and site details including
signs, lighting, pedestrian furniture, planting and paving, along
with building materials, colors, textures and grade shall be
compatible within the overall site design and shall preserve and
enhance the character of the surrounding area. These details
should blend with their surroundings to create a diverse, yet
unified, street composition.
b) Design Review Standards, which shall guide the recommendations
of the Design Review Board, are contained in the publication
entitled "Portsmouth Design Review Guidelines".203
c) While quality design is desirable everywhere, it is the intent of this
ordinance that the Portsmouth Design Review Guidelines be more
stringently applied in the Town Center District than in other zones
in order to achieve the intent of the Town Center District per
Article III. [Added 10-27-2004]
203. Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Design Review Guidelines.
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:721

ARTICLE X
Special Conditions
Section A. General.
1. In granting a variance or special use permit or in making any
determination upon which it is required to pass after a public hearing
under this zoning ordinance, the Zoning Board of Review may apply
such special conditions that may, in the opinion of the board, be
required to promote the intent and purposes of the comprehensive plan
and the zoning ordinance of the Town.
2. Failure to abide by any special conditions attached to a grant shall
constitute a zoning violation.
3. Those special conditions shall be based on competent credible evidence
on the record, be incorporated into the decision, and may include, but
are not limited to, provisions for:
a) Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon other land,
including the type, intensity, design, and performance of activities
in order to prevent nuisance to and promote harmony with nearby
property and with the environment;
b) Controlling the sequence of development, including when it must
be commenced and completed;
c) Controlling the duration of use or development and the time within
which any temporary structure must be removed;
d) Assuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required
public improvements;
e) Designating the exact location and nature of development,
including but not limited to:
(1) Setbacks from streets and neighboring property;
(2) Screen fencing or screen evergreen planting;
(3) Drainage facilities;
(4) Lighting equipment;
(5) Landscaping;
(6) Traffic flow and controls.
f) Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings, maps,
plats, or specifications.
4. Such special conditions may be in addition to those required elsewhere
in this Ordinance. Where there is a conflict between conditions imposed
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:723
herein and conditions set elsewhere in this Ordinance, the more
stringent requirements shall apply.
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section A
C:724
ARTICLE XI
Development Plan Review
Section A.
Development plan review of applications for certain uses, as specified in this
Ordinance, requiring a special-use permit or a variance, shall be conducted
by the Planning Board and the Design Review Board, as applicable, and
shall be advisory to the permitting authority.
Section B.
Applications subject to Development Plan Review shall, immediately upon
receipt of an application hereunder, refer the site plan and related
documents, as required in this ordinance, to the Portsmouth Planning Board
and the Design Review Board, as applicable, for review and advice. Two (2)
copies each of the site plan and supportive documents required in Articles
VII and IX shall be delivered to the Portsmouth Planning Board and the
Design Review Board, plus whatever plans and documents are required by
each Board for their review. The Design Review Board shall hold a special
meeting(s) as required for its review, and report its recommendations to
the Planning Board. Said Planning Board shall make a written report to the
Zoning Board of Review within forty-five (45) days of receipt of said plan by
the Planning Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
Section C.
Applications which are materially changed after review by the Planning
Board may, at the discretion of the Zoning Board of Review, be referred back
to the Planning Board and the Design Review Board for further review.
Section D.
Nothing herein shall be construed to permit waivers of any regulations
unless approved by the permitting authority pursuant to this ordinance.
Section E.
Preliminary plans may be submitted to the Planning Board and the Design
Review Board for informal discussion, provided however, any tentative
1. The Planning Board shall assume primary responsibility for the
processing and approval of all development plan review applications.
However, for all applications requiring Design Review, as stipulated in
Article VII, the Planning Board shall rely upon the expertise of a Design
Review Board, which is established as a subcommittee of the Planning
Board for design review matters.
2. Where the decision of the Zoning Board of Review differs from the
recommendations of the Portsmouth Planning Board, the reasons
therefor shall be clearly stated in writing.
Section A CHARTER Section E
C:725
advisory opinion of a preliminary plan by the Planning Board and the Design
Review Board shall not be binding upon the Planning Board, Design Review
Board, or Zoning Board of Review.
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:726
ARTICLE XII
Administration and Enforcement of Zoning Ordinance
Section A. Maintenance of the Zoning Ordinance.
1. The persons charged with the administration and enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance shall be: (1) the Building Official of the Town of
Portsmouth, whose minimum qualifications shall be official certification
as a building official or inspector in the State of Rhode Island, together
with a working knowledge of zoning principles and practices, and/or (2)
the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Portsmouth, whose
minimum qualifications shall be a working knowledge of zoning
principles and practices. [Amended 6-13-2005]
2. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the power to:
a) Issue any required permits or certificates hereunder.
b) Collect required fees.
c) Keep records showing the compliance of uses of land.
d) Authorize commencement of uses or development under the
provisions of the zoning ordinance.
e) Conduct inspections of suspected violations of this ordinance and
of any special conditions imposed upon any development.
f) Issue of violation notices with required corrective action.
g) Collect fines for violations.
h) Perform such other duties and take such actions as may be
assigned in the ordinance.
3. In order to provide guidance or clarification, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall, upon written request, issue a zoning certificate or provide
information to the requesting party as to his determination within
fifteen (15) days of the written request. In the event that no written
response is provided within that time, the requesting party shall have
the right to appeal to the Zoning Board of Review for the determination.
4. The Town Clerk shall be the custodian of the zoning ordinance and
zoning map or maps created hereunder.
5. The Town Planner, or if none the Planning Board, shall be responsible:
a) For the maintenance and update of the text and zoning map
comprising the zoning ordinance. Changes which impact the
zoning map shall be depicted on the map within ninety (90) days of
the authorized change(s); and
b) For review of the zoning ordinance at reasonable intervals; and
whenever changes are made to the comprehensive plan of the
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:727
Section B. Application procedure.
Section C. Preapplication conference.
Town, for the identification of any changes necessary and for the
forwarding of these changes to the Town Council.
6. Printed copies of the zoning ordinance and map(s) of the Town shall be
available to the general public and shall be revised to include all
amendments. A reasonable charge may be made for copies to reflect
printing and distribution costs.
7. Upon publication of a zoning ordinance and map, and any amendments
thereto, the Town Clerk shall send a copy, without charge, to the
Associate Director of the Division of Planning of the Department of
Administration of the State of Rhode Island, and the State Law Library.
1. All applications shall be made to the zoning enforcement officer on
appropriate forms prescribed by the zoning enforcement officer. The
zoning enforcement officer shall determine which provisions of this
ordinance are applicable to the subject property and proposed
development. He/she shall provide the applicant a zoning certificate as
described in Section A. herein.
2. Should a special use permit and/or a variance be required to meet the
provisions of this ordinance, or if the applicant wishes to appeal the
decision of the zoning enforcement officer, the applicant may apply to
the Zoning Board of Review for same as provided in Article XIII.
3. No building permit may be issued by the building inspector until a
determination has been made by the zoning enforcement officer that all
zoning requirements have been satisfied.
1. A potential applicant for a development proposal which would be
subject to a special use permit, development plan review or change in
the zoning ordinance may request a preapplication conference with
either the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Town Planner, or the
Planning Board. A preapplication conference is intended to allow the
Town to:
a) Acquaint the applicant with the comprehensive plan and any
specific plans that apply to the parcel, as well as the zoning and
other ordinances that affect the proposed development;
b) Suggest improvements to the proposed design on the basis of a
review of the sketch plan;
c) Advise the applicant to consult appropriate authorities on the
character and placement of public utility services; and
d) Help the applicant to understand the steps to be taken to receive
approval.
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:728
Section D. Fees.
A separate Fee Ordinance provides for reasonable fees, which are to be
paid by the applicant for the adequate review and hearing of applications,
the issuance of zoning certificates, and for the recording of the decisions
thereon.
2. A preapplication conference is not mandatory.
3. Any preliminary advisory opinion rendered by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer or the Town Planner, or the Planning Board may or may not be in
writing, at his/her discretion, and shall not be binding upon him/herself,
the Zoning Board of Review, the Planning Board, the Town Council, nor
any other officer or agent of the Town.
Section C CHARTER Section D
C:729

ARTICLE XIII
Zoning Board of Review
Section A. Establishment and procedures.
1. Appointment of members.
a) Members of the Zoning Board of Review shall be appointed by
majority vote of the Town Council.
b) In case any vacancy occurs in said Board for any case or cause, the
Town Council shall appoint a member to said Board to fill said
vacancy for the remainder of the term of the member who has
vacated his office.
c) The Zoning Board of Review shall consist of five (5) members, each
to hold office for the term of five (5) years; provided, however, that
the original appointments shall be made for terms of one (1), two
(2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) years, respectively. The Zoning
Board of Review shall also include two (2) alternates to be
designated as the first [1st] and second [2nd] alternate members,
their terms to be set by the ordinance, but not to exceed five (5)
years.
(1) Members of zoning boards of review serving on the effective
date of adoption of a zoning ordinance under this chapter shall
be exempt from provisions of this section respecting terms of
originally appointed members until the expiration of their
current terms.
2. Alternates. Alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in
hearings. The first and second alternates shall be designated by the
chairperson on a case by case basis. The first alternate shall vote if a
member of the board is unable to serve at a hearing and the second
shall vote if two (2) members of the board are unable to serve at a
hearing. In the absence of the first alternate member, the second
alternate member shall serve in the position of the first alternate.
3. Removal of a member. Members of the Zoning Board of Review may be
removed from the Board for due cause by majority vote of the Town
Council.
4. Organization of the Board.
a) The Zoning Board of Review shall annually elect a chairperson, a
vice chairperson and a secretary. The chairperson, or in his or her
absence, the vice chairperson, shall preside over all meetings of the
Board.
5. Expenses.
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:731
Section B. Application procedure.
a) Individual members of the Board may be reimbursed for expenses
incurred in the performance of official duties with approval of the
Chair.
b) The Zoning Board of Review may engage legal, technical, or
clerical assistance to aid in the discharge of its duties.
c) The Town may provide for remuneration to members of the Zoning
Board of Review.
6. Procedures generally.
a) The Zoning Board of Review shall adopt and maintain written rules
of procedure, which shall be available to any applicant or the
general public at the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Said
rules of procedure shall include, at a minimum, a mailing address
to which appeals and correspondence to the Zoning Board of
Review shall be sent, and an office where records and decisions
shall be filed.
(1) In case of conflict between such rules of procedure and this
ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall apply.
b) The chairperson, or in his or her absence, the vice chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by
the issuance of subpoenas.
c) No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the board
unless they have attended all hearings concerning that matter.
7. Any petition for a variance or a special use permit to the Zoning Board
of Review of the said Town, said petition shall be accompanied by a fee
as prescribed by the Town of Portsmouth Ordinance pertaining to fees.
1. All applications including applications requests for variances, special
use permits and appeals from a ruling of the zoning enforcement officer
shall be made on forms as provided by the rules of the Board and the
written ruling or decision of the enforcement official together with all
other papers, plans and data constituting the record of the case shall be
transmitted to the Board. All such applications must include a
completed form or forms as specified by the Zoning Board of Review
plus specific information required for the subject matter by this
Ordinance.
2. Completed applications shall be delivered to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer as specified in the written rules of procedure of the Zoning
Board of Review, but in no case less than one (1) week prior to the date
of publication of the first public notice on the subject matter. The
Zoning Board of Review shall decline to hear any application which
requires public notice for which a substantially complete application
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:732
Section C. Powers and duties of Zoning Board of Review.
has not been submitted by the deadline, except applications pertaining
directly to life safety requirements.
3. A time period of twelve (12) months shall be required to pass before a
successive similar application to the Zoning Board of Review may be
filed.
1. The Zoning Board of Review shall hold a public hearing on all appeals
including appeals in which applications for variances are involved and
on all requests for special use permits and shall publish a notice of such
hearings and give notice thereof to the parties in interest, as required
by this Ordinance.
2. Public notice. Notice of all public hearings held by the Zoning Board of
Review shall be as follows:
a) A notice shall be published in the legal notice section of a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Portsmouth once
per week for three (3) weeks, one (1) of which may include the
week of the hearing and one (1) of which must appear at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing.
b) Notice of hearing, which may be a copy of the newspaper notice,
shall be sent by first class mail to the applicant, and to all abutters,
as defined in Article II Definitions. Notice shall also be mailed to
the public water district if the subject of the application is within
two thousand feet (2,000') of a public water source.
c) All notices shall specify the general nature of the hearing, its date,
place and time. The notice shall also include the street address of
the subject property.
d) A supplemental notice shall be posted at the office of the Town
Clerk. This posting shall be for information purposes only and shall
not constitute required notice of a public hearing.
e) The cost of notification, including actual advertising and mailing
costs, shall be borne by the applicant.
3. The Zoning Board of Review shall have the following powers and duties:
a) To hear and decide appeals in a timely fashion where it is alleged
there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by an administrative officer or agency in the enforcement or
interpretation of this chapter, or of any ordinance adopted pursuant
hereto. Such appeals shall also be governed by the provisions of
Article XIV.
b) To authorize, upon application, in specific cases of hardship,
variances in the application of the terms of the zoning ordinance,
pursuant to Article VI. Section D.
Section B CHARTER Section C
C:733
Section D. Decisions and records of Zoning Board of Review.
c) To authorize, upon application, in specific cases, special-use
permits, pursuant to Article VII.
d) To refer matters to the planning board, or to other boards or
agencies of the Town as the Zoning Board of Review may deem
appropriate, for findings and recommendations;
e) To hear and decide other matters, according to the terms of the
ordinance or other statutes, and upon which the board may be
authorized to pass under this ordinance or other statutes.
4. The Zoning Board of Review is required to vote as follows:
a) Five (5) active members shall be necessary to conduct a hearing. As
soon as a conflict occurs for a member, that member shall recuse
himself or herself, shall not sit as an active member, and take no
part in the conduct of the hearing. Only five (5) active members
shall be entitled to vote on any issue;
b) The concurring vote of three (3) of the five (5) members of the
Zoning Board of Review sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any
zoning administrative officer from whom an appeal was taken; and
c) The concurring vote of four (4) of the five (5) members of the
Zoning Board of Review sitting at a hearing shall be required to
decide in favor of an applicant on any matter within the discretion
of the board upon which it is required to pass under the ordinance,
including variances and special-use permits.
d) The concurring vote of three (3) of the five (5) members of the
Zoning Board of Review sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to
determine if, during the course of any hearing, an application is
essentially changed and if said application shall be allowed to
continue or shall require a new application.
1. Following a public hearing, the Zoning Board of Review shall render a
decision within a reasonable period of time. The Zoning Board of
Review shall include in its decision all findings of fact and conditions,
showing the vote of each member participating thereon, and the
absence of a member or his or her failure to vote. Decisions shall be
recorded and filed in the office of the Zoning Board of Review within
thirty (30) working days from the date when the decision was rendered,
and shall be a public record.
2. The Zoning Board of Review shall keep written minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or,
if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of its examinations, findings of fact, and other official actions, all of
which shall be recorded and filed in the office of the Zoning Board of
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:734
Section E. Participation in zoning hearings.
Participation in a zoning hearing or other proceeding by a party shall not
be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not in good faith,
intentional misconduct, a knowing violation of law, transactions where there
is an improper personal benefit, or malicious, wanton, or willful misconduct.
Review in an expeditious manner upon completion of the proceeding.
For any proceeding in which the right of appeal lies to the Superior
or Supreme Court, the Zoning Board of Review shall have the minutes
taken either by a competent stenographer or recorded by a soundrecording
device.
3. Any decision by the Zoning Board of Review, including any special
conditions attached thereto, shall be mailed to the applicant, to the
zoning enforcement officer of the Town, and to the Associate Director of
the Division of Planning of the Rhode Island Department of
Administration. Any decision evidencing the granting of a variance,
modification, or special use shall also be recorded in the land evidence
records of the Town.
4. All determinations of the Board shall be made in accordance with the
comprehensive plan specified in Title 45 Chapter 24 of the General Law
of 1956 as amended.
5. In authorizing special use permits, the Board shall be bound by the
conditions for special uses which are set out in this Ordinance and in
authorizing either special use permits or variances the Board may
impose such further conditions as are deemed necessary for the
protection of neighboring properties and the public interest, as further
described in Article X. Special Conditions.
Section D CHARTER Section E
C:735

ARTICLE XIV
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Review
Section A. Right of appeal.
Section B. Appeals to Zoning Board of Review.
Section C. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Zoning Board of Review, after an appeal shall have been
duly filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in
the officer's opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which
may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction on application thereof
and upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken on due cause
shown.
Section D. Public hearing by Zoning Board of Review.
1. An appeal from any decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer may be
taken to the Zoning Board of Review by an aggrieved party. (The
definition of an aggrieved party is provided in Article II, Definitions.)
2. An appeal from a decision of the Zoning Board of Review may be taken
by an aggrieved party to the Superior Court, per the provisions of
Article XVII herein and R.I. Title 45 Chapter 24 of the General Law of
1956 as amended.
1. Any appeal to the Zoning Board of Review from a decision of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall be taken within a reasonable time of the date
of the recording of the decision by the Zoning Enforcement Officer by
filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the
Zoning Board of Review a notice of appeal, on forms as provided by the
rules of the Board, specifying the ground thereof.
2. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the Zoning Board of Review all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken. Notice of the appeal shall
also be transmitted to the Planning Board.
1. The Zoning Board of Review shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the
parties of interest, and decide the matter within a reasonable time.
a) Notice shall be given per the provisions of Article XIII Section B.
2. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney. Said hearing shall be conducted according to the written rules
of procedure adopted by the Zoning Board of Review, and the provisions
of Article XIII herein.
Section A CHARTER Section D
C:737
Section E. Decisions and records of Zoning Board of Review.
In exercising its powers the Zoning Board of Review may, in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or partly and may
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from
and may make such orders, requirements, decisions, or determinations as
ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer from
whom the appeal was taken. All decisions and records of the Zoning Board
of Review respecting appeals shall conform to the provisions of Article XIII
herein.
3. The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne by the
appellant.
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section E
C:738
ARTICLE XV
Adoption of Ordinance and Amendments
Section A. Power of Council to adopt.
Section B. Procedure for adoption or amendment.
1. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, and
general welfare, the Town Council shall have the power, in accordance
with the provisions of this Article, to adopt, amend, or repeal, and to
provide for the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of, the
zoning ordinance. The provisions of the zoning ordinance shall be set
forth in text and map(s), and may incorporate charts or other material.
2. The zoning ordinance, and all amendments thereto, shall be consistent
with the Town's comprehensive plan, as described in Chapter 45-22.2 of
the R.I. General Laws, and shall provide for the implementation of the
Town's comprehensive plan.
1. Proposals for adoption, amendment, or repeal of the zoning ordinance
or zoning map(s) shall be submitted to the Town Clerk.
2. Immediately upon receipt of the proposal, the Town Clerk shall refer
the proposal to the Town Council at their next regularly scheduled
meeting, and to the Planning Board for study and recommendation.
a) The Planning Board shall, in turn, notify and seek the advice of the
Town Planner and shall report to the Town Council within forty-five
(45) days after receipt of the proposal, giving its findings and
recommendations as prescribed in Section C herein.
b) Where a proposal for adoption, amendment, or repeal of the zoning
ordinance or zoning map is made by the Town Planning Board, the
requirements for study by the board may be waived, provided that
the proposal by the Planning Board include its findings and
recommendations pursuant to Section C. herein.
3. The Town Council shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days
of receipt of a proposal at a regularly scheduled meeting, giving proper
notice as prescribed in Section D herein. The Town Council shall render
a decision on any proposal within forty-five (45) days after the date of
completion of the public hearing.
4. The provisions of this section pertaining to deadlines shall not be
construed to apply to any extension consented to by an applicant.
5. The proposals shown in the public notice may be altered or amended
prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising, as a
result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public
hearing. Any alteration or amendment must be presented for comment
in the course of the hearing.
Section A CHARTER Section C
C:739
Section C. Review by Planning Board.
Among its findings and recommendations to the Town Council with respect
to a proposal for adoption, amendment, or repeal of the zoning ordinance or
zoning map, the Planning Board shall:
Section D. Notice and hearing requirements.
1. Include a statement on the general consistency of the proposal with the
comprehensive plan of the Town, including the goals and policies
statement, the implementation program, and all other applicable
elements of the comprehensive plan; and
2. Include a demonstration of recognition and consideration of each of the
applicable purposes of zoning, as presented in Article I.
1. No zoning ordinance shall be adopted, repealed, or amended until after
a public hearing has been held upon the question before the Town
Council. At said hearing opportunity shall be given to all persons
interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed ordinance.
2. General notice requirements. The Town Council shall first give notice of
the public hearing by publication of notice in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Town at least once each week for three (3)
successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing, which may include
the week in which the hearing is to be held.
a) Written notice, which may be a copy of the newspaper notice, shall
be mailed to the Associate Director of the Division of Planning of
the Rhode Island Department of Administration, and, where
applicable, to the parties specified in Subsections 2., 3., 4., and 5.
of this section, at least two (2) weeks prior to the hearing.
b) The newspaper notice shall be published as a display
advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal type
size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall:
(1) Specify the place of the hearing and the date and time of its
commencement;
(2) Indicate that adoption, amendment, or repeal of the zoning
ordinance is under consideration;
(3) Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the
ordinance that may be printed once in its entirety, or
summarize and describe the matter under consideration;
(4) Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter
under consideration may be obtained or examined and copied;
and
(5) State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or
amended prior to the close of the public hearing without
Section C PORTSMOUTH CODE Section D
C:740
further advertising, as a result of further study or because of
the views expressed at the public hearing. Any alteration or
amendment must be presented for comment in the course of
the hearing.
3. Notice for a general amendment. Where a proposed general
amendment to an existing zoning ordinance, having Town-wide or
district wide effect, includes changes in an existing zoning map, public
notice shall be given as required by Subparagraph 2 of this section.
4. Notice for specific lot(s) change(s). Where a proposed amendment to an
existing ordinance includes a specific change in the zoning district map
applicable to specific parcels, but does not affect districts generally,
public notice shall be given as required by Subparagraph 2 of this
section, with the additional requirements that:
a) Notice shall include a map showing the existing and proposed
boundaries, zoning district boundaries, and existing streets and
roads and their names, and Town boundaries where appropriate;
and
b) Written notice of the date, time, and place of the public hearing and
the nature and purpose thereof shall be sent to all owners of real
property whose property is located in or within not less than two
hundred feet (200') of the perimeter of the area proposed for
change, whether within the Town or within an adjacent town.
c) The notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the last
known address of the owners, as shown on the current real estate
tax assessment records of the Town in which the property is
located.
5. Notice of a public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the Town
Council of any town to which one (1) or more of the following pertain:
a) Which is located in or within not less than two hundred feet (200')
of the boundary of the area proposed for change; or
b) Where there is a public or quasi-public water source, or private
water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public water
source, within two thousand feet (2,000') of any real property that
is the subject of a proposed zoning change, regardless of municipal
boundaries.
6. Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any
state or municipal water department or agency, special water district,
or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water
resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as
a public water source and that is within two thousand feet (2,000') of
any real property which is the subject of a proposed zoning change,
provided, however, that the governing body of any state or municipal
water department or agency, special water district, or private water
Section D CHARTER Section D
C:741
Section E. Conditions set on zone changes.
Section F. Creation of vested rights.
company has filed with the building inspector in the Town a map survey,
which shall be kept as a public record, showing areas of surface water
resources and/or watersheds and parcels of land within two thousand
feet (2,000') thereof.
7. No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render any
ordinance or amendment invalid, unless the defect is found to be
intentional or misleading.
8. Costs of any notice required under this section shall be borne by the
applicant.
1. In granting the zoning ordinance amendment, notwithstanding the
provisions of Article V. Permitted Uses, the Town Council may limit the
change to one (1) of the permitted uses in the zone to which the subject
land is rezoned, and impose such limitations, conditions, and
restrictions, including, without limitation:
a) Requiring the petitioner to obtain a permit or approval from any
and all state or local governmental agencies or instrumentalities
having jurisdiction over the land and use which are the subject of
the zoning change;
b) Those relating to the effectiveness or continued effectiveness of the
zoning change; and/or
c) Those relating to the use of the land; as the Council deems
necessary.
2. The Town Planner, or if none the Planning Board, shall cause the
limitations and conditions so imposed to be clearly noted on the zoning
map and recorded in the land evidence records, provided, however, in
the case of a conditional zone change, the limitations, restrictions, and
conditions shall not be noted on the zoning map until the zone change
has become effective.
3. If the permitted use for which the land has been rezoned is abandoned
or if the land is not used for the requested purpose for a period of two
(2) years or more after the zone change becomes effective, the Town
Council may, after a public hearing as hereinbefore set forth, change
the land to its original zoning use before the petition was filed.
4. If any limitation, condition, or restriction in an ordinance is held to be
invalid by a court in any action, that holding shall not cause the
remainder of the ordinance to be invalid.
1. Any application for development that is substantially complete and has
been submitted for approval to the appropriate review agency of the
Section D PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:742
Town, as specified in this Ordinance, prior to enactment of a new zoning
ordinance or amendment shall be reviewed according to the regulations
applicable in the zoning ordinance in force at the time the application
was submitted. A Certification of Completeness or written notification
to an applicant that an application is not substantially complete shall be
issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer within five (5) working days
of his/her receipt of an application and required supportive materials.
a) "Substantially Complete" for this purpose shall mean that the
application and required supportive materials are complete and
sufficient for the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Planning Board or
the Zoning Board of Review to make a fully informed decision on an
application.
2. Any application for development under the provisions of this section
which is not utilized within a period of one (1) year from the date of its
authorization shall be void unless, upon written request of the
applicant, the Zoning Board of Review grants an extension, provided
that not more than one (1) such extension for a period of six (6) months
may be granted.
a) If written proof from the Portsmouth Water and Fire District is
provided showing that the applicant is unable to secure a tie-in to
the Portsmouth Water and Fire District's water supply, then the
Zoning Board of Review shall grant an extension for a period of one
(1) year, provided that the applicant demonstrates reasonable
diligence in attempting to secure such tie-in.
b) If written proof from an applicable State or Federal agency is
provided showing that the applicant is unable to secure the
necessary permits from said agency within the time allotted
hereunder, then the Zoning Board of Review shall grant an
extension for a period of one (1) year, provided that the applicant
demonstrates reasonable diligence in attempting to secure such
permit.
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:743

ARTICLE XVI
Violations
Section A.
It shall be the duty of the Town Solicitor, on authorization by the Town
Council wherever a violation or a contemplated violation of this Ordinance
is brought to its attention, to institute due legal proceedings to compel
compliance with said Ordinance and to restrain the erection, alteration or
use of any building, structure or other thing erected or used in violation of
the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section B.
The Town may also cause suit to be brought in the supreme or superior
court, or any municipal court, including a municipal housing court having
jurisdiction, in the name of the Town, to restrain the violation of, or to
compel compliance with, the provisions of this zoning ordinance. The Town
may consolidate an action for injunctive relief and/or fines under the
ordinance in the superior court.
Section C.
Any person, firm or corporation, and any architect or engineer, building
contractor or other person, employed by an applicant or developer, who
shall violate or assist in the violation or fail to comply with the requirements
of any provision of this Ordinance, or for a violation of any terms or
conditions of any action imposed by the Zoning Board of Review or of any
other agency or officer charged in this ordinance with enforcement of any
of its provisions, upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500) for each offense and each day of the
existence of any such violation shall be deemed a separate offense, all such
fines shall inure to the benefit of the Town.
Section A CHARTER Section C
C:745

ARTICLE XVII
Appeals to Superior Court
Section A. Appeals to a decision of the Zoning Board of Review.
1. An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Zoning Board of
Review to the Superior Court for Newport County by filing a complaint
setting forth the reasons of appeal within twenty (20) days after the
decision has been recorded and posted in the office of the Town Clerk.
The decision shall be posted in a location visible to the public in the
Town Hall for a period of twenty (20) days following the recording of the
decision. The Zoning Board of Review shall file the original documents
acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed from,
or certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be
pertinent, with the clerk of the court within thirty (30) days after being
served with a copy of the complaint. When the complaint is filed by
someone other than the original applicant or appellant, the original
applicant or appellant and the members of the Zoning Board shall be
made parties to the proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings
upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, in its discretion,
grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other orders as it
deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal.
2. If, before the date set for hearing in the Superior Court, an application
is made to the court for leave to present additional evidence before the
Zoning Board of Review and it is shown to the satisfaction of the court
that the additional evidence is material and that there were good
reasons for the failure to present it at the hearing before the Zoning
Board of Review, the court may order that the additional evidence be
taken before the Zoning Board of Review upon conditions determined
by the court. The Zoning Board of Review may modify its findings and
decision by reason of the additional evidence and shall file that
evidence and any new findings or decisions with the Superior Court.
3. The court shall consider the record of the hearing before the Zoning
Board of Review and, if it shall appear to the court that additional
evidence is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may
allow any party to the appeal to present the evidence in open court.
4. The court will not substitute its judgment for that of the Zoning Board
of Review as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The
court may affirm the decision of the Zoning Board of Review or remand
the case for further proceedings, or may reverse or modify the decision
if substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because of
findings, inferences, conclusions, or decisions which are:
a) In violation of constitutional, statutory, or ordinance provisions;
b) In excess of the authority granted to the Zoning Board of Review by
statute or ordinance;
Section A CHARTER Section A
C:747
Section B. Judicial aid in enforcement.
The Supreme Court and the Superior Court, within their respective
jurisdictions, or any justice of either of those courts in vacation, shall, upon
due proceedings in the name of the Town, instituted by its Town Solicitor,
have power to issue any extraordinary writ or to proceed according to the
course of law or equity or both:
Section C. Appeal of enactment of or amendment to zoning
ordinance.
c) Made upon unlawful procedure;
d) Affected by other error of law;
e) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial
evidence of the whole record; or
f) Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or
clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
1. To restrain the erection, alteration, or use of any building, structure,
sign, or land erected, altered, or used in violation of the provisions of
this zoning ordinance, and to order its removal or abatement as a
nuisance;
2. To compel compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance;
3. To order the removal by the property owner of any building, structure,
sign, or improvement existing in violation of this zoning ordinance, and
to authorize some official of the Town, in the default of the removal by
the owner, to remove it at the expense of the owner;
4. To order the reimbursement for any work or materials which shall have
been done or furnished by or at the cost of the Town;
5. To order restoration by the owner, where practicable; and/or
6. To issue fines and other penalties.
1. An appeal of an enactment of or an amendment to a zoning ordinance
may be taken to the Superior Court of Newport County by filing a
complaint, as set forth herein, within thirty (30) days after the
enactment or amendment has become effective. The appeal may be
taken by an aggrieved party or by any legal resident or landowner of
the Town or by any association of residents or landowners of the Town.
The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of the zoning ordinance, as
enacted or amended, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on
appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a bond, and make
such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of
the appeal.
Section A PORTSMOUTH CODE Section C
C:748
2. The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area or areas in which
the enactment or amendment does not conform with the comprehensive
plan and/or the manner in which it constitutes a taking of private
property without just compensation.
3. The court shall first consider whether the enactment or amendment of
the zoning ordinance is in conformance with the comprehensive plan. If
the enactment or amendment is not in conformance with the
comprehensive plan, then the court shall invalidate the enactment or
the amendment, or those parts of the enactment or amendment which
are not in conformance with the comprehensive plan. The court shall
not revise the ordinance to conform with the comprehensive plan, but
may suggest appropriate language as part of the court decision.
4. In the case of an aggrieved party, where the court has found that the
enactment or amendment of the zoning ordinance is in conformance
with the comprehensive plan, then the court shall next determine
whether the enactment or amendment works as a taking of property
from the aggrieved party. If the court determines that there has been a
taking, the court shall remand the case to the legislative body of the
Town, with its findings that a taking has occurred, and order the Town
to either provide just compensation or rescind the enactment or
amendment within thirty (30) days.
5. The Superior Court shall retain jurisdiction, in the event that the
aggrieved party and the Town do not agree on the amount of
compensation, in which case the Superior Court shall hold further
hearings to determine and to award compensation. Furthermore, the
Superior Court shall retain jurisdiction to determine the amount of an
award of compensation for any temporary taking, if that taking shall
exist.
6. The court may, in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its own
motion, award reasonable attorney's fees to any party to an appeal, as
set forth herein, including a town.
Section C CHARTER Section C
C:749

ARTICLE XVIII
Validity and Severability
1. Where the subject matter herein contained is elsewhere regulated,
the more stringent Ordinance or Regulation shall prevail.
2. If any provision of this Ordinance or of any rule, regulation, or
determination made thereunder, or the application thereof to any
person, agency, or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Ordinance, rule,
regulation, or determination and the application of the provisions
to other persons, agencies, or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections of this Ordinance
shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Ordinance.
CHARTER Section C
C:751

ARTICLE XIX
Low and Moderate Income Housing
Section A. Authority to grant a comprehensive permit.
In accordance with Title 45, Chapter 53 of the Rhode Island General Laws,
the Low and Moderate Income Housing Act, the Portsmouth Planning Board
is designated as the local review board, and shall have the power to issue
a comprehensive permit for a qualifying low and moderate income housing
project.
Section B. Procedure for approval of construction of low or
moderate income housing.
Any applicant proposing to build low or moderate income housing may
submit to the Planning Board a single application for a comprehensive
permit to build that housing in lieu of separate applications to the applicable
local boards. This procedure is only available for proposals in which at
least twenty-five percent (25%) of the housing is low or moderate income
housing. The application and review process for a comprehensive permit
shall be as follows:
1. Submission requirements. Applications for a comprehensive permit
shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer of the Planning Board
and shall include:
a) A letter of eligibility issued by the Rhode Island Housing Mortgage
Finance Corporation, or in the case of projects primarily funded by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or other
state or federal agencies, an award letter indicating the subsidy, or
application in such form as may be prescribed by the Town of
Portsmouth for a municipal government subsidy; and
b) A written request to the Planning Board to submit a single
application to build or rehabilitate low or moderate income housing
in lieu of separate applications to the applicable local boards. The
written request shall identify the specific sections and provisions of
applicable local ordinances and regulations from which the
applicant is seeking relief; and
c) A proposed timetable for the commencement of construction and
completion of the project; and
d) A sample land lease or deed restriction with affordability liens that
will restrict use as low and moderate income housing in
conformance with the guidelines of the agency providing the
subsidy for the low and moderate income housing, but for a period
of not less than thirty (30) years; and
e) Identification of an approved entity that will monitor the long-term
affordability of the low and moderate income units; and
Section A CHARTER Section B
C:753
f) A reasonably detailed financial pro-forma, or a copy of the financial
pro-forma provided to the RI Housing and Mortgage Finance Corp.,
for the proposed development; and
g) For comprehensive permit applications:
(1) Not involving major land developments or major subdivisions
including, but not limited to, applications seeking relief from
specific provisions of the zoning ordinance, or involving
administrative subdivisions, minor land developments or minor
subdivisions, or other local ordinances and regulations: those
items required by local regulations promulgated pursuant to
applicable state law, with the exception of evidence of state or
federal permits; and for comprehensive permit applications;
and
(2) Involving major land development projects and major
subdivisions, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant and
the Town; those items included in the master plan checklist for
low or moderate income housing as provided in the Town of
Portsmouth Land Development and Subdivision Regulations
promulgated pursuant to § 45-23-40 of the Rhode Island
General Laws.204 Subsequent to master plan approval, the
applicant must submit those items included in the preliminary
plan checklist for low or moderate income housing for a major
land development project or major subdivision as provided in
the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations
promulgated pursuant to § 45-23-41, with the exception of
evidence of state or federal permits.
(3) All required state and federal permits must be obtained prior
to the final plan approval or the issuance of a building permit.
Such final plan submission shall include written evidence that
the Plans approved at the master plan or preliminary stages
have not materially changed.
h) The Town may impose fees on comprehensive permit applications
that are consistent with but do not exceed fees that would
otherwise be assessed for a project of the same scope and type but
not proceeding as a comprehensive permit application, provided,
however, that the imposition of such fees shall not preclude a
showing by a non-profit applicant that the fees make the project
financially infeasible; and
i) Notwithstanding the submission requirements set forth above, the
Planning Board may request additional, reasonable documentation
throughout the public hearing, including, but not limited to,
opinions of experts, credible evidence of application for necessary
204. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:754
federal and/or state permits and/or financial assistance, statements
and advice from other local boards and officials.
2. Certification of completeness. The application must be certified
complete or incomplete by the Administrative Officer according to the
provisions of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations
provided, however, that for a major land development or major
subdivision, the certificate for a master plan shall be granted within
thirty (30) days and for a preliminary plan shall be granted within fortyfive
(45) days. The running of the time period set forth herein will be
deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of
the application by the Administrative Officer and will recommence upon
the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However,
in no event will the Administrative Officer be required to certify a
corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than fourteen (14)
days after its resubmission. If the Administrative Officer certifies the
application as incomplete, the officer shall set forth in writing with
specificity the missing or incomplete items.
3. Pre-application conference. Where the comprehensive permit
application proposal is a major land development project or a major
subdivision pursuant to the Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations205 the Planning Board may require an applicant proposing
a project under this section to first schedule a pre-application
conference with the Planning Board, the Technical Review Committee
established pursuant to the Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations, or with the Administrative Officer for the Planning Board
and other local officials, as appropriate. To request a pre-application
conference, the applicant shall submit a short description of the project
in writing including the number of units, type of housing, as well as a
location map. The purpose of the pre-application conference shall be to
review a concept plan of the proposed development. Upon receipt of a
request by an applicant for a pre-application conference, the Town has
thirty (30) days to schedule and hold the pre-application conference. If
thirty (30) days have elapsed from the filing of the pre-application
submission and no pre-application conference has taken place, nothing
shall be deemed to preclude an applicant from thereafter filing and
proceeding with an application for a comprehensive permit.
4. Review of applications. An application filed in accordance with this
section shall be reviewed by the Planning Board at a public hearing in
accordance with the following provisions:
a) Notification. Upon issuance of a certificate of completeness for a
comprehensive permit, the Planning Board shall immediately notify
each local board, as applicable, of the filing of the application, by
sending a copy to the local boards and to other parties entitled to
notice of hearings on applications under the zoning ordinance and/
or Land Development and Subdivision Regulations as applicable.
205. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:755
b) Public notice. Public notice for all public hearings will be the same
notice required under the Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations for a public hearing for a preliminary plan
promulgated in accordance with Article VI, Section E thereof. The
cost of notice shall be paid by the applicant.
c) Review of minor projects. The review of a comprehensive permit
application involving only minor land developments or minor
subdivisions or requesting zoning ordinance relief or relief from
other local regulations or ordinances not otherwise addressed in
this subsection, shall be conducted following the procedures in the
Land Development and Subdivision Regulations, with the exception
that all minor land developments or minor subdivisions under this
section are required to hold a public hearing on the application,
and within ninety-five (95) days of issuance of the certificate of
completeness, or within such further time as is agreed to by the
applicant and the Planning Board, render a decision.
d) Review of major projects. In the review of a comprehensive permit
application involving a major land development and/or major
subdivision, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the
master plan and shall, within one hundred and twenty (120) days of
issuance of the certification of completeness, or within such further
amount of time as may be agreed to by the Planning Board and the
applicant, render a decision. Preliminary and final plan review shall
be conducted according to the Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations except as otherwise specified in this section.
e) Required findings. In taking final action on an application, the
Planning Board shall make positive findings, supported by legally
competent evidence on the record which discloses the nature and
character of the observations upon which the fact finders acted, on
each of the following standard provisions, where applicable:
(1) The proposed development is consistent with local needs as
identified in the comprehensive community plan with
particular emphasis on the Town's affordable housing plan and/
or has satisfactorily addressed the issues where there may be
inconsistencies.
(2) The proposed development is in compliance with the standards
and provisions of the Town's zoning ordinance and Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations, and/or where
expressly varied or waived local concerns that have been
affected by the relief granted do not outweigh the state and
local need for low and moderate income housing.
(3) All low and moderate income housing units proposed are
integrated throughout the development; are similar in scale
and architectural style to the market rate units within the
project; and will be built and occupied prior to, or
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:756
simultaneous with the construction and occupancy of any
market rate units.
(4) There will be no significant negative environmental impacts
from the proposed development as shown on the final plan,
with all required conditions for approval.
(5) There will be no significant negative impacts on the health and
safety of current or future residents of the community, in areas
including, but not limited to, safe circulation of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, provision of emergency services, sewage
disposal, availability of potable water, adequate surface water
run-off, and the preservation of natural, historical or cultural
features that contribute to the attractiveness of the community.
(6) All proposed land developments and all subdivisions lots will
have adequate and permanent physical access to a public
street. Lot frontage on a public street without physical access
shall not be considered compliance with this requirement.
(7) The proposed development will not result in the creation of
individual lots with any physical constraints to development
that building on those lots according to pertinent regulations
and building standards would be impracticable, unless created
only as permanent open space or permanently reserved for a
public purpose on the approved, recorded plans.
f) The Planning Board has the same power to issue permits or
approvals that any local board or official who would otherwise act
with respect to the application, including, but not limited to, the
power to attach to the permit or approval, conditions, and
requirements with respect to height, site plan, size, or shape, or
building materials, as are consistent with the terms of this section.
g) In reviewing the comprehensive permit request, the Planning
Board may deny the request for any of the following reasons:
(1) If the Town has an approved affordable housing plan and is
meeting housing needs, and the proposal is inconsistent with
the affordable housing plan;
(2) If the proposal is not consistent with local needs, including, but
not limited to, the needs identified in its approved
comprehensive plan, and/or zoning ordinances and procedures
promulgated in conformance with the comprehensive plan;
(3) If the proposal is not in conformance with the comprehensive
plan;
(4) If the community has met or has plans to meet the goal of ten
percent (10%) of the year-round units in the Town as defined in
Section B CHARTER Section B
C:757
§ 45-53-3(4)(i) of the Rhode Island General Laws being low and
moderate income housing; or
(5) If concerns for the environment and the health and safety of
current residents have not been adequately addressed.
h) All Planning Board decisions on comprehensive permits shall be by
majority vote of the membership of the board and may be appealed
by the applicant to the State Housing Appeals Board.
i) If the public hearing is not convened or a decision is not rendered
within the time allowed in Subsections B.4.c) and d), the
application is deemed to have been allowed and the relevant
approval shall issue immediately; provided, however, that this
provision shall not apply to any application remanded for hearing,
where more than one (1) application has been remanded for
hearing provided for in § 45-53-6(f)(2) of the Rhode Island General
Laws.
5. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the issuance of an approval may
appeal to the Supreme Court.
6. Expiration of comprehensive permits. A comprehensive permit shall
expire unless construction is started within twelve (12) months and
completed within sixty (60) months of final plan approval unless a
longer and/or phased period for development is agreed to by the
Planning Board and the applicant. Low and moderate income housing
units shall be built and occupied prior to, or simultaneous with the
construction and occupancy of market rate units.
7. Limit on comprehensive permit applications. The Town may limit the
annual total number of dwelling units in comprehensive permit
applications from for-profit developers to an aggregate of one percent
(1%) of the total number of year-round housing units in the Town, as
recognized in the affordable housing plan and notwithstanding the
timetables set forth elsewhere in this section, the Planning Board shall
have the authority to consider comprehensive permit applications from
for-profit developers, which are made pursuant to this paragraph,
sequentially in the order in which completed applications are
submitted.
8. Annual reports required. The Planning Board shall report the status of
implementation to the Housing Resources Commission pursuant to
§ 42-128-4 of the Rhode Island General Laws, including the disposition
of any applications made under the plan, as of June 30, 2006, by
September 1, 2006 and for each June 30 thereafter by September 1
through 2010, as further provided in Title 45, Section 45-53-4(4)(xiii) of
the Rhode Island General Laws.
9. Remanded applications. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 45-53-4 in
effect on February 13, 2004, to commence hearings within thirty (30)
days of receiving an application remanded by the State Housing
Section B PORTSMOUTH CODE Section B
C:758
Section C. Filing fees.
An applicant seeking approval of a comprehensive permit under the
provisions of this article shall pay to the Town, upon submission of an
application to the Administrative Officer, a filing fee to cover the costs
of processing the application. The check shall be payable to the Town
of Portsmouth. Said fee shall equal the cumulative fees which would be
associated with approval of the project if it did not qualify for review as a
comprehensive permit.
Section D. Effective date.
Section E. Duplex units.
Appeals Board pursuant to § 45-53-6(f)(2) shall be heard as herein
provided; in any town with more than one (1) remanded application,
applications may be scheduled for hearing in the order in which they
were received, and may be taken up sequentially from the date they
are remanded, with the thirty (30) day requirement for the initiation of
hearings, commencing upon the decision of the earlier filed application.
1. This article shall take effect on September 30, 2005.
2. No for-profit developer shall submit a new application for
comprehensive permits until September 30, 2005, except by mutual
agreement with the Planning Board.
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article IV Section B "Land Space
Requirements Table", duplex housing structures in which at least one
(1) of the units meets the definition of "low and moderate income
housing" as provided in Article II Section B shall meet the following
dimensional requirements;
Minimum Yard Setbacks
Maximum Bldg.
Height
Zoning
District
Min.
Lot
Size
Min. Lot
Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
Min.
Lot
Frontage Front Rear Side Stories Feet
Max. %
Lot
Coverage
R-10 15,000 7,500 100' 20' 20' 10' 2-1/2 35' 20%
R-20 30,000 15,000 110' 30' 30' 15' 2-1/2 35' 20%
R-30 45,000 22,500 125' 30' 30' 20' 2-1/2 35' 20%
R-40 60,000 30,000 125' 30' 30' 20' 2-1/2 35' 20%
R-60 90,000 45,000 200' 50' 50' 50' 2-1/2 35' 10%
2. The "Low or moderate income" unit shall have substantially the same
exterior appearance as the market rate unit, and shall be of similar size
as the market rate unit. The "Low or moderate income housing" unit
shall be constructed at the same rate of development as the market rate
Section B CHARTER Section E
C:759
Section F. Residential Multi-Family Incentive District.
This section applies to Multifamily Housing developments located in the
Multifamily Incentive District, as defined in Article III Section J, in which at
least twenty-five percent (25%) of the units are "Low or moderate income
housing", as defined in Article II. Such proposals shall be referred to the
Planning Board, which shall have full review and approval authority, as
stipulated in Article VIII Sections A and B.
unit, and be offered for sale or rental at substantially similar times as
the market rate units.
All other provisions of Article IV. shall remain in force.
The Planning Board shall hear and rule upon all applications under this
section.
1. An apartment, condominium, cluster or town house under this section
may be permitted as a Land Development Project in the Residential
Multi-Family Incentive District provided that the Planning Board, in
accordance with this Ordinance, finds that the establishment of the
same meets the standards and requirements of this section.
2. The purpose of these regulations is to encourage the appropriate use of
land for the development of multi-family housing in which at least
twenty-five percent (25%) of the units are "Low or moderate income
housing", as defined in Article II., taking into consideration the natural
amenities of the site. No multi-family structure or structures or
apartment houses or group of apartment houses shall be erected unless
in accordance with the standards set forth in this section.
3. In granting any such Land Development Project or in permitting any
modification of the regulations set forth herein, the Planning Board may
prescribe such conditions and safeguards, as further described in
Article X. Special Conditions, as it may deem necessary to prevent
nuisance to and promote harmony with nearby property.
4. The disregarding of any such condition or safeguard, when made a part
of the terms under which a Land Development Project is granted, shall
be deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
5. A Performance Bond or cash surety in the name of the Town of
Portsmouth and in the amount of five percent (5%) of the estimated cost
of development shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer
prior to the start of construction. Such Performance Bond or cash
surety must be maintained in effect until a Certificate of Occupancy is
issued.
6. No proposed development shall be approved by the Planning Board
unless it is served by an adequate sewerage treatment system, as
certified by RIDEM, or public sewer, when the same becomes available,
and that the sewer line(s) to which it shall be connected, have adequate
Section E PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:760
capacity to carry the additional effluent created by the development.
Should the line(s) be determined to be inadequate, only such portion
of the development as can be accepted by the sewer line(s) shall be
approved for development, provided it meets all other requirements of
this Zoning Ordinance.
a) In the event a private sewage treatment plant is to be constructed,
it shall be approved by the State of Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management and it shall meet the standards of any
federal or state legislation regarding water pollution control before
a building permit may be issued.
7. In granting a Land Development Project for a development under this
section the Planning Board shall, immediately upon receipt of an
application hereunder, refer the site plan and related documents to the
Department of Public Works Director, the Chief of the Fire Department,
and the Town Planner for review and advice, per the stipulations of
Article XI. Development Plan Review. Plans for apartment,
Condominium and Town House developments within or adjacent to
commercial zones shall also be referred to the Design Review Board
review and advice, per the stipulations of Article XI. Development Plan
Review. Such persons and boards must render their advice and
comments to the Planning Board prior to the public hearing on said
application.
8. The Town shall require that the developer provide affidavits or
statements prior to final approval signed by the Department of
Environmental Management and the Coastal Resources Management
Council that the proposed site does not violate any portion of the
Wetlands Act or CRMC regulations, plus permits from RIDOT for curb
cuts and connections to State road drainage systems, if applicable,
before issuance of a building permit.
9. Application shall include all required submissions in the checklist
entitled "Checklist For Application- Low or Moderate Income Housing".
The site plan shall conform to the development standards set forth in
paragraph 10 below.
a) Submittal shall also include items required in Article IX Section D.
Design Review Standards, as applicable.
b) Show the location and size of all units, specifying those to become
low or moderate income units.
10. Development standards. All developments proposed under this Section
shall conform to the following standards:
a) Minimum frontage: one hundred ten feet (110').
b) Minimum front yard: thirty feet (30').
c) Minimum side yard: twenty-five feet (25').
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:761
(1) Driveways may not be counted as side yards.
d) Minimum rear yard: twenty-five percent (25%) or thirty feet (30')
whichever is less.
e) Maximum lot coverage by buildings: twenty-five percent (25%)**.
** Does include accessory structures such as swimming pools,
cabanas, recreational buildings, etc. used exclusively for the
residents of the development.
f) Maximum building and parking area coverage: forty percent (40%).
g) The following are the minimum required buildable land area per
unit in square feet. In determining buildable land area, not more
than ten percent (10%) of the area that is subject to periodic or
seasonal flooding, per the most recent FEMA maps, shall be
counted. (Example: total land area twenty (20) acres of which five
(5) acres is subject to flooding net buildable land for determining
density is fifteen point five (15.5) acres.) The provisions of this
subparagraph shall supersede the provisions of Article IV, Section
B. Land Space Requirements Table.
(1) If served by an on site sewer system with effluent being
discharged into an on site absorption field, the minimum
buildable land area per unit in square feet is as follows:
ZONE
1
BEDROOM
2
BEDROOM
3
BEDROOM
EACH
ADDITIONAL
BEDROOM
R-10 2,500 4,000 5,000 1,500
R-20 &
WD
5,000 8,000 10,000 3,000
R-30 7,500 12,000 15,000 4,500
R-40 10,000 16,000 20,000 6,000
(2) If served by sewer system plant or public sewer system with
effluent being discharged into an offsite absorption field the
minimum buildable land area per unit in square feet is as
follows:
ZONE
1
BEDROOM
2
BEDROOM
3
BEDROOM
EACH
ADDITIONAL
BEDROOM
R-10 1,875 2,800 3,750 1,000
R-20 &
WD
3,750 5,500 7,500 2,000
R-30 5,625 8,500 11,250 3,000
R-40 7,500 11,250 15,000 4,000
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:762
NOTE: Any room such as a den, playroom, etc. is to be
considered as a bedroom for this purpose.
h) On site sewerage systems approval by the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management is not required
hereunder (but is, however, required prior to issuance of a building
permit).
i) Sewage system.
(1) Public sanitary sewers shall be designed so as to ensure a selfcleaning
velocity of not less than two and one half feet (2.5')
per second nor more than ten feet (10') per second.
Computation of sewage and sewage flow calculation shall be
submitted.
j) Maximum Building Height: two and one-half (2 1/2) Stories, not to
exceed thirty-five feet (35').
k) Drainage.
(1) The developer shall provide for adequate drainage and shall
further provide that the rate of runoff from the property shall
not increase during construction or after completion of the
development to the detriment of surrounding properties. If the
retention of water is deemed necessary, then the retention
areas shall be provided prior to construction of any buildings
or the surfacing of any areas. The engineer shall submit on
separate sheets all computations in determining rates of runoff
and shall base all calculations on a ten (10) year storm
frequency using the TR-55 method for determining total storm
water runoff. These computations shall be prepared by an
engineer registered in the State of Rhode Island and he shall
affix his seal to the required documents.
l) Water.
(1) Computation of water usage and a statement of water
availability shall be submitted. Written evidence of permission
to connect to a public water supply shall be delivered to the
Building Inspector prior to issuance of a building permit.
m) Parkingi (see provisions in Article IX).
n) Open space.
(1) Open space shall be provided in appropriate places and every
effort shall be made to preserve wooded areas or other site
amenities.
o) Building design and location.
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:763
(1) Where more than one (1) building is erected on a lot it shall be
separated from any other building by a minimum of one
hundred feet (100') and all buildings shall be set back a
minimum of fifty-five feet (55') from the centerline of any
interior way and thirty feet (30') from any parking area.
(2) Town House or attached dwelling: No row of attached
buildings shall contain less than three (3) nor more than eight
(8) units and the minimum width between party walls shall be
not less than eighteen feet (18').
(3) No apartment building shall be less than sixty feet (60') in
length. No facade or any apartment building shall exceed one
hundred sixty linear feet (160') without a building jog of at
least forty-five degrees (45°) for a two (2) wing building or
thirty degrees (30°) for a three (3) wing building.
(4) No one (1) building shall contain more than twenty-four (24)
units.
p) All interior roadways and parking areas shall be constructed in
accordance with the "Construction Standard for Streets" of the
"Rules and Regulations Regarding the Platting or other Subdivision
of Land" of the Town of Portsmouth.206
q) Access and egress.
(1) For each lot there shall be not more than one (1) entrance and
exit driveway for each five hundred feet (500') of the existing
street on which the lot faces. Said entrance and exit shall meet
the requirements of the State of Rhode Island Department of
Roads and Bridges and the Portsmouth Police and Highway
Departments.
r) Acceptable engineering standards shall prevail where no standards
are specified.
s) Fire lanes shall be provided for and approved by the Fire
Department.
t) All low and moderate income housing units proposed must be
integrated throughout the development; be compatible in scale and
architectural style to the market rate units within the project; and
be built and occupied prior to, or simultaneous with the
construction and occupancy of any market rate units.
11. The foregoing Development Standards including but not limited to the
parking, open space, building design and location and other standards
set forth herein and in Article IX may be modified and/or varied by the
Planning Board, per the provisions of Article VIII, Section B.
206. Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE Section F
C:764
12. Where these regulations may conflict with other regulations, the more
stringent regulation shall prevail.
Section F CHARTER Section F
C:765
Appendix
Chapter A408
AED POLICY
§ A408-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to provide guidance in the efficient and
effective administration of an AED program for the Town of Portsmouth.
§ A408-2. Background; intent.
§ A408-3. Objectives.
A. Each year, approximately 250,000 people die from sudden cardiac
arrest (SCA). SCA is a condition that occurs when the electrical
impulses of the human heart malfunction, causing a disturbance in the
heart's electrical rhythm called "ventricular fibrillation" (VF). This
erratic and ineffective electrical heart rhythm causes complete
cessation of the heart's normal function of pumping blood and results in
sudden death. The most effective treatment for this condition is the
administration of an electrical current to the heart delivered by a
defibrillator within a short time after the onset of VF. An AED is used to
treat victims who experience SCA. It is only to be applied to victims who
are unconscious and do not have a pulse, signs of circulation and
normal breathing. The AED will analyze the heart rhythm and advise
the operator if a shockable rhythm is detected. If a shockable rhythm is
detected, the AED will charge to the appropriate energy level and
advise the operator to deliver an electric shock.
B. The chance of survival decreases an estimated 10% each minute
without defibrillation even when prompt bystander cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) is initiated. The use of an AED is intended to
maximize the chance of survival based upon the steps taken during the
critical minutes before emergency medical services (EMS) providers
arrive and assume responsibility for the care of the patient. The
following policy and procedures are designed to direct trained
responders in the Town of Portsmouth to deliver early defibrillation to
victims of SCA.
C. The policy is intended to greatly increase the chance of survival of an
SCA prior to the arrival of the local EMS. This policy does not create an
obligation to use the AED's nor create an expectation that either an
AED or trained employee will be present at every event.
A. Establish an AED program task force comprised of local Town, school
and emergency medical services personnel to provide effective AED
utilization.
B. Educate personnel to recognize the signs and symptoms of SCA.
Section F PORTSMOUTH CODE § A408-3
C:766
§ A408-4. Adoption of policy.
In recognition of the value of administering defibrillation promptly and
appropriately, the Town Council has authorized the purchase of AEDs and
hereby adopts this policy to provide program guidance and assist trained
volunteers in the event of an SCA situation.
§ A408-5. Assignment of Program Coordinators; contact
information.
Deputy Chief Robert Church and firefighter Kevin Jenks are designated
as Program Coordinators and are available to answer any questions
concerning the AED Policy. They may be contacted as follows:
Robert
Church
Fire
Department
683-1200 Mobile: 714-3567
Kevin Jenks Fire
Department
683-1200 Mobile: 640-6645
Fax: 683-1206
§ A408-6. Program Coordinator responsibilities.
Specific Program Coordinator responsibilities are as follows: selection of
equipment and volunteers for AED training, distribution of AED-trained
lists, coordination of training for emergency responders, maintenance of
equipment and accessories, retention of a specifications/technical
information sheet for each approved AED model, consultation/coordination
with local emergency medical services (EMS), revision of this policy as
required, monitoring the effectiveness of this program and communication
with the Medical Advisor on issues related to the medical emergency
response program, including post-event reviews.
§ A408-7. Medical Advisor.
The Medical Advisor for the AED program is David Johnson, M.D., 161
Chase Road, Portsmouth, RI 02871, Telephone: 401-683-3300. He/she will
provide medical oversight of the AED program, including the following:
writing prescriptions for AEDs, reviewing and approving guidelines for
emergency procedures related to the use of AEDs and CPR in accordance
with state and local laws, assisting in coordinating the program with the
local EMS and assisting in a post-event review with all responders involved.
§ A408-8. Notification of local EMS.
EMS in the Town is responsible for on-scene delivery of emergency medical
care. The Program Coordinators will notify rescue personnel of deployment
and location of AEDs.
C. Educate personnel in the appropriate use of AED. Provide training and
certification in CPR/AED for interested individuals.
§ A408-3 CHARTER § A408-9
C:767
§ A408-9. Authorized AED users.
AEDs may be used by the following certified personnel:
§ A408-10. Training.
§ A408-11. Trained volunteer responsibilities.
In the event of an emergency medical situation, the trained volunteer
is to activate the external emergency response by directing someone to
call 911. Trained volunteers should recognize the signs of SCA, start CPR
immediately, locate and use the defibrillator and care for the victim until the
EMS team arrives. See Appendix B for details of the protocol.
§ A408-12. Selection of equipment.
The Program Coordinators have selected the Zoll AED Plus as the preferred
AED. This model has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) and includes product features that add speed, reliability, and
A. Any trained volunteer responder who has successfully completed an
approved AED/CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) training program
and holds a current health care provider card or a Heartsaver/AED
course completion card.
B. Any professional rescuer who is currently certified according to the
guidelines of a nationally recognized program such as the American
Heart Association, the American Red Cross or the National Safety
Council.
A. Training classes should meet the guidelines of a nationally recognized
program, such as the American Heart Association, the American Red
Cross or the National Safety Council.
B. To meet the need for lay rescuer training, the American Heart
Association has developed a course called "Heartsaver AED for Lay
Rescuers and First Responders." This eight- to ten-hour course teaches
volunteers to recognize the warning signs of heart attack, perform CPR
and use an AED.
C. All participants successfully completing the course receive an American
Heart Association Heartsaver AED course completion card with a
recommended renewal date of two years from the date of issue.
D. Retraining in AED/CPR should occur at least every two years, sooner if
equipment, policies or procedures change. Trained volunteers are
strongly encouraged to renew AED/CPR training at least every two
years.
E. A mock "cardiac arrest drill" will take place at each facility with an AED.
The annual drill will be scheduled and monitored by the Program
Coordinators. See Appendix A for the form to be used.
§ A408-9 PORTSMOUTH CODE § A408-12
C:768
confidence to the responder team. A list of FDA-approved AEDs is available
at www.americanheart.org/cpr.
§ A408-13. Additional resuscitation equipment.
Each AED will have one set of defibrillation electrodes connected to the
device and one spare set of electrodes with the AED bag. Two sets of infant/
child electrodes should also be included in the AED bag. One resuscitation
kit will be connected to the handle of the AED. This kit contains two pairs
of latex-free gloves, one razor, one set of trauma shears, and one face mask
barrier device.
§ A408-14. Quantity and location of AEDs.
When deciding where to place an AED and how many are needed, the
Program Coordinators shall use a three-minute response time as a guideline
to help determine the number of AEDs needed and the appropriate
location(s).
§ A408-15. Equipment maintenance.
A. The following are the initial location assignments:
(1) Portsmouth Town Hall: south entrance, lobby wall to the left of the
Council Chambers.
(2) Portsmouth Senior Center: The AED program is to be implemented
as soon as CPR/AED training is completed. Location is to be
determined.
(3) Portsmouth High School: The AED program is to be implemented
as soon as CPR/AED training is completed. Location is to be
determined.
(4) Melville Elementary School: The AED program is to be
implemented as soon as CPR/AED training is completed and AEDs
are purchased. Location is to be determined.
(5) Sandy Point Beach: The AED will be located at the facility during
the beach operating season. The AED will be stationed at the head
lifeguard chair with appropriate signage during the facility's
operating hours. The AED and locator signage will be stored and
secured in the bathhouse during nonoperational hours.
B. The AED will be stored at the Portsmouth Fire Department for possible
redeployment during the off season. Notification of redeployment will
be made by the Program Coordinators.
A. All equipment and accessories necessary for supporting the medical
emergency response shall be maintained in a state of readiness. The
AED Program Coordinators or designee shall be responsible for having
regular equipment maintenance performed. All maintenance tasks shall
§ A408-12 CHARTER § A408-15
C:769
§ A408-16. Post-event review and documentation.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1976 Code to 2013 Code.
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2013 Code
Charter Charter
Ch. 1, General Provisions Ch. 1, Art. I
be performed according to equipment maintenance procedures as
outlined in the manufacturer's operating instructions.
B. A volunteer, assigned by the AED Program Coordinators or designee,
will perform a monthly AED check as described in Appendix C. The AED
will perform a self-diagnostic test that includes a check of battery
strength and an evaluation of the internal components. The volunteer
will initial the checklist at the completion of the monthly check. The
checklist will be stored with the AED.
C. Following the use of emergency response equipment, the Program
Coordinators will ensure that all equipment is cleaned and/or
decontaminated as required. The Program Coordinators will provide
one red biohazard bag for expendable equipment/supplies. The
Program Coordinators will replace pads, pocket masks and other
related resuscitation supplies that were used. The Program
Coordinators will complete the AED maintenance checklist as described
in Appendix C and return the AED to a state of readiness.
A. Following each AED use, a review shall be conducted to provide lessons
learned from the experience. The Program Coordinators or designee
shall conduct and document the post-event review. All key participants
in the event shall participate in the review. Included in the review shall
be the identification of actions that were beneficial, opportunities for
improvement, a critical incident stress debriefing, response time
evaluation and strategies for improvement.
B. The Program Coordinators will develop a summary of the post-event
review and send a copy to the Medical Advisor. The AED Program
Coordinators shall maintain a copy of the post-event review summary.
§ A408-15 PORTSMOUTH CODE § DT-1
C:770
Chapter/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2013 Code
Ch. 2, Administration
§§ 2-1 to 2-5 (Reserved) Omitted
§§ 2-6 to 2-9, Planning Board Ch. 10, Art. II
Ch. 3, Animals and Fowl
§§ 3-1 to 3-5 (Reserved) Omitted
§§ 3-6 to 3-8, Dogs Superseded by Ord. No. 83-7; see
now Ch. 101, Art. I
Ch. 4, Buildings REP
Ch. 5, Earth Removal Ch. 155
Ch. 6, Electricity REP
Ch. 7, Finance and Taxation
§§ 7-1 to 7-5 (Reserved) Omitted
§§ 7-6 to 7-9, Authority of Town
Council
REP
§§ 7-10 to 7-14, Grant REP
Ch. 8, Fire Protection Repealed by Ord. No. 83-8; see
now Ch. 124
Ch. 9, Garages and Gasoline Stations Ch. 206, Art. I
Ch. 10, Garbage and Refuse
§§ 10-1 and 10-2; 10-4 to 10-10 Ch. 326, Art. II
§ 10-3 Ch. 243
Ch. 11, Health and Sanitation Ch. 326, Art. I
Ch. 12, Housing Ch. 288
Ch. 13, Licenses and Business
Regulations
§ 13-1, Yard Sales Ch. 397
§§ 13-2 to 13-5 (Reserved) Omitted
§§ 13-6 to 13-17, Junk and
Secondhand Dealers
Ch. 230
§§ 13-18 to 13-24, Hawkers and
Peddlers
Ch. 274, Art. I
§§ 13-25 to 13-44, Manufacturing,
Processing and Storage of Petroleum
Products
Repealed by Ord. No. 95-9-26
Ch. 14, Motor Vehicles and Traffic
§ 14-1 Ch. 250, Art. V
§ 14-2 REP
§§ 14-3 to 14-5 Ch. 250, Art. III
§ DT-1 CHARTER § DT-1
C:771
Chapter/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2013 Code
§§ 14-6 to 14-7 Ch. 250, Art. I
§ 14-8 REP
§ 14-9 Ch. 250, Art. II
§§ 14-10 to 14-14 Ch. 250, Art. IV
§ 14-15 Repealed by Ord. No. 119
Ch. 15, Offenses — Miscellaneous
§ 15-1 REP
§ 15-2 Repealed by Ord. No. 120
§§ 15-3, 15-5, 15-6 and 15-11 Ch. 177, Art. III
§ 15-4 Ch. 177, Art. II
§ 15-7 Ch. 268, Art. I
§ 15-8 REP
§ 15-9 REP
§ 15-10 REP
§ 15-12 Ch. 177, Art. I
Ch. 16, Plumbing REP
Ch. 17, Recreation Ch. 10, Art. I
Ch. 18, Signs and Advertising
Structures
REP
Ch. 19, Streets and Sidewalks
§§ 19-1 to 19-5 (Reserved) Omitted
§§ 19-6 to 19-8 Ch. 183
§ 19-9 Ch. 339, Art. I
§§ 19-10 to 19-14 Ch. 339, Art. III
§§ 19-15 to 19-16 Ch. 339, Art. II
§§ 19-17 to 19-19 Repealed by Ord. No. 95-11-6B;
see now Ch. 118
Ch. 21, Zoning NI; see Ch. 405
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DT-1 PORTSMOUTH CODE § DL-1
C:772
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-10-22 10-22-2012 Stormwater
management: illicit
connections and
discharges to storm
sewers amendment
Ch. 336, Art. I
Referendum
vote
11-6-2012 Charter amendment §§ 103, 210, 304,
506, 603, 605, 801,
908A
2013-01-30 1-30-2013 Appropriations NCM
2013-02-11A 2-11-2013 Wastewater
management districts
Ch. 392
2013-02-11B 2-11-2013 Feeding of
nondomesticated
animals
Ch. 101, Art. IV
2013-03-11 3-11-2013 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
2013-06-24 6-24-2013 Tax levy NCM
2013-08-26A 8-26-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 405
2013-08-26B 8-26-2013 Municipal Court Ch. 12
2014-01-13 1-13-2014 Harbormaster ordinance
amendment
Ch. 215
2014-05-12 5-12-2014 Taxation: adjustments of
exemption during Townwide
reevaluation years
amendment
Ch. 352, Art. XI
2014-06-23 6-23-2014 Tax levy NCM
2014-07-14 7-14-2014 Nuisances: maintenance
of trees overhanging
public streets
Ch. 260, Art. II
2014-9-22 9-22-2014 Capital improvement
bonds
NCM
2015-02-23 2-23-2015 Purchasing amendment Ch. 50
2015-05-26 5-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 405
2015-06-08 6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 405
2015-06-22 6-22-2015 Tax levy NCM
2015-09-21 9-21-2015 Wastewater
Management District
Ch. 392
2015-09-28 9-28-2015 Rescinding borrowing
authorizations
NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:773
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-01-11A 1-11-2016 Tobacco products
amendment
Ch. 364
2016-01-11B 1-11-2016 Peddling and soliciting:
hawkers and peddlers
amendment
Ch. 274, Art. I
2016-07-11 7-11-2016 Noise amendment Ch. 257
2016-09-14 9-14-2016 Animals: general animal
regulations amendment;
Portsmouth Dog Park
Ch. 101, Art. I; Ch.
101, Art. V
11-8-2016 Charter Amendment § 501
2017-03-13 3-13-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 405
2017-05-08 5-8-2017 Taxation: Adjustments of
Exemption During Town-
Wide Reevaluation Years
Amendment
Ch. 352, Art. XI
2017-08-15 8-15-2017 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic: Parking
Prohibited in Certain
Areas Amendment
Ch. 250, Art. I
1-10-2018 Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 236
2018-03-12 3-12-2018 Solid Waste: Plastic
Bags
Ch. 326, Art. VI
2018-04-09 4-9-2018 Short-Term Rental of
Residential Dwellings
Ch. 314
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2018-09-10 9-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 405 2
2018-10-09 10-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 405 2
2019-02-25 2-25-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 405 2
2019-10-15
A
10-15-2019 Alarms Amendment Ch. 83 2
2019-10-15
B
10-15-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 170 2
§ DL-1 PORTSMOUTH CODE § DL-1
C:774
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2019-12-09 12-9-2019 Peddling and
Soliciting: Hawkers
and Peddlers
Amendment; Mobile
Food
Establishments
Ch. 274,
Art. I; Ch.
274, Art. IV
2
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:775