CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF WEST WARWICK, RHODE ISLAND 
____________ 
Adopted, August 11, 1970 
Effective, September 1, 1970 
____________ 
Published 1996 by Order of the Town Council 
Revised in accordance with West Warwick Home Rule Charter, Section 2203, June 19, 2018. 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF WEST WARWICK, RHODE ISLAND 
2018 
____________ 
David Gosselin, Jr., President 
John F. D'Amico, Vice President 
Jason E. Licciardi 
Jason K. Messier 
Maribeth Q. Williamson 
Town Council 
____________ 
Ernest M. Zmyslinski 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Marianne Kelly 
Town Clerk 
____________ 
Timothy A. Williamson Law Offices 
Town Solicitor 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF WEST WARWICK, RHODE ISLAND 
AT THE TIME OF CODIFICATION 
1970 
____________ 
Anthony L. Santilli 
President 
____________ 
Raymond N. Silva 
Bernard F. Magiera 
David C. Brindamour 
Joseph D. Messier 
Councilmen 
____________ 
John S. Brunero 
Town Solicitor 
____________ 
Mrs. Margaret E. Conlon 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This volume contains the Code of Ordinances of West Warwick, Rhode Island, as adopted by the town council on August 11, 1970, as amended. 
    In 1996, the Town of West Warwick contracted with Municipal Code Corporation to republish the Code of Ordinances in order to provide replacement copies in a new double column format. As part of the republication process, new ordinances were incorporated and chapters which had been included as fractional chapters were converted to decimal numbers. Future chapters should be added between existing chapters and given decimal numbers. Subsequent supplements to this new volume should commence with Supplement No. 1. 
    The Code has been republished as adopted and amended and the original numbering system was retained, excepted as noted above. The text is unaltered, except that obvious typographical errors have been corrected, in a few instances material has been added by the editors and enclosed in brackets, and a uniform style of expressing numbers in text was imposed. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLES SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 SPECIAL ACTS INDEX SAi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Linda G. Davis, Supervising Editor, and Mary Grace Tavel, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to David D. Clayton, Town Clerk, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island. 1996. 
    For the convenience of the users of this volume, the text of the original preface is reprinted below: 
This volume contains the special acts pertaining to the Town, along with a complete codification of the ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted by the Council. The Code contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature prescribed for and affecting the public as a whole, except as otherwise provided herein. Special ordinances or ordinances dealing with only a portion of the inhabitants of the Town, or relating to special purposes, such as levying special assessments, vacating streets, making appropriations, etc., are not included herein. For a more complete listing of the types of ordinances not included, see Section 3 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourth section of Chapter 19 is 19-4. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time, new sections may be inserted in their proper places simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4-4 and 4-5 is desired to be added, the new sections would be numbered 4-4.1, 4-4.2, 4-4.3. New chapters may be included by the addition of a fraction after the chapter number. Thus, if the new material is to be included between Chapter 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 121/2. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way, or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing. With this looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Codes with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof as provided in Section 6 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them, and that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference. 
The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which serve as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and C. Julian Manson, Code Editor-in-Chief, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to the Town Solicitor, Mr. John S. Brunero, the Assistant Town Solicitor, Mr. David Lussier, and the Council Clerk, Mrs. Margaret E. Conlon, for their supervision, cooperation and interest during the progress of the work on this Code. 
This Code is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of the Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
August, 1970 
LEGAL NOTICE 
_____ 
TOWN OF WEST WARWICK 
_____ 
    NOTICE is hereby given that the Galley Proofs of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of West Warwick will be opened for Public Inspection during regular business hours at the Town Clerk's Office, 1170 Main Street, West Warwick, Rhode Island, daily commencing Wednesday, July 29, 1970. 
    And that 
    It is hereby Ordained by the Town Council of the Town of West Warwick, as follows: 
    The text of the Ordinances herewith appended is hereby enacted, together with amendments, corrections and additions. Effective: September 1, 1970. 
    And that the following Ordinance will be adopted at a meeting of the Town Council of the Town of West Warwick to be held on the 11th day of August, A.D. 1970 at 8 o'clock P.M.: 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Effective Date of Such Code and a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
It is Ordained by the Town Council of the Town of West Warwick as Follows: 
    Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 19, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the Council on or before November 6, 1969, except such as are by reference thereto saved from repeal or continued in effect. 
    Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 1st day of September, 1970. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 1 hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance: 
(a)  Affecting the boundaries of the Town; 
(b)  Vacating, abandoning, or accepting any street, alley or easement; 
(c)  Relating to any specific local improvement; 
(d)  Authorizing, directing or ratifying any purchase or sale; 
(e)  Approving or accepting any subdivision or plat; 
(f)  Authorizing or directing the issuance of any bonds or other evidence of indebtedness; 
(g)  Authorizing or directing the making of any investment; 
(h)  Making or otherwise affecting any appropriations; 
(i)  Levying or otherwise affecting any taxes, not inconsistent herewith; 
(j)  Relating to franchises; 
(k)  Pertaining to zoning or rezoning; 
(l)  Regulating or restricting traffic or parking on particular streets or in particular locations in the Town, not inconsistent herewith. 
    Section 4. The repeal provided for by Section 1 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 5. Whenever in the Code adopted hereby any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of such Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty dollars ($20.00), or by imprisonment of not more than ten (10) days. Each day any violation of such Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
    Section 6. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section 7. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 5 of this ordinance and Section 1-10 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or, in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 8. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the Town Clerk may consider most expedient; and shall be available for public inspection during regular working hours. Copies of such Code shall be printed and made available to the public at a reasonable charge as fixed by resolution of the Council. It shall be the express duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized by her, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the Council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
    Section 9. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
    Section 10. That this ordinance shall become effective the 1st day of September, 1970. 
    PER ORDER OF THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF WEST WARWICK. 
BY:  Margaret E. Conlon      
Council Clerk  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. Charter amendments of 11-2-10 Included 8 2009-1 Included 8 2009-3 Included 8 2009-4 Included 8 2009-5 Included 8 2009-7 Included 8 2009-9 Included 8 2009-11 Included 8 2009-12 Included 8 2009-13 Included 8 2009-14 Included 8 2010-1 Included 8 2010-5 Included 8 2010-6 Included 8 2010-7 Included 8 2010-8 Omitted 8 2010-9 Omitted 8 2010-11 Included 8 2009-9 Included 9 2010-12 Omitted 9 2010-13 Omitted 9 2010-14 Included 9 2011-1 Omitted 9 2011-2 Included 9 2011-3 Omitted 9 2011-4 Omitted 9 2011-5 Omitted 9 2011-6 Omitted 9 2011-7 Omitted 9 2011-8 Omitted 9 2011-10 Omitted 9 2011-11 Omitted 9 2011-13 Included 9 2011-14 Omitted 9 2011-15 Omitted 9 2011-16 Omitted 9 2011-17 Omitted 9 2011-18 Omitted 9 2011-19 Omitted 9 2011-20 Included 9 2011-23 Included 9 2011-24 Omitted 9 2011-25 Included 9 2012-3 Included 10 2012-4 Included 10 2012-5 Included 10 2012-6 Included 10 2012-7 Omitted 10 2012-8 Omitted 10 2012-11 Included 10 2013-1 Included 10 2013-2 Included 10 2013-3 Included 10 2013-5 Omitted 10 2013-43 Included 10 2013-44 Included 10 2013-45 Included 10 2013-46 Included 10 2013-48 Included 10 2013-49 Included 10 2013-51 Included 10 2013-52 Included 10 2013-53 Included 10 2013-180 Included 10 2013-192 Included 10 2014-1 Included 11 2014-2 Omitted 11 2014-3 Omitted 11 2014-4 Included 11 2014-5 Omitted 11 2014-6 Omitted 11 2014-7 Omitted 11 2014-8 Included 11 2014-9 Included 11 2014-10 Included 11 2014-11 Omitted 11 2014-12 Included 11 2014-13 Omitted 11 2014-16 Included 11 2014-17 Included 11 2014-19 Omitted 11 2014-20 Included 11 Charter amendments of 11-4-14 Included 12 2014-3 Omitted 12 2014-158 (Res.) Included 12 2015-1 Omitted 13 2015-3 Omitted 13 2015-4 Included 13 2015-5 Included 13 2015-6 Included 13 2015-7 Included 13 2015-8 Included 13 2015-9 Omitted 13 2015-11 Omitted 13 2015-12 Omitted 13 2015-41 (Res.) Included 13 2015-183 (Res.) Included 13 2015-194 (Res.) Included 13 2015-13 Included 13-Addition 2015-14 Included 13-Addition 2015-15 Omitted 13-Addition 2015-17 Included 14 2015-18 Included 14 2016-1 Included 14 2016-3 Included 14 2016-7 Included 14 2016-8 Included 14 2016-9 Included 14 2016-10 Included 14 2016-11 (Res.) Included 14 2016-12 Included 14 2016-13 Included 14 2016-14 Included 14 2016-15 Included 14 2016-34 (Res.) Included 14 2016-58 (Res.) Included 14 2016-59 (Res.) Included 14 2016-107 (Res.) Included 14 2016-137 (Res.) Included 14 2017-1 Included 14 2017-2 Included 14 2017-3 Included 14 2017-4 Included 14 2017-5 Included 14 2017-6 Included 14 2017-7 Included 14 2017-8 Included 14 2017-10 Included 14 2017-12 (Res.) Included 14 2017-12 Included 14 2017-13 Included 14 2017-14 Included 14 2017-16 Included 14 2017-18 Included 15 2017-19 Included 15 2017-20 Included 15 2017-21 Included 15 2017-22 Included 15 2017-23 Included 15 2017-25 Included 15 2017-27 Included 15 2017-68(Res.) Included 15 2017-96(Res.) Included 15 2017-105(Res.) Included 15 2017-106(Res.) Included 15 2018-1 Included 15 2018-2 Included 15 2018-3 Included 15 2018-4 Included 15 2018-6 Included 15 2018-7 Included 15 2018-8 Included 15 2018-9 Included 15 2018-10 Included 15 2018-11 Included 15 2018-12 Included 15 2018-14 Included 15 2018-15 Included 15 2018-16(Res.) Included 15 2018-17 Included 15 2018-18 Included 15 2018-19 Included 15 2018-27(Res.) Included 15 2018-41(Res.) Included 15 2018-57(Res.) Included 15 2018-78(Res.) Included 15 2018-83(Res.) Included 15 2018-99(Res.) Included 15 2018-114(Res.) Included 15  
PART I - WEST WARWICK HOME RULE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This part contains the Home Rule Charter of the Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island, approved by the electorate at the November 4, 1986 General Election and the amendments approved by the electorate at the February 8, 1994 Special Election, and the General Election of November 5, 1996. All amendments to the Charter will be indicated by a history note parenthetically enclosed following the affected sections; conversely, absence of such notation indicates a derivation from the original publication. Any words inserted in the text for clarification are enclosed in brackets [ ]. 

ARTICLE I. - BASIC PROVISIONS 

101. - Inhabitants incorporated as town with powers and duties of a town. 
    The inhabitants of the Town of West Warwick, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the "Town of West Warwick," and as such shall continue to have, exercise and enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers, privileges and franchises, and shall be subject to all the duties and obligations, now incumbent upon or appertaining to said town as municipal corporation, or by virtue of the laws of this state so far as the same shall not be altered by this Charter or amendments thereof. The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive; and in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the town shall have and may exercise all powers which, under the Constitution of this state, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. 
102. - Form of government. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of this Charter and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this Charter, all powers of the town, except those powers vested in and exercised by the financial town meeting, shall be vested in an elected town council, which shall enact local legislation, and in a town manager appointed by the town council, who shall be responsible for the execution of the laws and the administration of the town government in accordance with the provisions of this Charter, the Constitution of the State of Rhode Island, and the laws enacted by the General Assembly of Rhode Island. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
103. - Joint activities with other governments. 
    The town shall have power to join with any other municipal corporation, special district, or with any other unit or agency or government, or with any number or combination thereof, by contract or otherwise, in the ownership, operation, or performance, jointly or by one (1) or more on behalf of all, of any property, facility, or service which each would have the power to own, operate, or perform separately. 
104. - Town appointed boards, commissions, committees and authorities. 
(A)  Subject to the approval of the town council, all appointed boards, commissions, committees and authorities of town government shall adopt bylaws and/or rules necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers granted to such public body by the Town Charter, the ordinances of the town or state law. All bylaws/rules shall at a minimum address: conduct of meetings, attendance and election of officers at least annually. 
(B)  Any official appointed by the town council to any board, commission, committee or authority shall be removed from office by the town council if said official fails to attend scheduled meeting for a period of three (3) consecutive meetings without the express(ed) written leave of the chairperson of such public body. 
Editor's note- This section is added by Question 12 approved at November 5, 1996 General Election. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS AND CANVASSING AUTHORITY 

201. - Conduct of elections. 
    Elections for all town offices which are filled by the vote of the electors of the town, shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each even numbered year, provided however, that special elections shall be scheduled as provided by law. All such town elections shall be conducted pursuant to applicable provisions of the elections laws of the state. 
202. - Canvassers, composition. 
    There shall be a bipartisan canvassing authority appointed by the council as provided by the Constitution and laws of the state. The canvassing authority shall be known as the board of canvassers, and shall be vested with all the powers and duties now or hereafter vested by law in the canvassing authority or board of canvassers of the town. All members of said authority or board now in office shall continue as members thereof until their successors have been appointed and qualified. All members shall be qualified electors and residents of the town during their term of office. 
203. - Districting. 
    It shall be the duty of the board of canvassers within one (1) year after each decennial federal census, or more frequently to review and if necessary to alter, the ward boundary lines designated for the election of members of the town council, in such manner that each of the five (5) wards shall comprise compact and contiguous territory, contain as nearly as is practical equal populations, and have well defined boundaries. 
ARTICLE III. - TOWN MANAGER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- This article is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 

301. - Appointment. 
    The town manager shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the town council, which shall fix the compensation, benefits and other terms of employment of the town manager. The town council may utilize a search process in selecting a town manager. The first town manager shall assume office not sooner than the first Monday following the certification of election of a majority of the members of the town council by the canvassing authority (the "Effective Date") in the election to be held on November 8, 1994. The mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the town until the Effective Date, which shall be the end of the term of office of the mayor. For the purpose of facilitating and encouraging a smooth and efficient transition from a mayoral to a managerial form of government, the town council may employ the first town manager on or after October 1, 1994. 
302. - Employment relationship. 
    The employment relationship between the town council and the town manager will be based on applicable principles of the International City Managers Association's Code of Ethics, as in effect from time to time, provided, however, that this section shall not limit the town council's authority to terminate the town manager, with or without cause, as set forth in Section 307. 
303. - Qualifications. 
    The town manager shall possess executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or her experience in or knowledge of accepted practice with respect to the duties of the office of town manager as hereinafter set forth. He or she shall either (a) hold a masters degree from an accredited institution in business or public administration and have at least three years' experience as manager of a city, town or county, or (b) have such education, experience and other attributes that, in the opinion of the town council, are comparable to the qualifications set forth in (a). The town manager need not be a resident of the town at the time of appointment, and may reside outside the town while in office only with the approval of the town council. 
304. - Employment prohibition. 
    The town manager shall devote his or her entire time and attention to the duties of town manager and shall not be actively engaged in any employment, business or the practice of any profession other than the office of town manager of the Town of West Warwick. 
305. - Assignment or assumption of duties. 
    The town manager, with the prior approval of the town council, may assume and perform, in addition to the duties of the office of town manager, any other administrative office or offices under his or her supervision but, by virtue of such action, shall not be entitled to additional compensation. The town manager, with the prior approval of the town council, may assign the duties of two or more administrative officers to one person or divide the duties of any office between two or more persons. 
306. - Acting town manager. 
    By letter filed with the town clerk, the town manager shall designate, subject to prior approval of the town council, a qualified officer of the town to exercise the powers and duties of the town manager during his or her temporary absence or disability for a period of thirty (30) days or less. If such absence or disability continues beyond thirty (30) days, the council may appoint an incumbent administrative officer of the town to be "acting manager" until such absence or disability shall cease. The acting town manager shall not make any appointments, without the prior approval of the town council. If such absence or disability continues beyond ninety (90) days, the town council may declare the position vacant and appoint a new town manager. 
307. - Suspension and removal. 
    The town manager may be suspended or removed, with or without cause, by a vote of not less than three (3) members of the town council. Any such action by the town council shall not be subject to review by any court, agency or other body. The town manager shall be paid through the effective date of removal, and shall not be compensated for any period of suspension. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at November 2, 2010 Election. 
308. - Powers and duties. 
    The town manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the town and shall be responsible to the town council for the administration and management of all town affairs placed in the manager's charge by the town council or pursuant to this Charter. He or she shall have control and supervision of all administrative departments, divisions, offices and agencies subject to his or her jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
    The town manager shall: 
(A)  Recommend to the town council the appointment of all officers, including department heads, and other employees of the town, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, law or personnel ordinance. 
(B)  When necessary for the good of the service, suspend or remove any officer, including any department head, and other employees of the town, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, law or personnel ordinance, subject to the approval of a majority of all members of the town council. 
(C)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the town council, together with a message describing its important features, and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(D)  Prepare and submit to the town council, not more than ninety (90) days following the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and the administrative affairs of the town for the preceding fiscal year. 
(E)  Keep the town council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the town and make such recommendations as he or she may deem desirable. 
(F)  Recommend to the town council a standard pay schedule for department heads and other administrative officers in the exempt service, including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates. 
(G)  Recommend to the town council adoption of such measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the town, for the improvement of administrative services or on any other appropriate matter. 
(H)  See that the terms and conditions imposed in favor of the town in any contract or franchise are faithfully kept and performed, and shall participate directly in all town labor contract negotiations with the exception of the School Department. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 2 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
(I)  See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced and that all licenses, permits and privileges granted by the town are faithfully preserved. 
(J)  Be responsible for care and preservation of the property and equipment of the town. 
(K)  Attend all meetings of the town council unless excused. 
(L)  Investigate the affairs of the town or any department, division or other segment thereof, as well as all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the town. 
(M)  Be responsible for the conduct and performance of all administrative functions and services which are not assigned to some other officer by this Charter, law or personnel ordinance, or by the town council. 
(N)  Coordinate the activities of all boards, commissions, and committees as may be directed by the town council. 
(O)  Perform such other duties as may be directed by the town council or are specified in this Charter. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOWN COUNCIL 

401. - Number, term, selection. 
    The Town Council shall consist of five (5) members, elected by the town by wards, said elections to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each even numbered year, commencing in November 2016 and every fourth year thereafter, two members, one each from Ward 4 and Ward 5 shall be elected to serve a four (4) year term, and at the General Election to be held in November 2018, and every fourth year thereafter, three (3) members shall be elected from the remaining three (3) Wards 1, 2 and 3 to serve a four year term. All members shall serve a four (4) year or until their individual successors are elected and qualified. 
Editor's note- This section is amended as approved at November 4, 2014 General Election. 
402. - Qualifications. 
    Members of the council as defined in this Charter shall at the time of their election and during their term of office be residents of the respective wards from and [sic] which they have been elected and qualified electors of the Town of West Warwick and shall hold no other paid public office or employment in the service of the town, except that of auctioneer. No member of the council shall be eligible to accept any other paid appointed town office during his or her term on the council or for a period of one (1) year thereafter. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 4 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
403. - Vacancies. 
(A)  A vacancy shall exist in the town council if a member dies, resigns, ceases to meet the qualifications for membership, is convicted of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude and has exhausted all appeals from said conviction, or is absent from four (4) consecutive months of council meetings, unless such absences are excused by a majority vote of the whole council membership, with reasons therefore stated at [the] time and appearing in the journal of the meetings from which the council member was excused. 
(B)  If a vacancy shall occur in the town council one (1) year or more prior to the regular election, a special election shall be called by the town clerk to take place within sixty (60) days after such vacancy has occurred, in the manner prescribed by state law. Any vacancy in the membership of the town council that shall occur less than one (1) calendar year prior to the regular election shall be filled for the unexpired term by the remaining members of the town council; provided that the one chosen by the town council to fill such vacancy shall be of the same political party as the prior incumbent, such political party allegiance to be verified in writing to the president of the town council by the town party committee of such political party. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 2 approved at November 2, 2010 Election. 
404. - Meetings. 
    The first meeting of a newly elected council shall be held on the first Monday following the certification of election of a majority of its members by the canvassing authority, at which session the newly elected members of the council shall assume the duties of their office. Regular meetings shall be held at least once each month for the transactions of business, at such time and place within the town as the council shall prescribe by ordinance. A special meeting of the town council shall be called by the town clerk on written request of the town council president, by not less than three (3) members of the council. Notice of a special meeting shall be in writing and delivered personally to each member, or to his or her place of residency, by the town clerk or a person designated by him or her, at least forty-eight (48) hours previous to the time of such meeting. The town council may meet upon shorter notice by majority consent of all its members, which shall be entered in the record of the proceedings. The purpose of a special meeting shall be stated in the notice of the meeting and no business shall be transacted at any special meeting other than that which has been stated in the notice. All meetings of the town council shall be open to the public, and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard, except that this provision shall not be deemed to prevent the holding of executive sessions permitted by state law, provided that all votes are taken in public. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved by the electorate at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
405. - Council offices. 
    The council shall elect one of its members as its president and another as vice president at its first meeting as defined in Section 404. The council president shall preside at meetings of the council and shall have a voice and vote in its proceedings. The vice president shall perform the duties of the president during the absence or disability of the president. In the absence of both the president and vice president, the council shall elect one of its members as acting president, who shall perform the duties of the president during the absence of both the president and the vice president. 
    The town council shall have the option of re-organization of the offices of president and vice-president after serving one year into their respective terms of office. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question approved at November 4, 2008 Election. 
406. - Compensation. 
    Members of the town council shall receive such annual salaries as shall from time to time be presented by the town council and approved by the budget process. The president of the town council shall receive such additional salary as shall from time to time be presented by the town council and approved by the budget process. No increase in salary shall take effect until after the next biennial election of the town council. 
407. - Powers. 
    The town council shall be the legislative determining body of the town, and shall exercise the powers of the town, as provided by this Charter, or by the Constitution and laws of this state. Among the powers of the council, to be exercised in accordance with relevant provisions of the Charter and of the Constitution and laws of this state shall be to: 
(A)  Determine its own rules and order of business and keep a journal of its proceedings which shall be open to public inspection in the office of the town clerk. 
(B)  Enact, amend, or repeal rules, ordinances and resolutions for the government of the town which shall have to do with the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, welfare and comfort of the inhabitants and the protection of persons and property, and other municipal functions. 
(C)  Provide reasonable penalties in accordance with law for the violation of any ordinances. 
(D)  Enact ordinances providing for levying taxes and other revenue and appropriate money for expenditures. 
(E)  Review and act upon the town budget in the manner prescribed in Article V. 
(F)  Fix the amount of official bonds of all nonelective officers of the town who, in its opinion, should be bonded, the premium on such bonds to be paid by the town. 
(G)  Inquire into any department, office, board, commission or other agency, excluding the school department, but not interfere with their normal administrative functions. 
(H)  Request, through the office of the town manager, the attendance of any officer of the town at its meetings within thirty (30) days. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(I)  Act upon all recommendations for appointments from the town manager for which town council confirmation is required. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(J)  Provide by ordinance for a personnel classification system in conformity with provisions of this Charter and applicable general and special laws. 
(K)  Review any special assessment upon request of a property owner and order correction or confirmation of the same. 
(L)  Enact and amend, after notice as prescribed by state law and public hearing, such zoning ordinances as it deems appropriate, providing such ordinances are in accordance with state law. 
(M)  Appoint such number of constables to serve civil process as it shall from time to time determine, and charge and collect for licenses issued to such constables such fees as the council shall fix by ordinance. 
(N)  Grant, suspend, or revoke licenses in accordance with state law. 
(O)  Provide for the audit of the town accounts at any time, or of the accounts of any of the town's departments, and to provide for an annual audit as hereinafter prescribed. 
(P)  Issue subpoenas to compel witnesses to testify and produce records as prescribed by state law. 
(Q)  Exercise powers, consistent and in accordance with the Charter and the laws and Constitution of the state, which have been or may hereafter be granted to the council by the Charter or to the town by the laws and Constitution of the state. 
(R)  Participate in person through one or more council members, and/or through the appointment of one or more designees, in the negotiation of all town labor contracts (other than school department contracts); provided, however, that no such contract shall become effective and binding on the town until it has received the prior approval of the town council subsequent to the completion of negotiations. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 5 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(S)  Whenever in this Charter an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Charter, the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided within this Charter; town ordinances, or under state or federal law, then the violation of any such provision of this Charter shall be punished by a fine as may be established by ordinance by the town council for the Town of West Warwick. Each day any violation of this Charter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Editor's note- This section is added by Question 16 Approved at November 5, 1996 General Election. 
408. - Quorum. 
    Three (3) members of the town council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. At least forty-eight (48) hours' notice shall be given to all members prior to the holding of an adjourned meeting. 
409. - Council procedure. 
(A)  The town council may act by rule, ordinance, or resolution. In addition to the case in which an ordinance is required by a specific provision of this Charter or any applicable state law, any action taken under provisions of Section 407(B), (C), (D), (J) and (L) shall be by ordinance only. 
(B)  Every proposed ordinance shall be filed with the town clerk by a member of the town council not later than three (3) business days previous to the day of the meeting at which it is to be introduced. The town clerk shall provide each member of the council forthwith with a copy thereof and shall post a copy of each ordinance in some place accessible to the public in the town hall. 
(C)  Every ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title. All ordinances shall begin with the words, "The Town of West Warwick Ordains." Every ordinance, other than an emergency ordinance, shall be read the first time by title, be explained by its introducer, and then referred to a subsequent regular meeting for action. If in the meantime a petition signed by at least twenty (20) qualified voters be filed with the town clerk requesting a public hearing, a public hearing shall be held at the meeting next following introduction of the ordinance, and no action shall be taken on the ordinance until the conclusion of the hearing. A public hearing shall be mandatory on any ordinance amending the zoning ordinance, adopting or amending a wage and classification plan or creating or amending a personnel classification system, and no such ordinance shall be passed as an emergency ordinance. Public hearings shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the town not less than three (3) nor more than seven (7) days prior to the hearing, and must be in conformity with the provisions of the laws of the state. 
(D)  The affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum shall be required for any official action of the council. The vote upon any ordinance shall be by roll call and entered on the record of the proceedings. A vote by roll call be taken on any matter at the request of any member. 
(E)  After passage, the town clerk shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, forthwith a notice describing the ordinance in brief and general terms, and stating that it is available for public inspection in the office of the town clerk. All ordinances shall be recorded by the clerk in a book called, "The Ordinance Book, " and it shall be the duty of the president of the council and the clerk to authenticate such record by their official signatures. 
(F)  Every ordinance, unless it shall specify another date, shall become effective at the expiration of twenty (20) days after publication following passage. 
(G)  In an emergency affecting the public peace, health, safety, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the town and for protection of persons and property, the council by an affirmative vote of three (3) members may adopt on the day of its introduction, without previous filing with the town clerk, an ordinance containing a declaration of emergency which shall take effect upon its passage. The nature of the emergency shall be specifically stated in the ordinance and such declaration shall be conclusive as to the existence of such emergency. Such emergency ordinance(s) shall be temporary and for the period of the emergency only and may authorize departments, offices and agencies of the town government to act outside and beyond the usual requirement of ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations. 
ARTICLE V. - BUDGET PROCESS 

501. - The fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the town shall begin on July 1st of each year, and end on June 30th of the following year. 
502. - Budget schedule and procedures. 
    The following provisions shall govern the preparation of the annual town budget: 
(A)  All departments, officials and agencies of the town, including the school committee, shall submit to the town manager and make available to the council, no later than the first Monday in February of each year, respective estimates for their capital and operating expenditures for the fiscal year beginning on the subsequent July 1st. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(B)  The town manager shall submit his or her budget to the town council no later than the third Monday in March. The budget submitted shall include the compensation that may be paid to all appointed officers, including board and commission members of the town, and stipulate the amount in each instance, except where specifically provided otherwise in this Charter. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(C)  The budget submitted by the town manager shall include: separate listings and totals for the capital and operating appropriations requested, respectively; comparisons with expenditures for the current fiscal year; a recommended tax rate for the town to fund the town's share of the total appropriations; a detailed listing of funds anticipated from the state and federal governments and other sources; together with such explanation of the budget and its several parts as the mayor may wish to provide. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(D)  On the same day that the budget is submitted to the council, there shall be made available copies thereof at the town hall to be furnished to interested citizens upon request. 
(E)  Upon receipt of the budget, the council shall make provision for no less than two (2) public hearings thereon, to be held on separate days, and to be concluded no later than the third Monday in April. Notice of said hearings shall be advertised on at least three (3) separate days in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, the final such advertisement to appear no less than three (3) days prior to the first hearing date. The council shall also cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town a summary of major expenditure categories appearing in the budget with the recommended appropriations compared to current authorized expenditures, said publication to appear no less than five (5) days prior to the first public hearing. 
(F)  The council may make any changes in the budget as submitted by the town manager which it shall think proper, provided however that it shall not have the authority to change any item in the school budget except the overall total amount, and provided further that the budget when approved by the council shall show a balance between authorized appropriations and anticipated receipts. The council shall complete action on the budget for submission thereof to the financial town meeting no later than the first Monday in May. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(G)  The council shall again cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town a budget summary as provided in subsection (E) of this section, showing any changes it shall have made in the budget as submitted by the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
503. - Financial town meeting. 
    Unless otherwise authorized by state law, the annual financial town meeting shall convene on the third Tuesday in May at such time and place as shall be prescribed by the town council. All financial town meetings shall be conducted and shall have the powers as prescribed by state law, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. At the financial town meeting, the town council will explain and officially propose its budget and any other issue(s) requiring a vote by registered West Warrick voters. The school committee may be invited by the town council to discuss its budget estimate which is part of the overall budget for West Warrick. On the first Thursday following the financial town meeting an all day referendum shall be held allowing registered voters to either approve or disapprove the budget and any other issue(s) requiring a vote. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 3 approved at November 2, 2010 Election. 
504. - Failure to complete budget. 
    In the event that the budget shall not have received final approval by the start of the fiscal year, the departments, officials and agencies of the town shall have the authority to continue making expenditures at the rates authorized in the budget of the previous fiscal year until such a time as a new budget shall have been approved. 
505. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    The town manager may at any time authorize the transfer of any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one classification of expenditure to another within the same department, office or agency or board or commission, provided that the existence of the balance proposed or to be transferred is certified in writing by the director of finance. At the request of the town manager, but only within the last three (3) months on the fiscal year, the town council may by ordinance transfer any portion of an unencumbered appropriation balance certified in writing by the director of finance from one department, office, agency, board or commission to another except that no such transfer shall be made from the appropriation of the school department. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
506. - Unexpended and unencumbered balances. 
    At the end of each fiscal year all unexpended or unencumbered balances and appropriations for that fiscal year shall revert to the general funds of the town unless reappropriated in the budget for the ensuing fiscal year. 
507. - Investment of idle funds. 
    Investment of all funds shall be made through national banks or trust companies, providing that the financial conditions and integrity of said institution or institutions are verifiable and can be monitored. The investment of funds shall be in direct obligations of the United States Government and "money market instruments" rated A or better. Investment in any one institution shall not exceed five (5) percent of that institution's capital and surplus as set forth in the institution's most recent audited financial statements. All investments will be made as would be done by prudent men of discretion and intelligence in such matters who are seeking a reasonable income and preservation of their capital. 
508. - Balanced budget. 
    The budget of the Town of West Warwick shall be balanced for each fiscal year so that total expenditures shall not be greater than total receipts. If any time during the fiscal year the town manager shall determine that actual revenue receipts will not equal the original estimates upon which the budget was based, the town manager, for purpose of maintaining a balanced budget, shall recommend to the town council such reductions or suspension in the appropriations for any or all departments, offices or other agencies of the town government as will, in the town manager's opinion, prevent the occurrence of a deficit. However, there shall be no reductions or appropriations for the town debt payments or the retirement fund or lease purchasing contractual obligations to balance the town budget. The town council shall by ordinance either approve the same in whole or part or make such other reductions or suspensions in total equal to that proposed by the town manager as will prevent the occurrence of a deficit. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
509. - Cash reserve fund. 
    The town council shall provide for a cash reserve fund which shall be used as a source of funds to meet town obligations in anticipation of tax receipts, anticipated from state or federal government or other sources, provided however, that all advances from said fund shall be repaid thereto upon receipt by the town of the anticipated tax payments or other anticipated payments. The cash reserve fund may also be used as a contingency fund for emergency appropriations. 
    The town manager shall include in his budget recommendations for fiscal year 1990 a sum equal to no less than .3 percent (.003) of the total recommended operating budget for that year, to be paid into the cash reserve fund, and shall include a sum equal to no less than .35 percent (.0035) for fiscal year 1991 for the same purpose, and for each fiscal year thereafter to be paid into the said cash reserve fund until said reserve shall equal 5 percent (.05) of the operating budget. All monies paid into the cash reserve fund shall be invested by the director of finance in such manner as to earn the maximum income thereon consistent with maintaining the availability of the monies in the fund upon short notice. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
ARTICLE VI. - BORROWING 

601. - Emergencies. 
    The council may, upon recommendation of the town manager, authorize the issuance of notes by emergency ordinance or resolution to provide funds for emergencies as defined in Section 409(G) in the event no other source of funds is available. The amount of any such emergency notes shall mature and be payable not later than one (1) year from their date. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
602. - Bonds. 
    The town may incur indebtedness at public or private sale by issuing its serial bonds pursuant to this Charter for any purpose for which a town is authorized by the general laws. Except as may otherwise be provided by special act, whether heretofore or hereafter enacted, bonds shall be authorized by ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of this Charter, which shall state at least the amount of bonds authorized and the purpose for which they are authorized. In the absence of a contrary provision in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds, the date, maturities, denominations, interest rate or rates, place of payment, form and other details of each issue of bonds and of providing for the sale thereof shall be determined by the finance director with the approval of the town council president, provided that all bonds shall be payable in annual principal installments. In the absence of a contrary provision in the ordinance authorizing their issuance, an authorized issue of bonds may be issued at one time or from time to time as two (2) or more separate bonds issues, as shall be determined by the finance director, with the approval of the town council president. All bonds issued pursuant to this section shall be signed by the town finance director and the town council president. Any premiums arising from the sale of bonds shall be applied first to defray the expenses incident to the preparing, issuing and marketing thereof and thereafter the balance, if any, shall be used to pay the principal of the first of the bonds to mature. No purchasers shall, however, in any way be responsible for the proper application of the bond proceeds or premium. All bonds shall be obligatory on said town, in the same manner and to the same extent as other debts lawfully contracted by it. The town shall annually appropriate a sum which with other revenues, if any, available for the purpose, shall be sufficient to pay the interest payable in the year to be covered by such appropriations on all bonds issued under this Charter and outstanding in such year and also to pay the principal of any of said bonds which may mature in such year. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
603. - Bond anticipation notes. 
    The officers authorized to issue bonds may issue and sell from time to time interest-bearing or discounted temporary notes in an anticipation of bonds, the issuance of which has been authorized by ordinance as provided in Section 602. The aggregate principal amount of such temporary notes at any one time outstanding shall not exceed the total principal amount of any bonds previously issued pursuant to such ordinance. Temporary notes issued hereunder shall be signed by the town finance director and the town council president and shall be payable within three (3) years from their respective dates, but the principal of, and interest on, any notes issued for a shorter period may be renewed or paid from time to time by the issue of other notes hereunder, provided the period from date of an original note to the maturity of any note issued to renew or pay the same debt shall not exceed three (3) years. The period for which bonds may be issued under Section 602 need not be reduced by the period of any temporary borrowing hereunder. Except as provided in this section, the proceeds derived from the sale of such temporary notes shall be used only for purposes for which the proceeds of the bonds in anticipation of which the temporary notes are issued may be used. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
604. - Federal or state aid anticipation notes. 
    If the town shall have contracted for or accepted an offer of a grant of federal or state aid or both for any purpose for which it may incur indebtedness as provided in this Charter, the town finance director, with the approval of the town council president may issue and sell from time to time interest-bearing temporary notes in anticipation of the receipt of such aid. The aggregate principal amount of such temporary notes at any one time outstanding shall not exceed the amount of such aid payable to the town at the time such temporary notes are issued, less all amounts of such aid theretofore paid, as shall be determined by the finance director, with the approval of the town council president. Temporary notes issued hereunder shall be signed by the town finance director and countersigned by the town council president, and shall be payable within twelve (12) months from their respective dates, but any such notes may be renewed or paid from time to time be [by] the issue of other notes hereunder. The proceeds derived from the sale of such temporary notes shall be used for the purposes for which the aid in anticipation of which they are issued may be used. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
605. - Notes in anticipation of taxes. 
    In any fiscal year, in anticipation of taxes for such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the town council may by resolution, adopted by a majority of all its members, authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the town, the amount of which outstanding at any one time shall not exceed in the aggregate the total tax levy of the current fiscal year, or the preceding fiscal year if no levies for the current fiscal year have been made. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Charter to the contrary, a resolution of the town council authorizing notes in anticipation of taxes may be finally passed at the regular or special meeting at which it is introduced. Notes issued under this section shall be made payable not more than one (1) year from their date of issue. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
606. - Execution of bonds and notes. 
    Any bonds or notes issued by the town may be signed with manual or facsimile signatures of the officers of the town required to sign the same. 
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 

701. - Organization. 
    There shall be a department of finance, the head of which shall be the director of finance, appointed by the council upon recommendation of the town manager. Further organization of this department shall be as stated in this Charter and by ordinances enacted by the town council, to the end that the essential processes in the finances of the town, namely control and accounts, purchasing, assessment of property, collection of taxes and other revenues, and payments may be properly administered. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
702. - Qualifications. 
    The director of finance shall be a person who holds at least a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university in accounting, finance, business administration, or economics, and who has had no less than three (3) years' experience as a comptroller, controller, accountant, auditor or a position involving similar responsibilities and requiring similar skills, in a private or public organization. 
703. - Functions. 
    The function of the department shall be the supervision and direction of all matters pertaining to the financial operation of the town including, but not limited to, accounting and budgeting, control of expenditures, assessment and collection of taxes and administration of trust funds, and such other duties as shall be required by this Charter, by ordinance or by state law. 
704. - Departmental offices. 
    Within the department of finance there may be established such other offices or agencies as the town council may determine, upon the recommendation of the town manager, and placed under the jurisdiction of the director of finance. The director of finance shall have general supervision and control of the operation of all offices in the department of finance. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
705. - Director of finance; duties and powers. 
    The director of finance shall: 
(A)  Cooperate with the town manager in compiling the expenditures and revenue estimates for the budget; 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(B)  Collect and receive all taxes and special assessments for the collection of which the town is responsible. He or she shall have all the powers rights and duties prescribed under the general laws for tax collectors; 
(C)  Receive all license fees, rents, funds, money receivable by the town from the state and/or the federal government, and from the court and from any department, office and agency of the town, except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
(D)  Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the town, or any department, office and agency of the town government including the school department, and deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the town council, or, if no such resolution be adopted by the town council, in such depositories as he may choose, subject to the requirements of law as to surety and the payment of interest on deposits, but all such interest shall be the property of the town and shall be accounted from and credited to the proper accounts; 
(E)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the town or in the possession of the town in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the town and the receipts and delivery of town bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange; 
(F)  Exercise control over all expenditures by pre-auditing all bills, invoices, payrolls or other evidences of claims or charges against the town, and see that budget appropriations are not exceeded by disbursements in any department, office or agency of the town including the school department; 
(G)  Pay out the funds by check; such payments to be made only after compliance with provisions of (F) above; 
(H)  Establish and maintain an accounting system for the town government and all departments, offices and agencies thereof, including the school department, in accordance with the requirements set by the state; and shall cause reports to be prepared for the town council monthly or at such more frequent intervals as the council may ordain, showing the obligations against, and the unencumbered balances in, the account of each spending agency of the town government, including the school department; 
(I)  Prescribe uniform forms of receipts, vouchers, bills and claims to be used by all departments, offices and agencies of the town, excluding the school department; 
(J)  Prepare a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the financial condition of the town for submission to the town manager and the town council, it being the duty of the department of finance to make sufficient copies for all departments of the town government and file a copy with the town clerk which is made a public record; 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(K)  Prepare as soon as possible, within a ninety-day period, and at the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report, in accordance with state law, for submission to the town manager, the town council and the taxpayers of the town, and also prepare a tax book following each reevaluation; 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(L)  Perform the work of buying for the town pursuant to rules and regulations established by ordinance according to which the finance director, or an officer appointed or designated by him or her, shall purchase or contract for all supplies, materials and equipment required by any department, office or agency of the town; establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies, materials and equipment; supervise the inspection of deliveries of supplies, materials and equipment to determine their quality, quantity and conformance with specifications; cause to be made and kept current an inventory of all supplies, materials and equipment belonging to the town; store, if necessary, and distribute all supplies, materials and equipment required by any department, office and agencies; transfer to or between department, offices and agencies surplus, obsolete and unused supplies, materials and equipment, and subject to the approval of the town council, dispose of any such, by sale if possible,[.] [W]whenever any department, office or agency of the town government, excluding school department, shall purchase or contract for any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, independently and contrary to the provisions of this Charter or the rules and regulations made hereunder, such order or contract shall be voidable by the town council. 
706. - Competitive bidding. 
    It shall be the responsibility of all officials and employees of the town who are involved in the procurement of any supplies, equipment, or services with town funds, to insure that the best quality at the lowest possible price is obtained. The following requirements and procedures shall govern purchase or procurement: 
(A)  Except in the case of contracts for consultants retained to perform services not able to be performed by any town employee, all purchases of, or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment or work to be performed in excess of the minimum dollar amount set pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, shall be made only after the preparation of written specifications and solicitation of competitive bids following public notice, under such rules and regulations as the council may prescribe by ordinance. Said minimum dollar amount shall be set at the beginning of each town fiscal year to equal one one-hundredth of one percent (.01%) of the total amount appropriated by the council for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(B)  All purchases in excess of four hundred dollars ($400.00) but which shall not exceed the minimum dollar amount set pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, shall be made only after telephone bids have been solicited. A memorandum shall be prepared and kept on file for public inspection in the office of the finance director in the case of each purchase, listing the vendors contacted, the bids received, the award made, and the reasons for said award. 
(C)  Purchases made, or contracts awarded, pursuant to subsection (A) of this section shall be to the lowest responsible bidder, except that the purchasing authority may be directed by the council to reject any or all bids, and re-solicit bids pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, and showing the total monies expended or obligated during the quarter for all such purchases, and the department or agency responsible for each purchase. 
(D)  A performance bond shall be required of successful bidders in such amount, with surety and in such cases or classes of cases as the council shall specify. No transaction which is essentially a unit shall be divided into a series of orders for the purpose of circumventing the requirements of this section for competitive bidding. Bids, specifications and all other factors being equal, preference shall be given to the bidder whose residence or whose place of business is in the Town of West Warwick. 
(E)  In the event of an emergency, where the adherence to the requirements and procedures prescribed in this section would cause substantial damage or might result in irreparable damage, purchases may be made without complying therewith. The head of any department, or agency may make any emergency purchases deemed necessary, but only after obtaining the approval of the town manager if available, and if the town manager shall not be available, their first obtaining the approval of the finance director. A record shall be kept of all such emergency purchases which shall be available for public inspection in the office of the finance director. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(F)  The town will have the authority to enter into purchasing agreements with the State of Rhode Island and other municipalities that would specifically benefit the Town of West Warwick through the purchase of quantities at lower per unit prices. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TAX ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR 

801. - Tax assessor. 
    There may be within the department of finance the office of the tax assessor, who shall be appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
802. - Qualifications. 
    The tax assessor shall be a person who holds a degree from an accredited college or university, having taken courses in business management or equivalent, shall hold a Rhode Island license as a real estate broker, and shall have had no less than three (3) years' experience as a real estate broker. 
803. - Powers and duties. 
    The tax assessor shall: 
(A)  Supervise and be responsible for the fixing of an assessed valuation for purposes of taxation upon all real estate and all taxable personal property; 
(B)  Apply to or apportion upon the assessed valuation of real estate and personal property the amount of tax ordered to be levied or imposed thereon; 
(C)  Make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls and a tax roll for the town in the manner provided by law; 
(D)  Establish a uniform and equitable system for assessing all classes and kinds of property; 
(E)  Prepare tax maps and land value maps; 
(F)  Give such notices of assessments and taxes and to perform such other duties as may be required by law and ordinance; 
(G)  Subject to the approval of the director of finance, employ from time to time within the limits of available appropriations such clerical assistants and such technical consultants as may be necessary; 
(H)  Cooperate with the board of canvassers and registration in the preparation of the lists of electors; 
(I)  Serve as an ex officio member of the board of assessment review. 
804. - Tax collector. 
    There may be within the department of finance the office of tax collector, who shall be appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
805. - Qualifications. 
    The tax collector shall be person who has graduated from a recognized college or university with courses emphasizing business management, accounting, business or public administration and at least three (3) [years'] experience in a supervisory capacity. 
806. - Powers and duties. 
    The tax collector shall: 
(A)  Collector [collect] and receive all taxes and special assessments for the collection of which the town is responsible, and shall have all the rights, powers and duties prescribed by the laws of the state and by ordinance. 
(B)  Conduct a tax sale of all properties upon which property taxes, sewer assessments, sewer use, and/or other town liens that remain unpaid for a period of 18 months from the date the property taxes first became due. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 13 approved at November 5, 1996 General Election. 
(C)  Within fifteen (15) days of the time of being sworn into office, give bond to the town in such sum and with such sureties as the council shall prescribe, for the faithful performance of the duties of such office. The cost of such bond shall be paid by the town. 
(D)  With the approval of the finance director may abate interest on delinquent tax payments. 
807. - Board of assessment review. 
    There shall be a board of assessment review consisting of three (3) members appointed by the town council, each to serve a three-year term, no more than two (2) of whom shall be members of the same political party at any one time, and all of whom shall be electors and residents of the town. The terms of the members of said board shall be arranged in such manner that the term of one (1) member shall expire each year. All members of said board in office at the time of the taking effect of this Charter shall continue to serve until the expiration of their respective terms, and all members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified, or until they shall cease to have the qualifications for office set forth in this section. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for appointments to the board in this section. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(A)  The town council shall provide by ordinance for the organization and procedure for the board of assessment review and for the manner of receiving, considering, and disposing of appeals, provided that the procedure before the board shall be informal and of a nature calculated to effect justice in as simple a manner as possible, and provided that the requirements stated in [subsection] (B) following are observed. 
(B)  The board of assessment review shall hear and consider the appeals of any property owner concerning the amount of his assessed valuation as determined by the tax assessor. The assessor shall attend all hearings of the board in order to explain his valuation, but shall have no vote. The board shall keep an accurate record of its proceedings which shall be available for public inspection. The board shall meet on the first business day after the expiration of twenty (20) days subsequent to the date on which taxes become due and payable, and at such times thereafter as may be necessary to hear appeals. No appeal shall be considered unless it is made in writing and is received by the board no later than three (3) months from the date the tax becomes due and payable. No appeal shall be considered by the board unless the tax due and payable, has been paid under protest, except that the Town Council or the Board of Assessment and Review may waive such requirement in instances where the assessment of the Town is deemed to be in error. If it shall appear that the valuation of any property has been incorrectly or inequitably assessed, the board shall have power to change the assessment and shall determine the correct valuation of such property. It shall be the duty of the director of finance to make payment of any refund that may be due to the property owner. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 4 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
(C)  The taking of an appeal to the board of assessment review, or any action thereon shall not be construed to limit or restrict the right of any taxpayer to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief from any assessed valuation or tax originally determined by the tax assessor or subsequently by the board of assessment review. 
ARTICLE IX. - DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL 

901. - General provisions. 
    The town shall have the authority under this Charter, subject to the Constitution and laws of the state to establish by ordinance enacted by the town council, such personnel policies, rules and regulations as the council may deem appropriate subject to the provisions of this Charter. The council shall enact a personnel ordinance to become effective no later than June 1, 1989. 
902. - Organization. 
    There shall be a department of personnel, the head of which shall be the director of personnel, appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
903. - Qualifications. 
    The director of personnel shall be a person who holds at least a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university in personnel management, labor relations, or business administration, and who has had no less than three (3) years' experience in personnel management. 
904. - Functions. 
    The functions of this department shall be to recruit, select, develop and maintain an effective and responsive work force which will meet the social, economic, and service requirements of the citizens of the town, and perform such other duties as shall be required by this Charter, by ordinance or by state law. 
905. - Exempt and career services. 
    The personnel of the town shall be divided into the exempt and career services. The exempt services shall consist of all officers elected by the people or by the council; all members of boards and commissions; persons employed on non-recurring projects of limited duration; persons employed as consultants or counsel, who are rendering temporary professional services; volunteers and persons appointed to service without pay; positions involving seasonal or part-time employment; employees of the school committee; and appointed officers and department heads. The career service shall consist of all other employees of the town. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
906. - Powers and duties. 
    The director of personnel shall, in accordance with state law or applicable collective bargaining agreements: 
(A)  Advise the town manager on the efficient utilization of human resources; 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(B)  Establish and maintain an employee record system; 
(C)  Establish a plan for resolving employee grievances and complaints; 
(D)  Establish employee disciplinary action procedures which shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, providing a means for presenting charges, conducting hearings, guaranteeing rights and establishing appeals; 
(E)  Make an annual report to the town manager and the town council on the quality and status of personnel administration in the town government, make recommendations for improvements therein, and suggest personnel budget requirements for the following fiscal year; 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(F)  Perform any other lawful acts, and adopt all other rules, which may be necessary or desirable to carry out the intent and provisions of this Charter relative to personnel matters, or to execute the policies of the town manager or the council. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
907. - Additional powers and duties; director of personnel and department heads. 
    The director of personnel shall in conjunction with department heads, and in accordance with state law or applicable collective bargaining agreements: 
(A)  Establish standard qualifications for all career and exempt service positions, unless otherwise provided for in this Charter; 
(B)  Prepare and revise a position classification plan for career service positions based upon similarity of duties performed and responsibilities assumed, to insure equitable compensation for all positions in the same class. The plan shall also include rules governing the positions or classes in the career service, if necessary; 
(C)  Establish minimum qualifications for each class or position; 
(D)  Establish an objective method for recruiting, testing, interviewing, investigating and determining the relative qualifications of all applicants for all positions. 
908. - The career service. 
    The procedure for all appointments in the career service shall be: 
(A)  Job announcements. The director of personnel shall issue job announcements and publicize vacancies. Such announcements shall be written in a clear and readable manner and shall include job title, salary range, and qualifications. Said announcements shall also indicate testing information, including the time, place and manner of completing applications. Vacancies shall be announced a minimum of ten (10) working days prior to the closing date for filing applications. Continuous recruitment programs may also be established for any or all of the positions in career service. 
(B)  Applications. All applications for employment shall be made on forms prescribed by the director of personnel, providing, however, that prior to submission of final applications, personal resumes containing information on the applicant's training and experience, may be submitted. Applications shall be held on file for a period of one (1) year. 
(C)  Rejection of applications. The director of personnel may reject applications which do not meet the minimum qualifications established for the position. Applications may also be rejected by the director if the applicant deliberately falsified information on the application, is physically unable to perform the duties of the position, or is not within the legal age limits prescribed by the law for the position. 
(D)  Selection process. The selection process shall maximize reliability, objectivity and validity through a practical and job related assessment of each applicant's attributes as they are related to successful job performance and career development. The selection process shall be balanced to provide for competition by applicants from within career service who are seeking promotion and nonmunicipal employees seeking entry into career service. The selection process shall be as follows: 
(1)  The director of personnel and/or department head shall administer appropriate tests to all qualified applicants. The test results shall constitute seventy-five percent of the applicant's final score. 
(2)  The director of personnel and/or department head shall conduct an oral interview following a standard format. The interview results shall constitute twenty-five percent of applicant's final score. 
(3)  The combined test and interview results shall be tallied as a single score, and the top [three] (3) highest scores shall be recommended to the town manager for appointment. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(4)  After considering all relevant factors including applicable test scores, if two or more applications have equal qualifications and abilities, preference may be given to the applicant who is a resident of the Town. 
Editor's note- This section is added by Question 5 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
(E)  Notification of candidates. All persons competing in the selection process shall be given written notice whether final rating is passing or failing. Within five (5) working days after receiving the rating notice, any applicant may inspect his or her examination papers and/or other documents relative to the rating during regular business hours at the office of the director of personnel. If an error is found, appropriate corrections shall be made by the director. 
(F)  Budget approval. Before any final appointment shall be made the director of personnel shall obtain certification from the finance director that such position has funding within the budget of the department in which the appointment is to be made. 
(G)  Final appointment. The director of personnel shall submit to the town manager the names of the three (3) highest scoring candidates, one of whom shall be appointed by the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
909. - Probationary status. 
    Career employees of the town shall serve a probationary period of one (1) year before any appointment or promotion shall become permanent, during which time the probationary employee may be discharged or reduced in class position. 
910. - Promotions. 
    Vacancies in higher positions in the career service shall be filled on the basis of competitive testing and interviewing as provided in Section [908] of this article. Promotional consideration shall be given to all town employee applicants who have completed their probationary period and who meet the qualifications for the vacant position. 
911. - Status of current employees. 
    All persons who have been employees of the town for not less than one (1) year at the time this Charter takes effect are hereby placed in the career service of the town. All persons who have been employees of the town for less than one (1) year and for more than six (6) months at the time this Charter shall take effect, shall become permanent employees in the career service upon satisfactory completion of a probationary period of six (6) months, provided, however, that those persons upon whom state law has conferred life tenure shall become permanent employees in the career service without regard to the length of their town employment. 
912. - Felony convictions. 
    No person who shall have been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a felony shall be eligible for employment or appointment in any position with the town. Any employee or elected or appointed official of the town who shall be charged with, indicted on or convicted of a felony shall be subject to suspension and removal from employment or office in the manner prescribed for employees or elected or appointed official of the town in Section 2209 of this Charter. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 17 Approved at November 5, 1996 General Election. 
913. - Additional requirements. 
    The requirements for hiring employees of the town set forth in this article shall be considered as minimum requirements, and shall not be interpreted as prohibiting the imposing of further requirements by the director of personnel and/or by department heads and other hiring authorities, with the approval of the town manager. Nothing in this Charter shall be construed as precluding the town manager or the town council from filling any exempt service position appointed or elected by them in the same manner as career service positions are filled. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
914. - General prohibitions. 
    All employees of the town shall be recruited, selected and promoted on the basis of their relative ability without regard to political consideration and they may not be required to contribute to any political purpose. Equal opportunity shall be given to all qualified applicants. There shall be no discrimination against any person being recruited for, seeking employment with, or currently employed by, the town because of political or religious affiliation or belief, or because or [of] race, nationality, gender, age, or marital status. 
915. - Residence. 
    No person shall be eligible for appointment as Town Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief or Director of Public Works of the town who is not a resident and elector of the Town of West Warwick, provided, however, that a non-resident shall be eligible for appointment to the position of Town Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief or Director of Public Works, if he or she signs an affidavit confirming that residency in the town will be established within one year of appointment. Upon certification of the town council that after a diligent search no person with proper qualifications can be found to fill the position of Town Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief or Director of Public Works, then the residency requirement may be waived by the town council. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election; Question 6 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
916. - Town officials and employees, appointments and tenure. 
    The tenure in office of all officials and employees of the town appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager shall terminate upon the termination of the town manager's employment, unless the town council otherwise determines. Any such official or employee may be removed by the town council with or without cause. All town officials and employees of the town appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager shall be subject to the provisions of the approved personnel manual of the Town of West Warwick. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 14 approved at November 5, 1996 General Election. 
ARTICLE X. - TOWN CLERK 

1001. - Selection and term. 
    There shall be a town clerk who shall be appointed by the Town Council to serve at the pleasure of the council. There may be appointed a deputy clerk who shall in the absence or disability of the town clerk have all the powers to perform all the duties which are granted to the office of town clerk, and perform such other duties as may be required, being thereunto qualified by taking the oath of office. The town clerk may be suspended or removed, with or without cause, by a vote of not less then three (3) members of the Town Council. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 15 approved at November 5, 1996 General Election. 
Editor's note- This section is amended as approved at November 4, 2014 General Election. 
1002. - Qualifications. 
    The town clerk shall be a person who has qualifications consistent with the objectives of the Town Clerk's Association and no less than three (3) years' experience in a supervisory capacity. 
1003. - Powers and duties. 
    The town clerk shall be the clerk of town council, clerk of the probate court, clerk of the board of canvassers, clerk of the financial town meeting and the recorder of deeds. It shall be the duty of the town clerk to: 
(A)  Make a permanent record of all proceedings and certify by the clerk's signature all actions of the aforesaid bodies; 
(B)  Be custodian of the town seal and of the official documents and records of the town; 
(C)  Direct and supervise the recordings of deeds, mortgages, vital statistics, license and permits and such other records as shall by ordinance and state law be required to be kept by the town clerk; 
(D)  Issue marriage licenses, burial permits, and such other licenses and permits as are required by ordinance and state law to be issued by the town clerk; 
(E)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by state law pertaining to town clerks, and such other duties appropriate to the office as the town manager and the town council may require. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1004. - Compensation. 
    The town clerk shall receive such annual salaries as shall be set by the town budget process. All fees collected by either the town clerk or deputy town clerk shall be conveyed daily to the finance director and be deposited in the general funds of the town, unless otherwise directed by the laws of the state. 
1005. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1005, Bond, was repealed by Question 7 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
ARTICLE XI. - TOWN SOLICITOR 

1101. - Selection and term. 
    There shall be a town solicitor who shall be appointed by the town council to serve at the pleasure of the council. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1102. - Qualifications. 
    The town solicitor shall be an attorney-at-law in good standing who has been admitted to the practice of law in this state, at least three (3) years prior to appointment. He or she shall not hold any other office in the town government except that of acting judge of probate when so necessary. The town solicitor need not be required to devote full time to the duties of the office. 
1103. - Duties. 
    The town solicitor shall be the attorney for the town and legal advisor to the town manager, town council and all other departments, offices, and agencies of the town government. It shall be the duty of the town solicitor to: 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(A)  Appear for and protect the rights of the town in all actions, suits and proceedings, civil or criminal in law or equity, brought by or against it or for or against any of its departments, including the canvassing authority; 
(B)  Examine and make recommendations on the form of all ordinances and resolutions and the form of all invitations for bids, contracts and other legal documents sent out by any department, office, or agency of the town; 
(C)  Perform such other duties appropriate to the office as the provisions of this Charter, the town manager and/or the town council may require; 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
(D)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the appointment of a law firm to perform the duties of the town solicitor, in the manner prescribed in Section 1101 of this article; 
(E)  Nor shall anything in this section prohibit the town council from providing for the appointment of assistant town solicitors if in its judgement the work load of the town solicitor's office shall justify such appointment. In the event that assistants are provided for, said offices shall be filled in the same manner and for the same term as that of the town solicitor. Nor shall anything in this section prohibit the council from making provision for the hiring of special counsel to assist or act in the place of the town solicitor, in extraordinary and limited circumstances, when in the judgement of the council such provision will best serve the interests of the town. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the school department from retaining counsel to be compensated from funds provided in its budget. 
1104. - Opinion, a public record. 
    All written legal opinions furnished to the town manager, the town council and all departments, offices and agencies of the town shall be filed with the town clerk and become public records unless otherwise directed by state law or town ordinances. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1105. - Special powers. 
    The statement in this Charter of duties of the town solicitor shall not be deemed to abridge such special powers and duties as are now and hereafter conferred upon town solicitors by state law. 
ARTICLE XII. - PROBATE COURT 

1201. - Selection and term. 
    There shall be a judge of probate who shall exercise and perform the powers and duties of a probate court for the town, who shall be appointed by the town council to serve at the pleasure of the council. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1202. - Qualifications. 
    The judge of probate shall be an attorney-at-law in good standing who has been admitted to the practice of law in this state at least three (3) years prior to appointment and who is a qualified elector of the town. 
1203. - Clerk. 
    The town clerk shall be the clerk [of] the probate court. The clerk shall pay all fees and other revenue received by the probate court to the finance director, on the same day as received, for the use and benefit of the town. 
1204. - Vacancies. 
    Whenever the judge of the probate court is a party to or interested in any proceeding about to be heard in his or her court, or is absent or unable to perform the judge's duties, or there is a vacancy in such office, the duties shall be temporarily performed by the town solicitor, and the fact of such interest, absence, inability or vacancy shall be recorded in the records of said court. If the vacancy has been more than ninety (90) days, the town council shall appoint another judge of probate. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
ARTICLE XIII. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

1301. - Organization. 
    There shall be a police department, the head of which shall be the chief of police appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager. In addition to the chief of police, there shall be such positions as determined from time to time as deemed appropriate and such other subordinate officers, all of the aforesaid serving full-time, as shall from time to time be determined by the town council. They shall hold their respective offices, during good behavior, until vacated by death, resignation or retirement or until they shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter unless in conflict with any collective bargaining agreement. All members of the force, except the chief of police, shall at the time of their permanent appointment have served for a period of not less than one (1) year in probationary status during which period they may be removed at any time by the town manager upon recommendation of the chief of police, with or without cause. The further organization of the department into divisions, offices or grades shall be made by the town council on recommendation of the town manager after conferring with the chief of police. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election; Question 8 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
1302. - Police chief qualifications. 
    The chief of police shall be a person who has graduated from a recognized college or university with a degree in law enforcement and/or business management with no less than three (3) years' experience in a supervisory capacity in a law enforcement agency. Effective July 1, 2003, any new appointment for chief of police shall have graduated from a recognized college or university with a bachelor's degree in law enforcement and/or business management with no less than three (3) years' experience in a supervisory capacity in a law enforcement agency. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 9 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
1303. - Powers and duties. 
    The police department shall be responsible for the preservation of the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property, regulation of traffic, and the enforcement of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the town and rules and regulations in accordance therewith. The chief of police and other members of the department shall have all powers and duties as are vested in such police offices by the laws of the state and the town ordinances. The chief of police shall be in direct command of the police force and shall, subject to the approval of the town manager, make rules and regulations concerning the operation and management of the police department and shall be responsible for all town property in his or her custody. In the absence or disability of the chief of police, the town council on recommendation of the town manager after conferring with the chief of police, if possible, shall appoint such officer of the department to assume all the powers and responsibilities and perform all of the duties of the chief. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election; Question 8 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
ARTICLE XIV. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

1401. - Organization. 
    There shall be a fire department, the head of which shall be the fire chief. The chief shall be appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager. In addition to the fire chief, there shall be such officers and employees, and volunteer personnel as the council shall from time to time determine. They shall hold their respective offices, during good behavior, until vacated by death, resignation or retirement, or until they shall be removed in accordance with provisions of this Charter unless in conflict with any collective bargaining agreement. All members of the force, except the fire chief, shall at the time of their permanent appointment have served for a period of not less than one (1) year in a probationary status during which period they may be removed at any time by the town manager upon recommendation of the fire chief, with or without cause. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1402. - Fire chief, qualifications. 
    The fire chief shall be a person who has graduated from a recognized college or university with a degree in fire sciences, public administration and/or business management, with no less than three (3) years' experience in a supervisory capacity in a fire department. Effective July 1, 2003, any new appointment for fire chief shall have graduated from a recognized college or university with a bachelor's degree in fire sciences, public administration and/or business management, with no less than three (3) years' experience in a supervisory capacity in a fire department. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 10 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
1403. - Powers and duties. 
    The fire department shall be responsible for the adequate protection of life and property from fire and other hazards normally within the jurisdiction of a fire department, and for the enforcement of the laws and regulations relating to fire prevention and fire safety. The fire chief and other members of the department shall have all powers and duties as are vested in such fire personnel by the laws of the state and town ordinances. The fire chief shall be in direct command of the fire department and shall, subject to the approval of the town manager, make rules and regulations concerning the operation and management of the fire department, and shall be responsible for all town property in the chief's custody. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
ARTICLE XV. - PUBLIC WORKS 

1501. - Department and director. 
    There shall be department of public works, the director of which shall be the director of public works to be appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1502. - Director, qualifications. 
    The director of public works shall be a person who has graduated from a recognized college or university with courses emphasizing, engineering, construction, business or public administration, and who has had no less than three (3) years' experience in the public work field in private industry or in a government agency. Effective July 1, 2003, any new appointment for director of public works shall have graduated from a recognized college or university with a bachelor's degree in engineering, business or public administration, and who has no less than three (3) years' experience in the public works field in private industry or in a government agency. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 11 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
1503. - Organization. 
    The department of public works shall be organized into such divisions and offices from time to time as the town manager shall direct, with the approval of the council. The heads of all such divisions and offices shall be appointed by the director of public works with the approval of the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1504. - Powers and duties. 
    The department of public works shall be responsible for the functions and services of the town relating to streets, highways, sidewalks, bridges, water courses, street lighting, storm sewers, the collection and disposal of garbage and other refuse and other duties as directed by the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1505. - Cooperation with other town agencies. 
    The department of public works, under the direction of the town manager, shall cooperate with and perform services for, other branches of the town government, including the school department upon request therefrom, by furnishing labor, materials and equipment, provided however, that the costs of such cooperative efforts and services are reimbursed to the department by the agencies thus served. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1506. - Further organization. 
    There may be within the department of public works the division of code enforcement and inspection, the head of which shall be appointed by the director of public works and approval [approved] by the town manager. The divisions shall be responsible for all building code enforcement, minimum housing code enforcement, the enforcement of zoning regulations, and all related functions and responsibilities which are within the jurisdiction of the town under state law and town ordinances not inconsistent therewith. All inspectors and other personnel responsible for enforcing such laws and regulations shall be under the jurisdiction of the division, and the general supervision of the director of public works. The head of said division may conduct personally such portion of the inspection functions of the division as he or she may be qualified to perform. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
ARTICLE XVI. - PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT 

1601. - Town planner. 
    There shall be a town planner, who shall be appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1602. - Qualifications. 
    The town planner shall be a person who has graduated from a recognized college or university with a master's degree in urban planning, and no less than three (3) years' experience as a city or town planner. 
1603. - Duties and functions. 
    The town planner shall be the chief advisor to the town manager, the town council and the town planning board, on matters pertaining to his or her expertise, and shall upon request provide staff assistance to the zoning board of review and to the development commission. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Social Election. 
1604. - Planning board; membership, appointment, term. 
    There shall be a planning board for the town consisting of five (5) members, each to serve a five-year term, appointed by the town council, in such manner that no more than three (3) of said members shall be members of the same political party. The said terms shall be so arranged that the term of one (1) member shall expire each year. The Town Council may appoint two (2) alternate members of said Board, who shall sit as an active member when and if a member is unable to serve at any hearing, upon request of the Chairperson of the Board. The alternate members shall be appointed for a five (5) year term with each member's term expiring in a different year. The alternate members shall not be part of the same political party. All members serving on said board at the time that this Charter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of their respective terms. All members and alternates of said board shall be qualified electors and residents of the town, and shall serve until the expiration of their respective terms, or until their successors are elected and qualified, or until they shall cease to have the qualifications set forth in this section. All vacancies on said board shall be filled for the unexpired term. The board shall elect a chairperson and such other officers as it may determine from among its own membership, and shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with this Charter or state law. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. Further, this section is amended by Question 1, approved at November 2, 2004, State-wide General Election. 
1605. - Planning board, powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the planning board to make studies of the resources and needs of the town with reference to its physical growth and development as affecting the health, safety, moral and general welfare of the people and the economy and efficiency of communal life. The board may make special studies when requested by the council or the town manager, and shall have access to available plans, records surveys and other data filed with any department of the town. The board shall report annually to the council and to the town manager, and may recommend plans and schemes of development and give estimates of the cost thereof, and shall make other reports upon such relative matters as may be from time to time referred to it by the council or the town manager. Such plans, schemes of development, [and] costs thereof shall be presented to the town manager annually as a five-year plan. All department heads shall submit to the planning board capital budget items. All capital budget items in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) shall be referred to an all-day referendum. 
    The planning board shall establish rules and procedures for all subdivision review in the Town of West Warwick in compliance with applicable state laws and the town's community comprehensive plan. 
    All significant community projects before the zoning board will be reviewed by the planning board at the discretion of the town manager for an advisory opinion. The board's recommendation must be made public and considered by the zoning board prior to any decision. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1606. - Zoning board of review. 
    There shall be a zoning board of review which shall consist of five (5) members, each to hold office for a term of five (5) years with one (1) member to be appointed each year by the town manager with the confirmation of the council. The town council may appoint two (2) alternate members of said board, one of whom shall sit as an active member when and if a member is unable to serve at any hearing, upon request of the chairperson, of said board. The board shall choose its chairperson, and said chairperson or an acting chairperson in his or her absence, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All members and auxiliary members of said board shall be qualified electors and residents of the town during their term of office, and shall hold no other office in the service of the town. No more than three (3) of the members of said board shall at any one time be members of the same political party, and one (1) of the auxiliary members shall be from each of the two (2) major political parties. The board shall elect its chairperson from among its members. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1607. - Development commission. 
    There shall be a development commission for the town consisting of seven (7) members, all of whom shall be electors and residents of the town. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the town council, each for a four-year term, but with their terms arranged in such manner that the terms of two (2) members shall expire in each of three (3) successive years, and the term of one (1) member shall expire in the fourth year. All members of said commission in office at the time of the taking effect of this Charter shall continue to serve until the expiration of their respective terms. Appointments to the commission shall be made in such manner that no more than four (4) of the members thereof shall be members of the same political party at any one time. All members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified, or until they shall cease to have the qualification for office set forth in this section. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for appointments to the commission in this section. The board shall elect its chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary-treasurer from among its members. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1608. - Duties of development commission. 
    The development commission shall: 
(A)  Promote, aid, and assist in the development, expansion and location of industry and business in the town, for the purpose of establishing an equitable balance between commercial and residential property. It may make surveys and compile statistics in furtherance of the purpose set forth herein; 
(B)  Perform other duties not inconsistent with the purposes of this article; 
(C)  Cooperate with all boards, commission and departments of the town requiring its aid, counsel and advice; 
(D)  Have access to all available plans, records, surveys and other information on file with any town department, and may call upon them for aid, advice and assistance. It may also act as a liaison between the town, state and federal agencies on such matters as may be authorized by the town council. 
1609. - Development commission-Reports, recommendations. 
    The development commission shall meet at least monthly and shall make quarterly reports to the town planner, town manager, and town council concerning the economic development of the town. Such reports must detail the substantive work accomplished in the preceding quarter and outline recommendations and goals for the upcoming quarter. It shall make such recommendations as it deems necessary and advisable for the best interests of the town. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election, and by Question 5 approved at November 2, 2010 Election. 
1610. - Same-Bylaws. 
    The commission may adopt bylaws covering its procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, and shall submit copies of same to the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1611. - [Department of building and zoning created.] 
    There shall be a department of building and zoning, the director of which shall be appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is added by Question 6 approved at November 2, 2010 Election. 
1612. - Director qualifications. 
    The director of building and zoning shall be a certified building official pursuant to the laws of the State of Rhode Island. 
Editor's note- This section is added by Question 6 approved at November 2, 2010 Election. 
ARTICLE XVII. - SEWER COMMISSION 

1701. - Sewer commission. 
    The town shall have the authority, pursuant to applicable state law, and subject to applicable rules and regulations of the state and federal governments, to operate, maintain, extend and improve a sewage disposal system for the town or any part or parts thereof. There shall be a sewer commission for the town, which shall be the town council. The sewer commission shall exercise the powers of the town in relation to all matters pertaining to sewers in the town as set forth in this section and in applicable state law, and also in relation to the extension of said sewer system to, and the collection and treatment of all sewage from the state, and any other municipal or quasi-municipal corporation, or any private party, under any contract or contracts it shall have entered into with such parties for said purposes, or shall enter into [in] the future. 
1702. - Powers of sewer commission. 
    The sewer commission shall have the powers to: 
(A)  Enter into contracts with the state, other municipal or quasi-municipal corporations, or private parties, under which it shall agree to collect and treat sewage from such contracting parties under terms set forth in such contracts, provided, however, that no such contract shall be for a period exceeding forty (40) years; 
(B)  Set and apportion sewer assessments and sewer use charges in the manner prescribed by applicable law; 
(C)  Prescribe rules and regulations, effective within the town, regulating or requiring the connection of estates and buildings with sewers, for the inspection of the materials, the construction, alteration and use of all connection into such sewers, and may prescribe penalties in accordance with local and State law for violation of each rule or regulation, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense, provided, however, that all such rules and regulations shall not be effective prior to their publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 12 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
(D)  Issue bonds and temporary notes for the purposes set forth in Sections 1701 and 1702, in the manner, and subject to the limitation set forth on applicable state law, and to make application for, receive and apply to the purposes set forth in the said sections, monies from the federal and state governments; 
(E)  Exercise any and all such additional powers as are conferred upon it by applicable state law, and any amendments thereof. 
1703. - Sewer department. 
    In addition to those powers as set forth herein and pursuant to Public Laws 1920, Chapter 2005, as amended, the Town Council for the Town of West Warwick, acting as sewer commission, shall be vested with the power and authority to plan, acquire, construct, operate, maintain, extend and improve a sewage disposal system for the Town or any part or parts thereof. 
    The Town Council shall also have the power to employ a Superintendent of Sewers upon the recommendation of the Town Manager and to prescribe his or her duties. The Town Manager shall have the power to employ such other assistants, employees and advisers as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the sewer system and, through the Town Manager and Superintendent of Sewers, shall be responsible for the management and operation of said system. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election; Question 13 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- The Art. XVIII title was amended by Question 14 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. Formerly, Art. XVIII was entitled, "Department of Public Welfare." 

1801. - Creation. 
    There shall be a department of human services which shall perform the functions and services of the town relating to human services. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 14 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
1802. - Director. 
    The head of the department shall be the director of human services. The director of human services shall be appointed by the town council upon the recommendation of the town manager. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election; Question 14 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
1803. - Power and duties. 
    The director of human services shall have all the powers and duties relating to the poor, needy an dependent persons as may be vested in the department of human services and shall administer all welfare statutes of the state or federal government, the administration of which is delegated to the town or the director of human services. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 14 approved at June 19, 2001 Special Election. 
ARTICLE XIX. - SCHOOL COMMITTEE 

1901. - Number, term, selection. 
    There shall be a school committee which shall consist of five (5) members, elected from the town by ward, to serve four-year terms, subject to recall as provided in this Charter, with their terms arranged in such manner that two (2) members are to be elected in November, 2012, and three (3) members are to be elected in November, 2014. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 6 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election; and by Question 7 approved at November 2, 2010 Election. 
1902. - Qualifications. 
    Members of the school committee, as defined in this Charter, shall, at the time of their election and during their term of office, be residents and qualified electors of the Town of West Warwick and shall hold no other paid public office or employment in the service of the town. No member of the school committee shall be eligible to accept any other paid appointed school department office during his or her term on the school committee or for a period of one (1) year thereafter. 
1903. - Vacancies. 
    A vacancy shall exist in the school committee if a member dies, resigns, ceases to meet the qualification for membership, is recalled, or is convicted of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude and has exhausted all appeals from said conviction. Any vacancy in the membership of the school committee shall be filled by the council until the next regular town election, when the office shall be filled for the unexpired term thereof, provided that that person selected to said vacancy shall be a member of the same political party as the person whose position he or she is elected to fill. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 6 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
1904. - Organization. 
    The school committee shall determine its own rules and its order or [of] business and the time of its meeting. 
1905. - Compensation. 
    Members of the school committee shall receive such annual salaries or stipends as may be set by the school committee, provided that any increase shall not become effective until after completion of the term of any member of the school committee at the time motion for said increase was approved. 
1906. - Powers and duties. 
    The school committee shall: 
(A)  Determine and control all policies affecting the administration, maintenance and operation of public schools and shall have all the powers and be subject to all duties prescribed by the laws of the state and may provide rules and regulations for the use operation, maintenance of public school properties. 
(B)  Have the power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department or activity of the public schools and make investigations as to school affairs. 
(C)  Appoint and establish the compensation of a superintendent of schools who shall be its chief administrative agent, and who shall have, under the direction of the school committee, the care and supervision of the public schools. The superintendent shall be subject to removal at the discretion of the school committee, following a public hearing, if the superintendent shall request the same. There shall be no right of appeal from the decision of the school committee. 
(D)  Appoint and remove all school employees upon recommendation of the superintendent of schools, except as otherwise be provided by state law. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the school committee and its members shall deal with the administration of the public schools solely through the superintendent of schools and neither the school committee nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the superintendent of schools, either publicly or privately. 
(E)  Submit budget estimates in the same manner provided by state law as other departments, but the budget estimates and appropriations shall be considered by the council and in the town's budget process in total only. The allocation of the amounts appropriated shall be determined by the school committee. 
(F)  At its discretion, request the department of public works to maintain and care for school buildings and grounds, provided that the costs are charged against appropriations for the public schools. 
(G)  Prepare a complete report of its finances and activities at the close of each fiscal year. Such reports shall be included as a separate section in the annual town report. 
(H)  Exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as prescribed by state law and as are not inconsistent with this Charter. 
ARTICLE XX. - OTHER TOWN OFFICES 

2001. - Town sergeant. 
    There shall be a town sergeant, appointed by the town council, to serve at the town council's pleasure. The town sergeant shall be a qualified elector and resident of the town during his or her continuance in office, shall have all the powers, privileges and immunities of the said office, and shall perform all duties as prescribed by the general laws of the state and applicable special laws and town ordinances. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
2002. - Town moderator. 
    There shall be a town moderator, appointed by the town council, to serve at the town council's pleasure. The town moderator shall be a qualified elector and resident of the town during his or her continuance in office, and shall preside over the financial town meeting or any special town meetings. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
2003. - Town offices, general. 
    There shall be the following offices to which the town council shall appoint, said appointees to serve at the town council's pleasure: 
(A)  Fence viewer, 
(B)  Sealer of weights and measures, 
(C)  Superintendent of lights, 
(D)  Weigher of coal and other merchandise, 
(E)  Safety committee chairman, 
(F)  Tree warden, 
(G)  Civil defense director, 
(H)  Recreation director. 
    All persons appointed to the offices provided for in this section shall be electors and residents of the town during their continuance in office. Each shall have the powers and duties which shall be prescribed for his or her office by state law and by ordinance. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
2004. - Pension board. 
    There shall be a pension board for the town, of seven (7) members, appointed by the town council for staggered three-year terms, from among persons who are qualified electors and residents of the town, no more than four (4) of whom shall at any time be members of the same political party. The office of any member who ceases to have the qualifications set forth in this section shall become vacant. Each of the members of the board in office on the date upon which this Charter takes effect shall serve the term for which he or she was appointed. All vacancies shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term. The board shall elect from its membership its chairman and such other officers as it shall deem necessary. The board shall be responsible for administering all retirement plans for town police, fire and other municipal employees, excepting those employees of the school department who are covered by the state retirement plan. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election; Question 2 approved at May 19, 2016 Special Election. 
2005. - Housing authority. 
    There shall be a housing authority for the town consisting of seven (7) commissioners appointed by the town council and each to serve a term of five (5) years, said terms to be so arranged that the term of one (1) commissioner shall expire each year. All persons appointed as commissioner shall be eligible voters and residents of the town, and the office of any commissioner who ceases to meet this qualification shall become vacant. Any vacancy on the authority shall be filled for the unexpired term. The housing authority shall have all of the powers and duties prescribed in applicable provisions of state law and any applicable amendments thereof. All commissioners of the housing authority in office at the time of the taking effect of this Charter shall continue in office and complete the terms for which they were appointed so long as they meet the qualifications for office set forth in this section. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election; Question 3 approved at May 19, 2016 Special Election. 
2006. - Water authority. 
    The town council shall appoint such members from time to time as the town may be entitled to appoint to the board of the Kent County Water Authority, to serve such terms, and to serve under such conditions, as are or may be prescribed by applicable state law, provided however, that all appointees chosen by the town council shall be persons who are qualified electors and residents of the Town of West Warwick, and provided further, that the office of any member who ceases to meet this qualification shall become vacant. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
ARTICLE XXI. - RECALL 

2101. - General authority. 
    The registered voters of the Town of West Warwick shall have the power to remove members of the School Committee and Town Council from office by recall, provided that the recall may not be initiated during either the first or last six (6) months of an incumbent's term. 
Editor's note- This section is amended as approved at November 4, 2014 General Election. 
2102. - Commencement of proceedings: petitioners' committee: affidavit. 
    Any five (5) qualified voters may commence recall proceedings by filing with the town clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in the proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent and setting out in full the proposed name and office of the elected official to be recalled. 
    Not later than ten (10) business days after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the clerk shall issue the appropriate blanks to the petitioners' committee. 
2103. - Petitions. 
(A)  Number of signatures. Recall must be signed by qualified voters equal in number to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of persons registered to vote at the last regular election in the town. 
(B)  Form and content. All papers of the petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one (1) instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the printed name and voting address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the name and office of the official for whom recall is sought. 
(C)  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed, an affidavit executed by the person circulating it stating the number of signatures thereon and affirming that he/she personally circulated the paper, that all the signatures were affixed in the presence of the circulator, and that he/she believes them to be genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
(D)  Time for filing recall petitions. Recall petitions must be filed with the town clerk within thirty (30) calendar days after the clerk's issuance of the blank petition. 
2104. - Procedure after filing. 
(A)  Certification of petition. The town clerk shall forthwith refer the filed recall petition to the board of canvassers which shall within ten (10) business days prepare a certificate as to the sufficiency, specifying if it is sufficient an [and] specifying if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective. The board of canvassers shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by return receipt mail. In reviewing the petition, the board shall accept every signature as valid if it can be reasonably identified to be the signature of the voter it purports to be; and provided, further, that variation of the voter's signature by the insertion or omission of identifying titles or by the substitution of initials for the first or middle names or both shall not in itself be grounds for invalidation of such signature. Any voter who is unable to write may sign by making his or her mark (X) on the petition in the presence of two (2) witnesses who shall subscribe their names on the paper as witnesses to the signing. 
(B)  Court review; new petition. A determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
2105. - Submission to voters. 
    The vote of the town on a recall petition shall be held not less than thirty (30) calendar days and not more than sixty (60) calendar days from the date that the board of canvassers certified the petition as sufficient. 
2106. - Results of election. 
    If a majority of the votes cast on the question of removal is affirmative, the person whose removal is sought shall thereupon be deemed removed from office upon certification of the election results 
Editor's note- This section is added by Question 6 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
ARTICLE XXII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- This article is renumbered because of Recall Article added by Question 6 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 

2201. - Dual office holding. 
    No paid employees of the town shall be eligible to hold any elective office in the town; nor shall any elected official of the town be eligible for appointment to or for the holding of any position as a paid employees [employee] of the town while serving as such elected official, or for one (1) year following the expiration of the term for which he or she have [has] been elected. For purposes of this section, paid employees of the school department shall be deemed to be employees of the town. 
2202. - Public records. 
    All records and accounts of every department, office and agency of the town shall be public records as defined in state law, with such exceptions as are set forth in state law, and shall be open to inspection by any person so requesting in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
2203. - Codification and revision of ordinances. 
    The town council, within two (2) years following the effective date of this Charter, and at least every five (5) years thereafter, shall cause to be prepared a revision or codification of the ordinances of the town which are currently in effect and are appropriate for continuation as local laws of the town. Such revision or codification shall be prepared under the supervision of the town solicitor, but the council may authorize the solicitor to contract for the services of persons or organizations experienced in the performance of such work. 
2204. - Conflict of interest. 
    The conflict of interest provisions of state law shall apply to all officials of the town as prescribed therein, in accordance with all prohibitions and definitions therein contained. 
2205. - Charter amendment and review. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time, or a new Charter adopted, in the manner provided by the Constitution of the state. No amendment or proposed new Charter shall be placed before the electors for a vote thereon by the council until a public hearing has been held on all such amendments or on such new Charter. It shall not be necessary for the full text of proposed amendments, or of a proposed new Charter, to be printed on the ballot. A digest or description thereof, or any statement or question which substantially expresses the purpose or identifies the subject matter to be voted upon shall be sufficient. The council shall approve of the wording of any such digest, description, statement or question as it shall appear upon the ballot. A copy of the full text of the proposed amendments, or of the proposed new Charter, shall be posted in each polling place and such other places as may be designated by the canvassing authority. 
(A)  Should two (2) or more amendments adopted at the same time have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail. The section[s] of any amendment added to this Charter shall be numbered by the town clerk and inserted in their appropriate places. 
(B)  In the tenth year following the year of the adoption of this Charter, and in each subsequent tenth year, the town council shall appoint a charter review commission of nine (9) members, all of whom shall be electors and residents of the town and not more than five (5) of whom shall be members of the same political party. Said commission shall review the Charter of the town as it exists at the time of its appointment, and propose to the council such amendments, if any, as it may deem necessary and advisable. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
2206. - Fees. 
    All fees, penalties and payments collected by town official[s] or agencies in their official capacities shall be deposited in the general funds of the town, and the compensation paid to each official shall be in lieu of all fees, penalties and payments payable to such officials in the performance of his or her duties. 
2207. - Annual audit. 
    Within three (3) months after the beginning of each fiscal year, the town council by resolution shall arrange for an annual independent audit of the books, accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the town, as of the close of the preceding fiscal year, to be conducted either by state auditor or, following competitive bidding, by a certified public accountant holding a certificate from this state and having no personal interest in the financial affairs of the town. Such examination shall conform to applicable state law and with generally accepted auditing standards, and, further, allow for the auditor to express opinions on the financial condition of the town. A copy of the audit report shall be furnished to the town manager, and a copy or copies as requested to the council. A copy shall also be filed with the town clerk for public inspection. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 1 approved at February 8, 1994 Special Election. 
2208. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer of the town shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, shall take and subscribe to the following oath of office or affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the town clerk: 
I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution and obey the laws of the United States of America and the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations; and I will in all respects observe the provision of the Charter and ordinances of the Town of West Warwick, and will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of... 
2209. - Conviction of crime. 
    Any employee or elected or appointed official of the town who shall have been charged with a felony may, at the sole discretion of the town council, be suspended from office or employment with or without pay pending trial, and any official of the town who shall have been convicted of or entered of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony charge shall be automatically suspended from office or employment without pay pending the outcome of any appeal from said conviction. Any such employee or elected or appointed official whose conviction shall stand following the exhaustion of all appeals shall be deemed to have vacated his or her office or employment. Any such employee or elected or appointed official who is acquitted or whose final conviction shall be overturned upon appeal, may resume his or her duties and shall be paid all compensation that would otherwise have been due during his or her unpaid suspension from office or employment. 
Editor's note- This section is amended by Question 17 Approved at November 5, 1996 General Election. 
2210. - Partial invalidity. 
    If any section or part of a section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that the provision or language held invalid may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply, and if any section or part of section concerned with election procedures shall be held invalid by such court, the pertinent election procedures set forth in the law of the state shall apply. 
2211. - Special acts superseded. 
    The following special acts of the General Assembly pertaining to the granting of tenure in office to officers of town government in the Town of West Warwick, and any other special acts of like nature which shall have been enacted prior to the date upon which this Charter takes effect, shall be superseded by applicable provisions of this Charter: Public Laws of 1968, Chapter 174; Public Laws of 1973, Section[s] 1, 2 and 3 of Chapter 70; Public Laws of 1975, Chapter 138; Public Laws of 1978, Chapters 316, 318 and 319; and Public Laws of 1986, Chapter 58, provided, however that any officer of the town holding office at the time this Charter takes effect, who shall have been granted tenure in office under the terms of any such special act of the General Assembly, shall continue to enjoy said tenure as if such act had remained in effect. All other special acts or parts of acts of the General Assembly pertaining to the Town of West Warwick, which are in conflict with provisions of this Charter, shall be superseded by said Charter provision. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- This article is renumbered because of Recall Article added by Question 6 approved on February 8, 1994 Special Election. 

2301. - Adoption of Charter. 
    This Home Rule Charter for the Town of West Warwick shall be submitted to the electors of the town at the general election to be held on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 1986, in such manner as is provided by state law. 
2302. - Effective date. 
    This Charter shall take effect on the first Monday in December, 1988, at twelve o'clock noon if the same shall have been approved by the electors as provided in Section 2301 hereof, and such approval shall have been certified by the canvassing authority, provided, however, that such provisions of this Charter as relate to the election of the mayor, the members of the town council, and the school committee shall be deemed to have taken effect on the first day prescribed by state law for the filing of declarations of candidacy for the general election to be held on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 1988. 
2303. - First election under Charter. 
    At the general election held on Tuesday after the first Monday in November 1988, the electors of the town shall vote for a mayor, five (5) members of the town council, and two (2) members of the school committee, to fill the offices established by this Charter in Article III, Section 301, Article IV, Section 401, and Article XIX, Section 1901, respectively. Said officials thus elected shall take office on the effective date of this Charter as prescribed in Section 2302 of this Article. 
2304. - Continuation in office. 
    All officials of the town, elective and appointive, shall continue in office following the effective date of this Charter, and shall exercise the powers and duties of their respective offices as these were constituted at the time of their election or appointment, until successors have been elected and qualified or duly appointed under the terms of this Charter, or until their offices have been abolished by ordinance in implementation of this Charter. 
2305. - Continuation of personnel. 
    All persons employed in the service of the town, at the effective date of this Charter, shall continue in such employment until their status is altered in accordance with the provisions of this Charter or regulations enacted pursuant thereto. 
2306. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    The town council shall have the authority to make any changes or transfers in appropriations existing when this Charter takes effect, where such changes or transfers are required for the operation of the town government under the provisions of this Charter. 
2307. - Ordinances to implement Charter. 
    The town council shall proceed to enact or adopt as promptly as possible all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations which may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Charter. 
2308. - Transfer of records and property. 
    All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any office, department or agency or portion thereof, all of the powers and duties of which are assigned to any other office, department, or agency shall be transferred and delivered to the office, department or agency to which such powers and duties are so assigned. If part of the powers and duties of any office, department or agency or portion thereof are assigned to another office, department, or agency, all records, property, and equipment relating exclusively thereto shall be transferred and delivered to the office, department, or agency to which such powers and duties are so assigned. In the event of disagreement over the transfer of the same, the mayor shall make the final decision. 
2309. - Continuance of contracts and obligations. 
    All contracts and obligations entered into by the town prior to the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect. 
2310. - Pending actions and proceedings. 
    No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time when this Charter shall take effect, brought by or against the town or any office, department, or agency or officer thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything herein contained. 
2311. - Continuation of tax obligations. 
    All taxes levied or assessed by the town prior to the effective date of this Charter, which have not been collected by the town, shall be collected with any interest and penalties thereon by the town government hereby established in accordance with state law. 
2312. - Continuance of ordinances. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the town in force at the time when this Charter takes effect, not inconsistent with this Charter, shall continue in force until amended or repealed. 
2313. - Town meeting referendum. 
    At the regular town election in November, 1990, the town council shall present to the voters of the town, for their approval or rejection, an amendment to this Charter providing for the elimination of the financial town meeting. 
2314. - Instances not covered by this article. 
    In all instances involving the transition of the town government from that under the previous laws governing the town to that under this Charter, which are not covered by the provisions of this article or by other provisions of this Charter, the council shall supply necessary details and procedures and may adopt such rules, regulations, and ordinances as may be required therefore [therefor]. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table contains a chronological listing of amendments enacted subsequent to November 4, 1986, which affect the Home Rule Charter of the town. 
Date of 
Approval Section  Section 
this Charter 11- 4-86 Arts. I-XXIII Arts. I-XXIII  2- 8-94 102, 301-308 402, 404, 407 502, 505, 508 509, 601-605 701, 704, 705 801, 804, 807 902, 905, 906 908, 913, 915 1004, 1101, 1103 1104, 1201, 1204 1301, 1303, 1401 1403, 1501 1503-1506, 1601 1604-1607, 1609 1610, 1703, 1802 1901, 1903 2001-2006, 2106 2201-2211 2301-2314 11- 5-96 806, 912, 916 1001, 2209       Added 104, 407  1- 7-97       Added 104       Added 407(S) 806(B) 912 916 1001 2209  6-19-01 308(H) 807(B) 908(D)(4) 915       Rpld 1005 1301-1303 1402 1502 1702(C) 1703 Art. XVIII(title)  1801-1803 11- 4-08  405 11- 2-10 307, 403(B), 503 1609, 1901       Added 1611, 1612 11- 4-14 401, 1001, 2101  4-28-16 2016-58(Res.) 2004  4-28-16 2016-59(Res.) 2005  
PART II - SPECIAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This part contains special acts relating to the Town of West Warwick. Only those acts of general and prospective effect are set out. A table following the compilation shows the acts not included and the reasons for their omission. 
Each act is set out in a separate article, and the articles are in chronological order. The sequence of sections within each article is the same as in the act comprising it. A history note in parentheses following each section cites the original source of the section and any subsequent amendments. Amendments have been worked into their proper places and amended or repealed provisions deleted. 
The editors have added catchlines in boldface print preceding each section. 
It should be noted that Part I of this volume contains the Home Rule Charter for the town which was approved by the voters at the November 4, 1986, General Election, being effective at noon on the first Monday in December, 1988. Section 2111 of such Charter provides that special acts of the General Assembly pertaining to the granting of tenure to certain officers in town government enacted prior to the effective date of the Charter shall be superseded by applicable provisions of the Charter, provided that those officers who have been granted tenure under the special acts shall continue to enjoy such tenure as if such act had remained in effect; and that all other special acts or parts thereof pertaining to the town which are in conflict with provisions of the Charter shall be superseded by such Charter provisions. 

ARTICLE 1. - DIVISION OF WARWICK AND WEST WARWICK 

Sec. 1. - Towns divided. 
    The Town of Warwick is hereby divided into two (2) towns. All the territory constituting representative districts one and two of the present town shall constitute the Town of Warwick, and shall constitute representative districts one and two of the Town of Warwick after the passage of this act. All the territory constituting representative districts three, four and five of the present town shall constitute the Town of West Warwick and shall constitute representative districts one, two and three, respectively, of the Town of West Warwick after the passage of this act. Both of said towns shall be a part of the Second Congressional District. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  1) 
Sec. 2. - General corporate nature, statutory powers, etc. 
    The inhabitants of each of said towns shall be a body corporate, and each body corporate shall exercise and enjoy, all the rights, powers, privileges and franchises granted, and shall be subject to the liabilities imposed upon towns by the constitution and General Laws of this state now and hereafter in force. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Representation in general assembly. 
    From the Town of Warwick, there shall be elected one senator and two (2) representatives; that is, one representative shall be elected by each of the representative districts in said town. From the Town of West Warwick, there shall be elected one senator and three (3) representatives; that is, one representative shall be elected by each of the representative districts in said town. 
    For the purpose of filling the vacancies created by this act, the present representatives from the first and second districts of the present Town of Warwick shall serve as representatives of the first and second districts, respectively, of the Town of Warwick, and the present representatives from the third, fourth and fifth districts of the present Town of Warwick shall serve as representatives of the first, second and third districts, respectively, of the Town of West Warwick; and the present senator from the present Town of Warwick shall serve as senator from the Town of Warwick; said representatives and senator to serve until their terms as representatives and senator from, the present Town of Warwick would have expired if said town had not been divided. The electors of the Town of West Warwick shall on the first Tuesday following the first Monday of November, 1913, elect a senator who shall serve for one year and until his successor is elected and qualified. After said terms shall have expired the electors of each of said towns shall elect their senator and representatives as is prescribed by the constitution and General Laws of the State of Rhode Island. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  3) 
State Law reference- Senatorial districts described, G.L. 1956,  22-1-2; representative districts described, G.L. 1956,  22-2-2. 
Sec. 4. - When district court sits. 
    The district court of the fourth judicial district shall meet in Warwick each Tuesday and in West Warwick each Friday, at some regular hour to be fixed by the court, and such days shall be return days for civil writs issued from this court; but said court shall not sit on legal holidays for the transaction of civil business. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  4) 
State Law reference- Sessions of district court, G.L. 1956,  8-8-13. 
Sec. 5. - Drawing of grand and petit jurors. 
    There shall be drawn by the town council of the town of West Warwick, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the General Laws, for the drawing of jurors, twenty-two grand jurors and forty-three petit jurors for service in the superior court for the county of Kent, and there shall be drawn by the town council of the town of Warwick at the time and in the manner prescribed by the General Laws for the drawing of jurors fourteen grand jurors and thirty petit jurors for service in the superior court for the county of Kent. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  5) 
State Law reference- Drawing of jurors and the number thereof, G.L. 1956,  9-9-16, 9-9-20. 
Sec. 6. - Boards of police commissioners. 
    There shall be a board of police commissioners for the town of Warwick, consisting of three members, all of whom shall be qualified electors of said town, and there shall be a board of police commissioners for the town of West Warwick, consisting of three members, all of whom shall be qualified electors of said town. The members of each of said boards shall be elected by the electors of their respective towns at the first town election to be holden in each of said towns after this act takes effect. Of the three commissioners chosen on each of said boards, one shall serve for one year, one for two years and one for three years from the date of their election, and thereafter there shall be elected at each annual election for town officers in each of said towns one member of the police commission for said town to serve for three years. Each of said boards of police commissioners shall in their respective towns have all the privileges and powers that are conferred upon the board of police commissioners of the present town of Warwick by virtue of Chapter 695 of the Public Laws of Rhode Island, approved May 5, 1911. The annual salary of each member of each of said boards shall be three hundred dollars, and each board is hereby authorized to elect a clerk and to determine the salary of the same. The records of each of said boards shall at all times be open to the inspection of the governor, or to such person or persons whom he may designate in writing. The clerks of each of said boards of police commissioners shall give a bond in the sum of five thousand dollars to their respective towns with surety or sureties satisfactory to the town treasurer thereof, but the members of said boards shall not be required to give bond. The board of police commissioners of the present town of Warwick shall when this act becomes operative deliver to the police commissioners of the respective towns such records, documents and papers relative to the granting of licenses of every description, and of all other matters within the jurisdiction of said board that may pertain to each of said respective towns. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  6) 
Editor's note- The board of police commissioners of West Warwick has been abolished and its functions transferred to the town council by Laws 1923, ch. 2420, appearing as art. 3 hereof. 
Sec. 7. - Custody of records, copies. 
    All books of record, plats and assessors' plats of the present town of Warwick shall become the property of the town of Warwick, but the inhabitants of West Warwick shall have the same rights of access to said records and plats as the inhabitants of the town of Warwick. And the Warwick Division Commission, hereinafter created, shall forthwith cause to be made copies of all such records and plats as said commission may deem necessary for the use of said town of West Warwick. The cost of making such copies shall be borne and paid equally by the towns of Warwick and West Warwick. Said copies when so made shall become and be the property of the town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  7) 
Sec. 8. - Elective officers specified; terms. 
    On the first Tuesday following the first Monday of November, 1913, and annually thereafter, the electors of each of said towns shall elect a town council of five members, town clerk, town treasurer, a school committee of five members, a board of tax assessors of three members, and such other town officers as may be provided for by the General Laws, and which are not in conflict with the provisions of this act relating to the establishment of a police commission. 
    Of the board of tax assessors so chosen in 1913, by each of said towns, one member shall serve for one year, one for two years, and one for three years; and thereafter at each annual election for town officers in each of said towns, there shall be elected one assessor of taxes to serve for three years. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  8) 
Cross reference- School committee membership, Art. 26. 
Sec. 9. - Election of probate judge. 
    The town council of each of said towns may elect a probate judge in accordance with Chapter 306, Section 3 of the General Laws. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  9) 
Editor's note- G.L. 1909, ch. 306,  3 appears as G.L. 1956,  8-9-4, 8-9-5. 
Sec. 10. - Jurisdiction of pending proceedings. 
    All proceedings commenced or pending prior to the time when this act shall take effect before the court of probate in the present town of Warwick, over which the court of probate of the town of West Warwick would acquire jurisdiction, shall remain within the jurisdiction of the court of probate of the town of Warwick until their final termination. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  10) 
Sec. 11. - Continuation of officers; transitional registration of voters. 
    The town officers now in office in the present town of Warwick shall hold office until the officers of the respective towns of Warwick and West Warwick shall have been elected as provided for in this act, and shall have qualified for their respective offices, and said town officers shall continue to perform for both of said towns all of the duties now imposed by law upon them, until such new officers are elected and qualified. And the moderators of the present voting districts and other election officials shall continue to serve until after the elections herein provided for both of said towns until their successors are elected and qualified. All persons who if registered would be qualified to vote in the present town of Warwick at the annual election to be holden on the fourth day of November, 1913, if this act had not been passed, may register with the town clerk of the present town of Warwick in the same manner as may be required by law, and such registration shall be good within and for both of the towns created under this act to all intents and purposes as it would have been in the town of Warwick had said town not been divided by this act. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  11) 
Sec. 12. - Caucuses. 
    The respective town committees of all qualified political parties in the present town of Warwick shall issue calls for caucuses for their respective political parties in the two towns created hereunder in such manner as said town committees may determine to nominate candidates for senators and representatives in the general assembly, town and district officers, members of town and other committees, and transact such other business as said town committee may direct to be transacted. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  12) 
State Law reference- Caucuses replaced by primaries, G.L. 1956,  17-15-6. 
Sec. 13. - Financial town meeting, fiscal year. 
    The electors of the town of Warwick qualified to vote on any proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money in said town shall on the Tuesday following the third Monday in November, in the year 1920, and thereafter annually on the second Tuesday in May, assemble in town meeting at the town hall in said town, at two o'clock in the afternoon, for the purpose of hearing official reports, ordering a tax or taxes, making appropriations and transacting any other business appertaining to the financial affairs of said town. The fiscal year of the town of Warwick shall include the twelve calendar months from May to April both inclusive. 
    The electors of the town of West Warwick qualified to vote on any proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money in said town, shall annually on the Tuesday following the third Monday in May, assemble in town meeting at a place in said town designated by the town council of West Warwick, at two o'clock in the afternoon, for the purpose of hearing official reports, ordering a tax or taxes, making appropriations and transacting any other business appertaining to the financial affairs of said town. The fiscal year of the town of West Warwick shall include the twelve calendar months from May to April both inclusive. 
    Said town meeting in each of said towns shall be warned and called as provided by law with respect to town meetings prescribed by law. The list of electors qualified to vote at such town meetings in each of said towns, shall be made out and canvassed in the same manner as provided by law with respect to elective town meetings. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  13; Laws 1915, ch. 1326,  1; Laws 1920, ch. 2004,  1; Laws 1921, ch. 2149,  1) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that Laws 1952, ch. 2892,  1, included herein as art. 12, provides that the financial town meeting be held annually on the Tuesday following the third Monday in March at 7:00 in the evening. 
State Law reference- Notice of meetings, G.L. 1956,  45-3-5; canvas of electors, G.L. 1956,  17-10.1 et seq. 
Sec. 14. - Apportionment of debts, liabilities. 
    All debts and liquidated liabilities of the present town of Warwick shall be and remain valid and binding. The Warwick Division Commission, hereinafter created, shall apportion the payment of said debts and liquidated liabilities between the towns of Warwick and West Warwick in proportion to the ratable property in said towns, according to the assessment of taxes last made in the present town of Warwick. Such apportionment shall not bar the holder of such debt or liability against the present town of Warwick from recovering as fully as said holder might have recovered against the present town, but shall be made only for the purpose of determining which town shall be primarily liable for each debt and for establishing a right of recoupment between said towns if [of] the town primarily liable to pay any obligation apportioned to it. All actions in law and equity now pending against the present town of Warwick may be prosecuted to final judgment without the substitution of any new defendant, but execution shall issue against the town treasurers of both the town of Warwick and West Warwick and the amount under said execution shall be paid by the two towns in the same proportions as present indebtedness is apportioned by the Warwick Division Commission. Causes of action against the present town of Warwick in which no suit has yet been brought and in which the statute of limitations has not expired, if brought, shall be brought in the manner prescribed in Chapter 46 of the General Laws of 1909, but against both the towns of Warwick and West Warwick, and in the event of the execution against said towns, said towns shall pay the judgment secured in the same proportions as present indebtedness is apportioned by the Warwick Division Commission. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  14) 
Editor's note- Chapter 46, G.L. 1909, is distributed throughout G.L. 1956, tits. 29 and 45. 
Sec. 15. - Maintenance of division highways. 
    Of the highways forming portions of the division line between said towns, those roads known as "Quaker avenue," and "Rocky Hill road," extending from the East Greenwich line at Barton's corner northerly to the Centreville road, (sometimes called Warwick avenue), shall be maintained and kept in repair by the town of Warwick, and the remainder of such division highways shall be maintained and kept in repair by the town of West Warwick, and all claims brought for damages by reason of any defect in said highways, in accordance with Chapter 46 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956, ch. 46], shall be brought accordingly. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  15) 
Note- See the note following  14. 
Sec. 16. - Division commission created. 
    There shall be appointed by the governor of the State of Rhode Island a commission of five competent persons, two of whom shall be residents of the town of Warwick created by this act, and two of whom shall be residents of the town of West Warwick, and one of whom shall be a resident of some city or town in Rhode Island other than Warwick or West Warwick, which commission shall be known as the Warwick Division Commission, and which commission shall perform the duties imposed upon it by the provisions of this act, and which is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to do and perform each and every act, necessary and essential to the complete division of the town of Warwick and not otherwise specifically devolved upon any official or person, and the acts of said commission in carrying out the provisions of this act shall be final. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  16) 
Sec. 17 - Duties of division commission. 
    The Warwick Division Commission, as provided for in the preceding section of this act, is hereby authorized and directed to apportion the valuation of the town of Warwick and the valuation of the town of West Warwick, as a basis for the state tax, according to the proportionate part of taxable property situate and within said towns; and the amount so found by them, or by any three of them agreeing, shall be the basis of said state tax for the said towns of Warwick and West Warwick. Said commission shall report the result of their action to the town clerk of Warwick and to the town clerk of West Warwick, when elected and qualified, to the secretary of state and to the general treasurer of the State of Rhode Island. The expenses and compensation of said commission shall be borne equally by said towns of Warwick and West Warwick. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  17) 
Sec. 18. - Repealer; when act effective. 
    All acts and parts of acts, whether of General Laws or special statutory enactments, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, and this act shall take effect and be in force upon its approval by the governor of the State of Rhode Island. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  18) 
Sec. 19. - Expenditures for schools in Warwick. 
    In addition to the powers now vested in school committees by the provisions of the General Laws, the school committee of the town of Warwick is hereby vested with the exclusive power and authority to expend all appropriations for school purposes made at any financial town meeting held in said town: Provided, however, that nothing herein shall be so construed as to vest in said committee the expenditure of any special appropriation for the erection of new school buildings or the purchase of sites therefor. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  19; Laws 1915, ch. 1326) 
Sec. 20. - Appointment, removal of policemen in Warwick. 
    In addition to the powers conferred upon the police commission of the town of Warwick by section 6 of this act, except as hereinafter provided, said police commission may appoint at any regular meeting after the passage of this act so many and such police officers, including the chief of police, a deputy chief of police, captain, lieutenant, and one or more sergeants of police, for service in said town as by rule or otherwise said commission may from time to time determine, which said officers shall hold their respective offices until vacated by death or resignation, except as hereinafter provided; and the chairman of said commission may at any time suspend any such officer or officers from his or their office or offices until the next regular meeting of said commission, at which meeting he shall report any and all such suspensions, with his reasons therefor, and the said commission may continue such suspension or suspensions until the next regular meeting following: Provided, however, that any one or more of the police officers so appointed, including the chief of police, deputy chief of police, captain, lieutenant, and sergeant or sergeants of police, shall be subject to removal from office by said commission, at any regular meeting thereof, for misconduct, or incapacity of such character as the said commission may deem a disqualification for said office; and all such removals shall be by the said commission upon charges made in writing, if requested by such officer or officers, and of which the officer or officers complained of shall have notice and opportunity at the time to be heard thereon; provided further however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to any police officer or constable other than the members of the regular paid police department of said town of Warwick. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  20; Laws 1921, ch. 2148,  1) 
Sec. 21. - Term of office of present policemen in Warwick. 
    Upon the appointment and qualification of said police officers in the town of Warwick in accordance with the provisions of this act, the term of office of the officers composing the existing police force in that town shall terminate. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  21; Laws 1921, ch. 2148,  1) 
Sec. 22. - Effect on old Warwick police commission act. 
    So much of the provisions of section 7 and 8 of chapter 695 of the public laws, passed at the January session, A. D. 1911, entitled "An act providing for a board of police commissioners for the town of Warwick," as are inconsistent with the provisions of this act, are hereby repealed, provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to affect the powers of the police commission of the town of West Warwick as defined in said chapter 695 and in section 6 of this act. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  22; Laws 1921, ch. 2148,  1) 
Editor's note- The West Warwick police commission was abolished and its functions transferred to the town council by Laws 1923, ch. 2420, compiled herein as art. 3. 
Sec. 23. - Sinking land commission created. 
    Howard V. Allen, town treasurer of the town of Warwick, Frank P. Duffy, town treasurer of the town of West Warwick, Arthur B. Harrington, president of the town council of the town of Warwick, and Donat Archambault, president of the town council of the town of West Warwick, and their respective successors in said offices, are hereby created and shall constitute a board of sinking fund commissioners of the sinking fund authorized to be established by the town of Warwick under the power granted by chapter 942 of the general laws passed at the November session of the general assembly, A. D. 1901, entitled "An act authorizing the town of Warwick to issue bonds and to establish a sinking fund for the redemption thereof." 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  23; Laws 1925, ch. 745,  1) 
Sec. 24. - Contributions to sinking fund; compensation. 
    Said towns of Warwick and West Warwick shall annually hereafter from the revenues of said towns, contribute to said sinking fund and pay to the board of sinking fund commissioners for the redemption of said bonds, the following amounts, until said sinking fund with its accumulations shall be sufficient for the redemption at maturity of the bonds for which said sinking fund was established, viz: the town of Warwick four thousand three hundred ninety dollars, and the town of West Warwick, two thousand seven hundred dollars. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  24; Laws 1925, ch. 745,  1) 
Sec. 25. - Powers, duties of sinking fund commissioners. 
    Said board of sinking fund commissioners shall take possession of, sue for, and recover from any person or corporation, said sinking fund, or any part thereof in the possession of such person or corporation, shall have charge and control of said sinking fund, shall invest and reinvest in the name of the board all amounts so recovered or taken possession of and all other amounts contributed thereto and the income and accumulations thereof, as it accrues, in the bonds of towns and cities secured by sinking funds, or certificates of said towns issued in anticipation of taxes, or any securities, except personal securities, in which funds of savings banks of Rhode Island, Massachusetts or New York may by law be invested, and the commissioners may sell and reinvest such securities. They shall keep a record of their proceedings and shall annually make a written report to the financial town meetings of said towns of Warwick and West Warwick of the amount and condition of said bonds and the income thereof for the preceding financial year and said records shall be open to the inspection of the town councils of said towns or to any committee authorized by the respective town councils for that purpose. No member of the board shall receive compensation for his services but the necessary expenses of the board shall be paid by said towns. 
(Laws 1913, ch. 1012,  25; Laws 1925, ch. 745,  1) 
ARTICLE 2. - SEWERAGE SYSTEM 
DIVISION I. - LAWS 1920, CH. 2005, AS AMENDED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- This article contains Laws 1920, ch. 2005, as amended and reenacted in its entirety by Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1. Sections 2 and 3 of said act provided as follows: 
"Sec. 2. Nothing herein shall affect the validity of any action taken or assessments made pursuant to chapter 2005 of the acts of 1920 as amended prior to passage of this act. Assessments made prior to passage of this act shall be collected in the manner set forth in the prior law." 
"Sec. 3. This act shall take effect upon its passage." 
Prior to Laws 1969, ch. 196, said Laws 1920,  2005 had been amended in part by Laws 1934, ch. 2169; Laws 1942, ch. 1183; and Laws 1952, ch. 2925. It was amended in its entirety by Laws 1969, ch. 107. 
Laws 1941, ch. 1112, which was superseded by Laws 1969, ch. 196, abolished the sewer commissioners under Laws 1920, ch. 2005, and substituted the council therefor. 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
    The town of West Warwick is hereby authorized and empowered to construct and maintain main drains or common sewers in any or all of the streets and highways of said town; to purchase all or any part of the drains now in said streets heretofore constructed by any party or parties; to acquire, construct and maintain works or plants for the proper treatment and disposal of sewage, and to acquire suitable sites for such works or plants. The cost and expense of such acquisition, construction, maintenance and purchase shall be paid in the manner hereinafter provided. 
    The sewer commissioners who shall be the members of the town council as and are referred to herein as "said commissioners," are authorized to order any water supplier which services any person assessed by said commissioners pursuant to sections 5 and 6 to terminate the water supply service of any person for non-payment of sewer use fees, charges, pretreatment, non-compliance and assessments. Said commissioners will abide by the rules and regulations of the Public Utilities Commission governing water shut-offs. Upon notification by said commissioners to terminate service, the water supplier shall within fourteen (14) days terminate said service and notify said commissioners that said termination has occurred. Upon notification by said commissioners, the water supplier shall restore the water supply in accordance with the water supplier's policy on water supply restoration. 
    The town of West Warwick shall indemnify and hold harmless the water suppliers from any damages incurred to any party as a result of any actions of the water supplier taken pursuant to the provisions of this section. The water supplier shall receive reimbursement from the town of West Warwick for any fees, charges, assessments or costs incurred by the water supplier which are affiliated with the shut-off and restoration of service. 
    Said commissioners shall have the authority to assess any person any fees, charges and assessments affiliated with the shut-off and restoration of service. When service is provided to a residence occupied by a tenant, the tenant may, after paying the fees, charges and assessments necessary in order to restore or prevent termination of service, deduct the amount paid from the rent due the landlord. The tenant shall provide the landlord with a copy of the receipt from said commissioners when making a deduction from the rent. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1; Laws 1994, ch. 118,  1) 
Sec. 2. - General powers of council. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick shall be vested with the power and authority to plan, acquire, construct, operate, maintain, extend and improve a sewage disposal system for the town or any part or parts thereof. The town council shall also have power to employ a superintendent of sewers, to prescribe his duties, and to employ such other assistants and advisers as may be necessary. The town council from time to time shall fix the salaries of such employees. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  2; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 3. - Agreements authorized. 
    When authorized by vote of its town council, the town of West Warwick may enter into agreements for periods not exceeding 40 years with the state or any other municipal or quasi-municipal corporation or any private party for the treatment or disposal by one party of sewage collected by the other, and the state, such other municipal or quasi-municipal corporations and private parties are authorized to enter into such contracts with the town. 
(Laws 1920,  2005,  3; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 4. - Power of eminent domain. 
    For the purposes of this act, the town of West Warwick may acquire land or other real property, or any interest, estate or right therein, by eminent domain by the methods prescribed by chapter 1 of title 24 of the general laws as it may be amended from time to time, provided that no property or interest, estate or right therein belonging to the state or any political subdivision shall be acquired without its consent and that no property or interest, estate or right therein belonging to or used by a public utility shall be acquired without the consent of the division of public utilities. Any damages which may be agreed upon or determined under said chapter, including any interest and other applicable charges, shall constitute a general obligation of the town, but such obligation shall not at any time be included in the debt of the town for the purpose of ascertaining its borrowing capacity. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  4; Laws 1934, ch. 2169,  1; Laws 1942, ch. 1183,  1; Laws 1952, ch. 2925,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 5. - Special assessments. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick shall, to the extent described below, assess the cost of any project or projects for the construction, completion, extension, enlargement or improvement of the sewage disposal system upon the owners of the estates in the town which abut that portion of any street or highway in or along which any sewer constituting any portion of such project or projects may be located or which otherwise specially benefit from such project or projects. Such assessments may be made separately for each project or for several projects taken together. The cost to be assessed shall be that which is determined by the town council to provide particular rather than general benefit. Such assessments shall be just and equitable and may be based upon frontage or area within a specified reasonable distance from the street or highway or on assessed valuations or on any other factor affording a reasonable measure of benefits or upon any combination of the foregoing. The town council shall not make any particular assessment in excess of the benefit conferred and may make reasonable adjustments of such assessments against estates having a frontage upon more than one street or against estates which for any reason are unable to derive the normal benefits from the system. 
    Such assessments shall name the owners assessed, describe their estates and state the amounts of the assessments but no error [of] omission in the name or description shall invalidate the assessment as long as either the owner or the estate is substantially identified. A copy of such assessments shall be recorded with the town clerk as a public record. From the date of delivery to the town clerk the assessments and interest accruing thereon shall constitute a lien upon the respective estates on a parity with the lien for town taxes until paid in full. The collector of taxes of the town shall have the same rights to enforce such liens against the estates and to collect such assessments and interest from the owners as he has in the case of town taxes. 
    Prior to or forthwith after the delivery to the town clerk of a copy of such assessment, the collector of taxes shall cause notice to be sent to the owner of each estate assessed. The notice shall substantially identify the estate assessed, state the amount of the assessment and refer to the remedy available under this section. The notice shall be mailed postpaid and directed to the last known address of the addressee. If there are owners whose addresses are unknown, a similar notice covering the assessments against their estates shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town and such published notice may be a single collective notice for all such owners. No irregularity in the notice required by this section shall excuse the non-payment of the assessment or affect its validity or any proceedings for the collection thereof as long as there is substantial compliance with the provisions hereof. No deficiency in the notice to the owner of an estate assessed shall excuse the non-payment by others of the assessments against their estates or affect the validity thereof or any proceedings for the collection thereof. 
    Any person aggrieved by any such assessment may within 90 days after the mailing or publication of notice to him file a petition for relief against the town as respondent in the superior court, and the clerk shall thereupon issue a citation to summon the town, and said petition and citation shall be subject to the provisions of section 44-5-29 of the general laws [G.L. 1956,  45-5-29]. If the court finds such assessment invalid in whole or in part, it shall give judgement reducing the amount thereof or for a refund accordingly. The filing of such a petition shall not relieve the estate involved from the lien hereinabove provided for or prevent the assessment becoming due as provided in this section, but the final judgment of the court reducing such assessment in whole or in part shall reduce such lien and the amount due accordingly. The remedy provided in this paragraph shall be exclusive, and no action or proceeding questioning the validity of any such assessment shall be begun after the expiration of said 90-day period. 
    In the event an assessment is partially or wholly invalid, the town council may make a corrected assessment to replace the invalid assessment or portion. The corrected assessment shall be made in the same manner as an original assessment. The first installment of a corrected assessment shall be sufficient to compensate without interest for all installments which would have become due then or theretofore if the corrected assessment had been made at the time of the original assessment. The corrected assessment shall bear interest from the date notice of the corrected assessment was delivered to the town clerk. 
    Each assessment under this act shall be payable in equal annual installments over not less than twenty nor more than thirty years, as determined by the town council, upon a date fixed by the town council and shall bear interest from the date notice of the assessment was delivered to the town clerk until paid at a rate to be fixed at or prior to the assessment by the town council, provided that the whole assessment against any owner or estate may be paid without interest at any time prior to the due date of the first installment thereof, and provided further that the whole unpaid balance of any such assessment together with the interest accrued thereon to the date of payment may be paid at any time. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the town council may provide for increasing the tentative amount of any assessment by a reasonable amount in lieu of interest upon the assumption that the assessment will be paid in annual installments when required and make the assessment in the aggregate amount of the tentative assessment plus such interest charge, which assessment shall be payable in equal annual installments upon a date fixed by the town council without further interest, provided that if any such assessment is paid in full before the expiration of the full term there shall be an equitable adjustment of the interest charge so that interest will be paid on the unpaid balance of the tentative assessment for the period up to such payment in full. 
    In the event of the subdivision of any estate subject to any such assessment by the conveyance of any part or parts thereof to a different owner, the town council may apportion the assessment or the unpaid part thereof among the new estates so created upon any basis which might then be used under this section for a new assessment and such basis need not be the same as that used for the assessment being apportioned. The apportioned assessment shall be payable at the same times and in the same amounts pro rata as the original assessment or unpaid part thereof. In all other respects the apportioned assessment shall be governed by the provisions of this section which would then apply to a new assessment. Upon the recording of the apportioned assessments, the original assessment shall be discharged. 
    All lands in the town of West Warwick held by religious corporations, and on which are located buildings which are used solely for the purposes of holding religious services therein, and all lands in said town held by cemetery corporations and used solely for cemetery purposes, shall be exempt from the payment of any and all assessments for the construction of sewers made in pursuance of the provisions of this act, so long as such lands shall be held and used solely for such purposes: Provided, that all assessments made on such lands for the construction and acquisition of sewers, under the provisions of this act, shall be and remain for thirty years a lien on said lands, without interest, and the town may enforce the collection of such assessments, whenever such lands or any portion thereof shall be abandoned for said purposes, in the same manner as other sewer assessments are collected or enforced. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  5; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 6. - Service charges. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick may fix and revise from time to time a schedule of sewer service charges for the sewer service furnished in the town for the purpose of paying the cost of maintaining, repairing and operating its sewage disposal system (including reserves for such purposes and for renewals and replacements), the principal and interest on all sewer bonds of the town when due, and any other expenses not otherwise provided for which may arise under this act, to the extent that moneys for the foregoing purposes are not otherwise provided. 
    Such charges shall be just and equitable and may be based upon the quantity of water used or the number and size of sewer connections made or the number and kind of plumbing fixtures installed on the estate or upon the number of persons residing or working in or otherwise connected therewith or upon any other factor affecting the use of or the value of the facilities and services furnished or upon any combination of such factors. 
    Such charges shall be assessed by the town council periodically against each estate connected with or using any part of the town's sewage disposal system in the name of the owner, tenant or occupant, who shall be personally liable therefor, but no error or omission in such name or the description of such estate shall invalidate the assessment as long as either the owner, tenant or occupant of the estate is reasonably identified. Sewer service charges shall be payable upon a date fixed by the town council, and if not paid within thirty days thereafter they shall bear interest at the rate of eight per cent per annum from their due date until paid. A certificate signed by the collector of taxes of the town stating the amount of the delinquent charges, their due date, the name of the owner of the estate against which such charges were assessed and the name of the tenant or occupant if assessed to a tenant or occupant who is not the owner and an identification of such estate shall be recorded with the town clerk as a public record. From and after the date of delivery to the town clerk and until the same are paid in full, such delinquent assessments together with the interest accruing thereon shall constitute a lien upon the respective estates on a parity with the lien for town taxes, and the collector of taxes shall have the same rights to enforce such liens and to collect such charges and interest as he has in the case of town taxes. 
    The collector of taxes shall cause notice of the assessment of such charges to be given to the owners and to the tenants and occupants assessed in the manner and with the effect provided above as to special assessments and the remedy provided above as to special assessments shall be applicable. In the event a charge is partially or wholly invalid, the town council may assess a corrected charge to replace the invalid charge or portion. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  6; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 7. - Regular laws authorized; violation, penalty; publication. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick may from time to time prescribe rules and regulations, effective within the town, regulating or requiring the connection of estates and buildings with sewers, and for inspection of the materials, the construction, alteration and use of all connections entering into such sewers, and may prescribe penalties not exceeding fifty dollars, for violation of each such rule or regulation, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Such rules and regulations shall not be effective prior to their publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  7; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 8. - Pollution prohibited. 
    The effluent from any system of sewerage or part thereof operated under the provisions of this act which may be discharged into any lake, stream or river shall be at all times of such a character as not to pollute or contaminate the waters of such lake, stream or river so as to be dangerous to the public health, and if the waters of any such lake, stream or river are used as a potable supply, such effluent shall be of such a character as not to pollute or contaminate such potable supply or to endanger the public health: Provided, however, that the duly authorized representatives of any city or town in this state dependent upon or making use of the waters of such lake, stream or river as a potable supply, may at any time, after thirty days' notice to said town of West Warwick that the use and maintenance of any system of sewerage provided herein is such as to be dangerous to the public health or to pollute or contaminate such potable supply, petition the superior court within and/or the county of Kent for a restraining order to prohibit said town from so using such lake, stream or river as to pollute or contaminate the waters thereof or be dangerous to the public health, and such court, after due investigation and hearing, may make such order as will effectually remove such pollution or contamination as may be found to be dangerous to the public health. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  8; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 9. - Bonds authorized. 
    The Town of West Warwick is hereby empowered, in addition to authority previously granted, to issue bonds to an amount not exceeding sixteen million dollars ($16,000,000.00) from time to time under its corporate name and seal or a facsimile of such seal. In computing the aggregate amount of bonds which may be issued under the authority of this section, bonds or serial notes issued under this section prior to the effective date of Chapter 196 of the Public Laws of 1969 shall be excluded. The bonds of each issue shall mature in annual installments of principal, the first installment to be not later than three (3) years and the last installment not later than thirty (30) years after the date of the bonds. No installment of principal of any issue shall exceed any prior installment by more than six (6) per cent of the total principal amount of the issue. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  9; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1; Laws 1976, ch. 90; Laws 1977, ch. 161; Laws 1978, ch. 336,  1) 
Sec. 10. - Terms, form of bonds; how issued and sold. 
    The bonds shall be signed by the town treasurer and by the manual or facsimile signature of the president of the town council and shall be issued and sold at not less than par and accrued interest in such amounts as the town council may determine. The manner of sale, denominations, maturities, interest rates and other terms, conditions and details of any bonds or notes issued under this act may be fixed by the resolution of the town council authorizing the issue or by separate resolution of the town council, or, to the extent provisions for these matters are not so made, they may be fixed by the officers authorized to sign the bonds or notes. The bonds of each issue shall bear interest at a rate or rates not exceeding six per cent per annum. Coupons shall bear the facsimile signature of the town treasurer. The proceeds derived from the sale of the bonds shall be delivered to the town treasurer, and such proceeds exclusive of premiums and accrued interest shall be expended (a) for the purposes set forth in section 1 and section 4 of the [this] act (exclusive of current operating and maintenance expenses), or (b) in payment of the principal of or interest on temporary notes issued under section 11 of this act or (c) in repayment of advances under section 12 of this act. No purchaser of any bonds or notes under this act, however, shall be in any way responsible for the proper application of the proceeds derived from the sale thereof. The proceeds of bonds or notes issued under this act, any applicable federal or state assistance and the other moneys referred to in section 14 of this act shall be deemed appropriated for the purposes of this act without further action than that required by this act. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  10; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 11. - Temporary notes. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick may authorize the issue from time to time of interest bearing or discounted notes in anticipation of the authorization or issue of bonds under section 10 of this act or in anticipation of the receipt of federal or state aid for the purposes of this act. The amount of original notes issued in anticipation of bonds may not exceed the amount of bonds which may be issued under this act and the amount of original notes issued in anticipation of federal or state aid may not exceed the amount of available federal or state aid as estimated by the town treasurer. Temporary notes issued hereunder shall be signed by the town treasurer and by the president of the town council and shall be payable within three years from their respective dates, but the principal of and interest on notes issued for a shorter period may be renewed or paid from time to time by the issue of other notes hereunder, provided the period from the date of an original note to the maturity of any note issued to renew or pay the same debt or the interest thereon shall not exceed three years. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  11; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 12. - Advances authorized. 
    Pending any authorization or issue of bonds hereunder or pending or in lieu of any authorization or issue of notes hereunder, the town treasurer, with the approval of the town council, may apply funds in the general treasury of the town to the purposes specified in section 10 of this act, such advances to be repaid without interest from the proceeds of bonds or notes subsequently issued or from the proceeds of applicable federal or state assistance or from other available funds. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  12; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 13. - Investment of proceeds pending expenditure. 
    Any proceeds of bonds or notes issued hereunder or of any applicable federal or state assistance, pending their expenditure, may be deposited or invested by the town treasurer in demand deposits, time deposits or savings deposits in banks which are members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or in obligations issued or guaranteed by the United States of America or by any agency or instrumentality thereof or by the State of Rhode Island or as may be provided in any other applicable law of the State of Rhode Island. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  13; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 14. - Application of accrued interests, premiums, profits. 
    Any accrued interest received upon the sale of bonds or notes hereunder shall be applied to the payment of the first interest due thereon. Any premiums arising from the sale of bonds or notes hereunder, any net earnings or profits realized from the deposit or investment of funds hereunder and any balance of bond or note proceeds remaining after completion of the projects shall, in the discretion of the town treasurer, be applied to the cost of preparing, issuing and marketing bonds or notes hereunder to the extent not otherwise provided, to the payment of the cost of the projects or the cost of additional improvements coming within the description of the projects in section 1, to the payment of the principal of or interest on bonds or notes issued hereunder or to any one or more of the foregoing. The cost of preparing, issuing and marketing bonds or notes hereunder may also, in the discretion of the town treasurer, be met from bond or note proceeds exclusive of premium and accrued interest or from other moneys available therefor. In exercising any discretion under this section, the town treasurer shall be governed by any instructions adopted by the town council. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  14; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 15. - Effect of debts; amortization. 
    All bonds and notes issued under this act and the debts evidenced thereby shall be obligatory on the town of West Warwick in the same manner and to the same extent as other debts lawfully contracted by it and shall be excepted from the operation of Section 45-12-2 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956,  45-12-2]. No such obligation shall at any time be included in the debt of the town for the purpose of ascertaining its borrowing capacity. The town shall annually appropriate a sum sufficient to pay the principal and interest coming due within the year on bonds and notes issued hereunder to the extent that moneys therefor are not otherwise provided. In order to provide such sum in each year and notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, all taxable property in the town shall be subject to ad valorem taxation by the town without limitation as to rate or amount, except that the rate of taxation on intangibles shall be limited as provided in Section 44-5-6 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956,  44-5-6]. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  15; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 16. - Validity of debts not affected by change in affairs. 
    Any bonds or notes issued under the provisions of this act and coupons on any bonds, if properly executed by officers of the town in office on the date of execution, shall be valid and binding according to their terms notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payment therefor any or all of such officers shall for any reason have ceased to hold office. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  16; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 17. - Federal, state assistance. 
    The Town of West Warwick, acting by its town council, is authorized to apply for, contract for and expend any federal or state advances or other grants or assistance which may be available for the purposes of this act, and any such expenditures may be in addition to other moneys provided in this act. To the extent of any inconsistency between any law of this state and any applicable federal law or regulation, the latter shall prevail. Federal and state advances, with interest where applicable, whether contracted for prior to or after the effective date of this act, may be repaid as a cost of the projects under section 10 of this act. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  17; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 18. - Compliance with constitution. 
    In all matters related to the purposes of this act, including without limitation and where applicable, the condemnation of any land or interest in land and the levy and collection of assessments or other charges on account of the projects, all steps shall be taken which are necessary to meet constitutional requirements whether or not such steps are required by statute. The validity of bonds and notes issued hereunder shall in no way depend upon the validity or occurrence of any action required by the preceding sentence or of any other action not specifically required herein for the issue of such bonds or notes. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  18; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1) 
Sec. 19. - Approval of bonds by electors. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no bonds in excess of $12,000,000 heretofore authorized under said Chapter 2005 shall be issued in excess of amounts approved from time to time by vote of a majority of the electors present and voting on the question at an annual or special financial town meeting. A vote not to approve an amount of bonds under Chapter 2005 shall not preclude any later vote to approve the same or a different amount. 
(Laws 1920, ch. 2005,  19; Laws 1969, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1969, ch. 196,  1; Laws 1972, ch. 107,  1; Laws 1977, ch. 161,  2) 
Sec. 20. - Agreements for use by adjoining municipalities. 
    The Town of West Warwick and any municipality or municipalities bordering said town are hereby authorized to enter into agreements for the purpose of providing for the common use of the West Warwick sewer system, and said town of West Warwick and such bordering municipalities may do everything necessary and proper to carry out this authority. 
(Laws 1973, ch. 37,  1) 
Sec. 21. - Assessments and charges allowed by recorded contract constitute lien. 
    Whenever the town council, pursuant to said act, enters into a contract in accordance with said act, and the contract is recorded in the city or town clerk's office, any sewer assessment allowed to be levied by the Town of West Warwick and any operation and maintenance or user charges allowed to be levied by the Town of West Warwick shall constitute a lien upon said subject properties in parity with the lien for town taxes, and upon default, said properties may be sold by the Town of West Warwick for the enforcement of said lien by the same procedures as if land were situated within the Town of West Warwick, and said sale being conducted within the Town of West Warwick as if said property were located herein. 
(Laws 1983, ch. 10,  1) 
Secs. 22-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION II. - LAWS 1979, CH. 82, AS AMENDED 

Sec. 31. - Bonds authorized. 
    The town of West Warwick is hereby empowered, in addition to authority previously granted by Chapter 2005 of the Public Laws of 1920, as amended, to issue bonds to an amount not exceeding $4,500,000.00 from time to time under its corporate name and seal or a facsimile of such seal. The bonds of each issue may be issued in the form of serial bonds and or term bonds or a combination thereof and shall be payable, either by the maturity of principal in the case of serial bonds or by mandatory serial redemption in the case of term bonds, in annual installments of principal, the first installment to be not later than five (5) years and the last installment not later than thirty (30) years after the date of the bonds; provided no installment of principal of any issue shall exceed any prior installment by more than seven and one-half (71/2) per cent of the total principal amount of the issue. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  1; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  1) 
Sec. 32. - Terms, forms of bonds; how issued and sold. 
    The bonds shall be signed by the town treasurer and by the manual or facsimile signature of the president of the town council and shall be issued and sold at not less than par and accrued interest in such amounts as the town council may authorize. The manner of sale, denominations, maturities, interest rates and other terms, conditions and details of any bonds or notes issued under this act may be fixed by the proceedings of the town council authorizing the issue or by separate resolution of the town council or, to the extent provisions for these matters are not so made, they may be fixed by the officers authorized to sign the bonds or notes. Interest coupons (if any) shall bear the facsimile signature of the town treasurer. The proceeds derived from the sale of the bonds shall be delivered to the town treasurer, and such proceeds exclusive of premiums and accrued interest shall be expended (a) for planning, acquiring, constructing, operating, maintaining, extending and improving a sewage disposal system for the town, or any part or parts thereof, as provided in Chapter 2005 of the Public Laws of 1920, as amended, or (b) in payment of the principal of or interest on temporary notes issued under section 33 or (c) in repayment of advances under section 34. No purchaser of any bonds or notes under this act shall be in any way responsible for the proper application of the proceeds derived from the sale thereof. The proceeds of bonds or notes issued under this act, any applicable federal or state assistance and the other moneys referred to in section 36 shall be deemed appropriated for the purposes of this act without further action than that required by this act. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  2; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  2) 
Sec. 33. - Temporary notes. 
    The town council may be [by] resolution authorize the issue from time to time of interest bearing or discounted notes in anticipation of the issue of bonds under section 32 or in anticipation of the receipt of federal or state aid for the purposes of this act. The amount of original notes issued in anticipation of bonds may not exceed the amount of bonds which may be issued under this act and the amount of original notes issued in anticipation of federal or state aid may not exceed the amount of available federal or state aid as estimated by the town treasurer. Temporary notes issued hereunder shall [be] signed by the town treasurer and by the president of the town council and shall be payable within five (5) years from their respective dates, but the principal of and interest and notes issued for a shorter period may be renewed or paid from time to time by the issue of other notes hereunder, provided the period from the date of an original note to the maturity of any notice issued to renew or pay the same debt or the interest thereon shall not exceed five (5) years. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  3; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  3) 
Sec. 34. - Advances authorized. 
    Pending any authorization or issue of bonds hereunder or pending or in lieu of any authorization or issue of notes hereunder, the town treasurer, with the approval of the town council, may, to the extent that bonds or notes may be issued hereunder, apply funds in the treasury of the town to the purposes specified in section 32, such advances to be repaid without interest from the proceeds of bonds or notes subsequently issued or from the proceeds of applicable federal or state assistance or from other available funds. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  4; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  4) 
Sec. 35. - Investment of proceeds pending expenditure. 
    Any proceeds of bonds or notes issued hereunder or of any applicable federal or state assistance, pending their expenditure, may be deposited or invested by the town treasurer in demand deposits, time deposits or savings deposits, in banks which are members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or in obligations issued or guaranteed by the United States of America or by any agency or instrumentality thereof or as may be provided in any other applicable law of the state of Rhode Island. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  5; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  5) 
Sec. 36. - Application of accrued interests, premiums, profits. 
    Any accrued interest received upon the sale of bonds or notes hereunder shall be applied to the payment of the first interest due thereon. Any premiums arising from the sale of bonds or notes hereunder shall, in the discretion of the town treasurer be applied to the cost of preparing, issuing and marketing bonds or notes hereunder to the extent not otherwise provided, to the payment of the cost of the projects, to the payment of the principal of or interest on bonds or notes issued hereunder or to any one or more of the foregoing. The cost of preparing, issuing and marketing bonds or notes hereunder may also, in the discretion of the town treasurer, be made from bond or note proceeds exclusive of premium and accrued interest or from other moneys available thereof. Any balance of bond or note proceeds remaining after payment of the cost of the projects and the cost of preparing, issuing and marketing bonds or notes hereunder, shall be applied to the payment of the principal of or interest on bonds or notes issued hereunder. Any earnings or net profit realized from the deposit or investment of funds hereunder, shall upon receipt be added to and dealt with as part of the revenues of the town from property taxes or, in the discretion of the town treasurer, shall upon receipt be added to and dealt with as part of the revenues of the town from sewer use charges. In exercising any discretion under this section, the town treasurer shall be governed by any instructions adopted by resolution of the town council. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  6; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  6) 
Sec. 37. - Effect of debts; amortization. 
    All bonds and notes issued under this act and the debts evidenced thereby shall be obligatory on the town in the same manner and to the same extent as other debts lawfully contracted by it and shall be excepted from the operation of section 45-12-2 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956,  45-12-2]. No such obligation shall at any time be included in the debt of the town for the purpose of ascertaining its borrowing capacity. The town shall annually appropriate a sum sufficient to pay the principal and interest coming due within the year on bonds and notes issued hereunder to the extend that moneys therefor are not otherwise provided. If such sum is not appropriated, it shall nevertheless be added to the annual tax levy. In order to provide such sum in each year and notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, all taxable property in the town shall be subject to ad valorem taxation by the town without limitation as to rate or amount. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  7; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  7) 
Sec. 38. - Validity of debts not affected by change in office. 
    Any bonds or notes issued under the provisions of this act and coupons on any bonds, if properly executed by officers of the town in office on the date of execution, shall be valid and binding according to their terms notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payment therefor any or all of such officers shall for any reason have ceased to hold office. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  8; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  8) 
Sec. 39. - Federal, state assistance. 
    The town, acting by resolution of its town council, is authorized to apply for, contract for and expend any federal or state advances or other grants or assistance which may be available for the purposes of this act, and any such expenditures may be in addition to other moneys provided in this act. To the extent of any inconsistency between any law of this state and any applicable federal law or regulation, the latter shall prevail. Federal and state advances, with interests where applicable, whether contracted for prior to or after the effective date of this act, may be repaid as project costs under section 32. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  9; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  9) 
Sec. 40. - Compliance with constitution. 
    Bonds and notes may be issued under this act without obtaining the approval of any governmental agency or the taking of any proceedings or the happening of any conditions except as specifically required by this act for such issue. In carrying out any project financed in whole or in part under this act, including where applicable the condemnation of any land or interest in land, and in the levy and collection of assessments or other charges permitted by law on account of any such project, all action shall be taken which is necessary to meet constitutional requirements whether or not such action is otherwise required by statute; but the validity of bonds and notes issued hereunder shall in no way depend upon the validity or occurrence of such action. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  10; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  10) 
Sec. 41. - Bonds, notes, transfer, income exempt from taxation. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, any bonds or notes issued under this act, their transfer, and the income thereon (including any profits made on the sale thereof) shall at all times be exempt from taxation by the state of Rhode Island or any subdivision thereof other than estate and succession taxes. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  11; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  11) 
Sec. 42. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon passage. 
(Laws 1979, ch. 82,  13; Laws 1980, ch. 151,  12) 
ARTICLE 3. - ABOLISHING BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 1. - Board abolished. 
    Such portions of section 6 of chapter 1012 of the public laws, passed at the January session, A.D. 1913, entitled "An act dividing the town of Warwick into two towns," as are concerned in any way with the board of police commissioners for the town of West Warwick, are hereby repealed, and the board of police commissioners for the town of West Warwick is hereby abolished. 
(Laws 1923, ch. 2420,  1) 
Cross reference- P.L. 1913, ch. 1012,  6 appears herein as art. 1,  6. 
Sec. 2. - Powers, authority vested in town council. 
    All the powers and authority vested in said board by section 6 of chapter 1012 of the public laws, passed at the January session, A.D. 1913, are hereby conferred and vested in the town council of the town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1923, ch. 2420,  2) 
Sec. 21/2. - Tenure of officers; demotion, suspension, removal. 
    All police officers, including the chief, who have been appointed or shall be appointed by the town council of the town of West Warwick, shall hold their respective offices until vacated by death, resignation or by disability to serve, except as hereinafter provided; and the chief of police may at any time suspend any police officer or officers from his or their office or offices until the next regular meeting of said council, at which meeting the chief of police shall report in writing any and all suspensions with his reasons therefor, and the council shall direct the town clerk to notify the officer or officers who have been suspended that a hearing will be held with respect to said suspension or suspensions at the next regular or special meeting as the council shall direct, and the said council may continue said suspension or suspensions until said hearing is held; provided, however, that any one or more of the police officers, including the chief, so appointed shall be subject to reduction in rank, suspension or removal from office by said council upon its own motion at any regular or special meeting thereof, for misconduct, disobedience of orders from a superior officer, or for malfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other acts which are unbecoming an officer; and all such reductions in rank, suspensions or removals shall be by said council upon charges made in writing, setting forth in general the facts upon which the said charge or charges is or are based, and the said town council shall give the officer or officers complained of notice and an opportunity at the time appointed to be heard thereon; provided, further, however, that this section shall apply to regularly employed and full-time maintenance personnel and employees of the police department; and that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to any police officer or constable other than the members of the regular paid police department of said town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1923, ch. 2420,  3; Laws 1949, ch. 2180,  1; Laws 1954, ch. 3320,  1; Laws 1966, ch. 237,  1) 
Sec. 3. - Prior acts validated. 
    All legal acts, matters and things done, and all rights and powers conferred and all duties imposed by the said board are hereby declared valid and effectual in all respects and shall continue in force until otherwise ordered by said town council. 
(Laws 1923, ch. 2420,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Documents transferred to council. 
    The clerk of said board shall forthwith deliver to said town council all their books, records, documents and papers and all other property of every kind and description relative to all acts and things done or performed by said board. 
(Laws 1923, ch. 2420,  4) 
Sec. 5. - When act effective; repealer. 
    This act shall take effect upon it passage, and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1923, ch. 2420,  5) 
ARTICLE 4. - DEDICATION OF STREETS 

Sec. 1. - Approval prerequisite to recording. 
    No map, plat, plan or chart of any private land or land situated in the town of West Warwick, showing thereon any one or more streets, avenues, roads, lanes or alleys as open to travel or otherwise dedicated for public use, shall hereafter be accepted for filing or record by the town clerk of said town, unless all such streets, avenues, roads, lanes and alleys shall have first been approved by the town council of said town or on appeal therefrom by judgment of court as hereinafter provided: Provided, however, that nothing herein shall apply to any map, plat, plan or chart approved or adopted by order or decree of court in any judicial proceedings, or made, approved or adopted by or pursuant to due action of any public authority. 
(Laws 1926, ch. 919,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Procedure for approval; disapproval. 
    With every application to said town council of the town of West Warwick for such approval, such map, plat, plan or chart shall be deposited in duplicate with said town council, or if said town council is not in session, with the town clerk of said town, and upon the receipt thereof shall be referred by said town council or said town clerk to the highway commissioner of said town, or other officer of said town duly appointed for that purpose, who shall as soon as may be report thereon to said town council. Within thirty days from the time of such depositing of any such map, plat, plan or chart, if all such streets and other ways are reasonable in their location, extent and width with due regard to both the public and private interests involved, said town council shall approve the same, and upon such approval said town clerk shall endorse and certify the fact of such approval by said town council on each said duplicate, and shall promptly deposit in his office, but not file or record the same until requested by the owner or owners of such land or lands and until the fees thereof are paid. If said town council finds that any of such streets or other ways are not reasonable as aforesaid, it shall disapprove the same and shall cause the reasons for its disapproval to be recorded in the records of its proceedings. Said town council may prescribe the size, scale and materials of such maps, plats, plans and charts as shall be filed for approval as aforesaid, and the names used to designate the streets and other ways shown thereon. 
(Laws 1926, ch. 919,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Appeals from council. 
    Any person or persons aggrieved by any such action of said town council may appeal from such action to the superior court for Kent county in the same manner and subject to the same provisions as prescribed by law for appeals from the orders and decrees of town councils: Provided, that upon such appeal, instead of a copy being included in the record of the proceedings to be filed in said court, the original map, plat, plan or chart in duplicate shall be transmitted by said town clerk to said court, and said court or the court with a jury if a jury trial is claimed by either party within ten days after the filing of the reasons of appeal, shall try the case, and upon any final judgment approving all such streets, and ways, the clerk of court shall endorse and certify on each such duplicate a copy of such judgment or the substance thereof, and shall transmit both such duplicates to said town clerk, who shall receive but not file or record the same until requested by the owner or owners of such land or lands and until the fees therefor are paid. 
(Laws 1926, ch. 919,  3) 
Sec. 4. - When streets become public. 
    Upon the filing of any such map, plat, plan or chart pursuant to the provisions hereof, any and all streets, avenues, roads, lanes and alleys shown thereon as open to travel or otherwise dedicated for public use shall be thence forward public highways to all intents and purposes, and be liable to be opened by the town council of said town of West Warwick in the same manner as highways which are laid out by said town council; but said town shall not be liable to repair such highways, respectively, until said town council shall decree and order that the same respectively shall be repaired at the expense of said town. 
(Laws 1926, ch. 919,  4) 
Sec. 5. - Acceptance of deeds. 
    Said town clerk shall not receive for record nor record any deed to said town of any land in said town which deed is made for the purpose of having the land therein described become a public highway pursuant to section 25 of chapter 95 of the general laws [3], unless said town council shall have first accepted such deed to said town: Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any such deed of any land that is shown as a street, avenue, road, lane or alley, and as open to travel or otherwise dedicated for public use, on any map, plat, plan or chart, then on file or recorded in the office of said town clerk; and further provided, that no acceptance of any such deed by said town council shall be deemed to impose any liability upon said town to repair any such highway, before said town council shall decree and order that the same shall be repaired at the expense of said town. Said town council shall cause any such deed accepted by it to be transmitted to said town clerk who shall record the same. 
(Laws 1926, ch. 919,  5) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- G.L. 1923, ch. 96,  25, appears as G.L. 1956,  24-2-8. 

Sec. 6. - When act effective. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1926, ch. 919,  6) 
ARTICLE 5. - ORDINANCE REVISIONS 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick is hereby authorized and empowered to cause to be printed and published in book or pamphlet form any general revisions of the town ordinances of said town, including any additions or amendments to present ordinances of said town; said publication to be in lieu of publication in newspapers. Said publication in book or pamphlet form shall be sufficient for all purposes, and no other publication shall be necessary. 
(Laws 1927, ch. 1124,  1) 
Sec. 2. - When act effective. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1927, ch. 1124,  2) 
ARTICLE 6. - BUILDING AND ZONING REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning ordinances generally, G.L. 1956,  45-24-27 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
    For the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, or general welfare, the town council of the town of West Warwick shall have power in accordance with the provisions of this act within the limits of said town by ordinance to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes. 
    For any and all of said purposes said town council may divide said town into districts of such number, shape and area as it may deem best suited to carry out the purposes of this act; and within such districts it may regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures or land. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of building throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. 
    Such regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, to promote health and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements; and to promote the conservation of exceptional natural physical features. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout such town. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2065,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Appointment of inspector; duties. 
    Said town council shall have power to appoint an inspector of buildings and define his duties in the issuance of building permits and in the administration and enforcement of such ordinances. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2065,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Public hearing required; notice. 
    No such ordinance shall be enacted, amended or repealed until after a public hearing has been held upon the question of the enactment, amendment or repeal of such ordinance, before said town council, who shall first give notice of such public hearing by publication in a newspaper printed in the county of Kent at least once each week for three successive weeks prior to the date of such hearing, at which hearing opportunity shall be given all persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed ordinance. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2065,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Penalty authorized. 
    The said town council shall have power to provide a penalty for the violation of any ordinance enacted under the authority of this act by fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for each offense, such fine to inure to said town, and may also cause suit to be brought in the supreme or superior court in the name of said town to restrain the violation of, or to compel compliance with, the provisions of any such ordinance. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2065,  4) 
Sec. 5. - Enforcement by extraordinary writ or equity. 
    The supreme court and the superior court, within their respective jurisdictions, or any justice of either of said courts in vacation, shall, upon due proceedings in the name of said town instituted by its town solicitor, have power to issue any extraordinary writs or to proceed according to the course of equity or both: 
To restrain the erection, alteration or use of any building, structure or other thing erected, altered or used in violation of the provisions of any ordinance enacted under the authority of this act, and to order its removal or abatement as a nuisance; 
To compel compliance with the provisions of any ordinance enacted under the authority of this act; 
To order the removal by the owner of any building, structure or other thing existing in violation of any ordinance enacted under the provisions of this act and to authorize some official of said town in default of such removal by the owner to remove it at the expense of such owner. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2065,  5) 
Sec. 6. - Pre-existing uses. 
    No ordinance enacted under the authority of this act shall prevent or be construed to prevent the continuance of the use of any building or improvement for any purpose to which such building or improvement is lawfully devoted at the time of the enactment of such ordinance. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2065,  6) 
Sec. 7. - Vested rights, incumbrances not created. 
    Nothing in this act or any ordinance enacted under the authority of this act shall create or be construed to create any vested rights in any person, firm or corporation, or to be or create any incumbrance upon the title of any person, firm or corporation in any property affected by any such ordinance. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2065,  7) 
Sec. 8. - Zoning board of review. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick forthwith shall provide by ordinance for the selection and organization of a zoning board of review pursuant to the provisions of section 45-24-13 [G.L. 1956,  45-24-56] of the general laws in chapter 45-24 entitled "Zoning ordinances," the terms of the members of said board to be in conformity with the provisions of section 45-24-14 [G.L. 1956,  45-24-56] of said chapter, and said board shall operate and function in conformity with sections 45-24-15 through 45-24-20 [G.L. 1956,  45-24-56 and 45-24-57], inclusive, of said chapter. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2065,  8; Laws 1968, ch. 226,  1) 
Editor's note- Laws 1978, ch. 314,  1, provided that section 45-24-14 of the General Laws be amended to read as follows: 
"46-24-14. Composition of board of review-Open hearings. The board of review shall consist of five (5) members, each to hold office for the term of five (5) years; provided, however, that the original selection shall be made for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) years, respectively. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The mayor of any city or the town council of any town shall have the right to name an auxiliary or sixth member of said board of review of said city or town, as the case may be, who shall sit as an active member when and if a member of said board is unable to serve at any hearing, upon request of the chairman. All hearings of such board shall be open to the public. 
Provided further, however, that the town council of the Town of West Warwick shall have the right to name an additional auxiliary or seventh member of said board of review of said town to sit as an active member when and if a member of said board is unable to serve at any hearing, upon request of the chairman of said board." 
It should be noted that G.L. 1956,  45-24-14 has been repealed. The latest similar provision is G.L. 1956,  45-24-56. 
Sec. 9. - Appeals. 
    Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any ordinance or decision of said town council made under the authority conferred by this act, may present to the supreme court a petition duly verified, setting forth that such ordinance or decision is illegal or unreasonable in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality or unreasonableness. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty days after the making of such ordinance or decision. Upon presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to said town council to review such ordinance or decision. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a master to take such evidence as it may direct and to make report to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law. The court may reverse or affirm any ordinance brought up for review, or may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify any decision brought up for review. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2065,  9) 
Sec. 10. - Repealed by Laws 1966, ch. 10. 
Sec. 11. - When act effective; repealer. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and any and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2065,  11) 
ARTICLE 7. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
    Upon acceptance of the terms of this act by its financial town meeting the town of West Warwick is authorized to organize and maintain a permanent fire department, consisting of such number of officers and members as the town council in office at the time of the approval of this act, or its successors, shall determine. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  1) 
Editor's note- Laws 1933, ch. 2077, comprising this article, was duly accepted by financial town meeting. 
Sec. 2. - Choosing, term, compensation of personnel. 
    All officers and members of said department shall be chosen by the town council from time to time as occasion may require. They shall serve during the pleasure of the council at such compensation as the council shall fix. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  2) 
Sec. 21/2. - Suspension, reduction in rank, removal. 
    All officers and members of the fire department who have been appointed or shall be appointed by the town council of the town of West Warwick shall hold their respective office at such compensation as the said council shall fix until vacated by death, resignation or disability to serve, except as hereinafter provided; and the chief of the fire department may at any time suspend any officer or member of said department until the next regular meeting of the town council, at which meeting the chief of the fire department shall report in writing any and all suspensions, with his reasons therefor, and the council shall direct the town clerk to notify the officers or members suspended that a hearing will be held with respect to said suspension or suspensions at the next regular or special meeting of said council as the council shall direct, and the said council may continue such suspension or suspensions until the said hearing is held; provided, however, that any one or more of the officers or members of said department shall be subject to reduction in rank, suspension or removal from office by said council, upon its own motion at any regular or special meeting thereof, for misconduct, disobedience of orders from a superior officer, or for malfeasance or nonfeasance in office and all such reductions, suspensions or removals shall be by the said council upon charges made in writing, setting forth in general, facts upon which the said charge or charges is or are based; and the said town council shall give the officer or officers, member or members of said fire department complained of, notice and an opportunity at the time appointed to be heard thereon; provided, further, however, that nothing in this act shall be construed to apply to the volunteers and/or callmen but only to the regular full time members of the paid fire department of the town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  21/2; Laws 1949, ch. 2179,  1) 
Sec. 3. - Purchases. 
    The town council is authorized to make such purchases from time to time as, in its opinion, may be necessary or essential for the proper equipment of said fire department, provided, however, that no purchase of a fire engine, pumper, hook and ladder truck, fire station or land upon which to build such a station, shall be made unless the financial town meeting of said town shall have first appropriated the money therefor. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Effect of department on fire districts. 
    From and after the creation of a town fire department by the town of West Warwick under the provisions of this act, no fire district now located wholly or in part within the town of West Warwick shall pass any vote or resolution levying a tax upon any taxable property within the town of West Warwick, except for the purpose of liquidating obligations outstanding at the time of the passage of a vote or resolution by the town council of West Warwick declaring that a town fire department has been organized within said town, in the event that such obligations shall not be assumed by the town of West Warwick. Nor shall any such fire district pass any such vote or resolution for the purpose of liquidating such obligations if the same shall have been assumed by the town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  4; Laws 1946, ch. 1688,  1) 
Sec. 5. - Town may assume assets, liabilities of districts. 
    The town of West Warwick may contract with said fire districts, or with any of them, to take over the assets and to assume the liabilities of such districts or district, upon such terms as the contracting parties may agree upon, and the said several fire districts are authorized to enter into any such contract or contracts with the town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  5) 
Sec. 6. - Apportionment where district overlaps with town. 
    In such of said fire districts as overlap town lines an equitable division and distribution of the assets and liabilities owned or outstanding at the time of the passage of a vote or resolution by the town council of West Warwick declaring that a town fire department has been organized within said town shall be made between the West Warwick taxpayers and the taxpayers of such other town or city included in such district or districts by boards of appraisers consisting respectively of three citizens of the town of West Warwick to be appointed by the town council of West Warwick and three citizens of each of the sections of the respective fire districts located outside the town of West Warwick to be elected at a meeting of said respective fire districts by the tax paying citizens thereof residing in the respective sections of said fire districts located outside the town of West Warwick and such division and distribution shall respectively require the approval of a majority of the members of said several boards of appraisers and in the event that a majority can not so agree said board of appraisers or any of them as the case my [may] be shall appoint an umpire who shall be a citizen of the state of Rhode Island but not a resident or taxpayer of the town of West Warwick or of the city of Warwick or of the town of Coventry and thereupon said umpire shall be a member of the board of appraisers appointing him and said division and distribution shall then be made by the vote and written agreement of at least four of said members of said board. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  6; Laws 1947, ch. 1967,  1) 
Sec. 7. - Crompton fire district may supply water; sale of assets. 
    The Crompton fire district is authorized to distribute water throughout the town of West Warwick and may sell such water to the inhabitants of said town of West Warwick and to the town of West Warwick for domestic manufacturing or fire purposes; said district, for the purposes aforesaid, may carry any work to be constructed by it over or under any highway, turnpike, railroad or street in the town of West Warwick in such manner as not to permanently obstruct or impede travel thereon, and may enter upon and dig up any highway, turnpike, road or street in said town for the purpose of laying down pipes or building aqueducts upon or beneath the surface thereof or for the purpose of repairing the same, all such work upon or in any highway or street to be with the permission and under the direction of the town council of said town. 
    The Crompton fire district is also authorized to contract with the town of West Warwick or with any privately owned corporation or individual for the sale of its entire assets or any part of its assets, and may convey good title thereto. Any purchaser of the reservoir and water system of said Crompton fire district shall acquire and have all the rights, privileges, easements and franchises to maintain pipes, hydrants, structures, reservoirs and other fire equipment of said district that are now enjoyed by said Crompton fire district. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  7) 
Sec. 8. - Resolution required to organize department. 
    A town fire department shall be held to have been organized under this act when the town council of West Warwick passes a resolution declaring that such a department has been organized and is ready to take over the duties of the said fire districts now existing within said town. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  8) 
Sec. 9. - Repealer. 
    All acts and parts of acts and any provisions of the charter or charters of said fire districts, or any of them, inconsistent herewith, are hereby amended or repealed, as the case may be, insofar as they may conflict with the provisions of this act. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  9) 
Sec. 10. - When act effective. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1933, ch. 2077,  10) 
ARTICLE 8. - CLERK AS TEMPORARY JUDGE OF PROBATE 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
    Whenever the judge of the probate court of the town of West Warwick is a party to or interested in any proceeding about to be heard in his court, or is absent or unable to perform his duties, or there is a vacancy in such office, his duties shall be temporarily performed by the town clerk of the said town of West Warwick; and the fact of such interest, absence, inability or vacancy shall be recorded in the records of said court. 
(Laws 1944, ch. 1426,  1) 
Sec. 2. - When act effective. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1944, ch. 1426,  2) 
ARTICLE 9. - AMBULANCE SERVICE 

Sec. 1. - Vehicle purchase ratified. 
    The purchase of 2 motor vehicles by the town council of the town of West Warwick is hereby validated and affirmed. 
(Laws 1949, ch. 2407,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Authority to establish service, charge therefor. 
    The town of West Warwick is hereby authorized and empowered to purchase such equipment as may be deemed necessary and to expend such amounts as may be necessary to operate and maintain a town ambulance, and the town council of said town is authorized and empowered in its discretion to establish the rates to be exacted for the furnishing of ambulance service; provided, however, that the provisions of this act shall not be construed to prohibit said town from furnishing ambulance service without charge. 
(Laws 1949, ch. 2407,  2) 
Sec. 3. - When act effective; repealer. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1949, ch. 2407,  3) 
ARTICLE 10. - PLANNING BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Planning boards and planning generally, G.L. 1956,  45-22-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Appointment required, membership, term, purposes. 
    The town council of West Warwick shall appoint a nonpartisan planning board, consisting of five (5) members for the term of five (5) years, for the purpose of making a study of the resources and needs of the town with reference to its physical growth and development as affecting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people and the economy and efficiency of communal life. 
(Laws 1951, ch. 2687,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Powers, duties, reports. 
    The planning board may make special study when requested by the town council and shall have access to available plans, records, surveys and other data filed with any department of the town. The planning board shall report annually to the town council and may recommend plans and schemes of development and give estimates of the cost thereof, and shall make other reports upon such relative matters as may be from time to time referred to the board by the town council. 
(Laws 1951, ch. 2687,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Original appointments. 
    The original appointments shall be made for the terms of five (5) years, four (4) years, three (3) years, two (2) years and one (1) year respectively. Each succeeding appointment shall be made for the term of five (5) years as provided in section 1. 
(Laws 1951, ch. 2687,  3) 
Sec. 4. - When act effective; repealer. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1951, ch. 2687,  4) 
ARTICLE 11. - PARKING METERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Parking meters, G.L. 1956,  31-28-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this act the term "parking meter" shall mean a meter device installed upon the public highways or the sidewalks adjacent thereto, wherein a coin must be deposited for the privilege of occupying for a certain period a space which is situated in a zone which a lawful authority has designated as a parking meter zone for the purpose of regulating parking of vehicles on said public highways. 
(Laws 1951, ch. 2710,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Referendum required. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick at the next general election to be held on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November, A.D. 1952, or at any special election of said town held previous thereto, may submit to its qualified electors, for approval or rejection, the following question: 
    "Shall the installation of parking meters for operation upon the public highways in the town of West Warwick be authorized?" 
(Laws 1951, ch. 2710,  2) 
Editor's note- The above proposition was approved at a special meeting held May 25, 1951. 
Sec. 3. - Ordinances; reasonableness of fee; establishment of zones. 
    If said electors signify their approval of said question, as aforesaid, the town council may enact ordinances authorizing the installation, operation, maintenance, policing and supervision of parking meters on said public highways and fix and provide for the payment of a fee for the purpose of parking therein by requiring the operator of any vehicle parking in such zone to deposit in the meter therein or adjacent thereto such a coin of the United States as said council shall determine to be necessary for the purpose of regulating such parking. Any fee thus established for parking shall bear a reasonable relation to the actual cost incurred by the town of West Warwick in the installation, operation, maintenance, policing and supervision of such parking meter system and the parking of motor vehicles on said public highways. 
    Said town council of the town of West Warwick may establish parking meter zones for the purpose of regulating the parking of motor vehicles on said public highways. 
(Laws 1951, ch. 2710,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Penalty authorized. 
    Said town council may impose a penalty not to exceed $5.00 in any one case for violation of any of its rules, orders or regulations made and issued under the authority of this act. 
(Laws 1951, ch. 2710,  4) 
Sec. 5. - When act effective; repealer. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1951, ch. 2710,  5) 
ARTICLE 12. - DATE AND TIME OF FINANCIAL TOWN MEETING, FISCAL YEAR TRANSITION FINANCING 

Sec. 1. - Meeting date and time; fiscal year established. 
    The qualified elections [electors] of the Town of West Warwick, shall annually on the second Tuesday of May at seven o'clock in the evening assemble in town meeting at a place in said town designated by the town council, for the purpose of hearing official reports, ordering a tax or taxes, making appropriations, transacting any other business appertaining to the financial affairs of the town and such other business or matters as may lawfully be considered or acted upon by said meeting. The fiscal year of the Town of West Warwick shall include the twelve (12) calendar months from July to June, both inclusive; provided that the fiscal year beginning March 1, 1987 shall comprise the period March 1, 1987 and ending June 30, 1987. 
(Laws 1952, ch. 2892,  1; Laws 1986, ch. 260,  1(1)) 
Sec. 2. - Bonds-Authority to issue; terms. 
    The Town of West Warwick is hereby empowered, in addition to authority previously granted, to issue bonds to an amount not exceeding five million five hundred thousand dollars ($5,500,000) from time to time under its corporate name and seal. The bonds of each issue may be issued in the form of serial bonds or term bonds or a combination thereof and shall be payable either by maturity of principal in the case of serial bonds or by mandatory serial redemption in the case of term bonds, in annual installments of principal, the first installment to be not later than five (5) years and the last installment not later than twenty (20) years after the date of the bonds. For each issue the amounts payable annually for principal and interest combined either shall be (a) as nearly equal from year to year as is practicable in the opinion of the officers authorized to issue the bonds, or (b) shall be arranged in accordance with a schedule providing for a more rapid amortization of principal, or (c) shall be arranged in annual installments of principal each of which does not exceed any prior installment by more than fifteen (15) per cent of the total principal amount of the issue. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 260,  1(2)) 
Sec. 3. - Same-Manner of sale; proceeds. 
    The bonds shall be signed by the town treasurer and by the president of the town council and shall be issued and sold in such amounts as the town council may authorize. The manner of sale, denominations, maturities, interest rates and other terms, conditions and details of any bonds or notes issued under this act may be fixed by the proceedings of the town council authorizing the issue or by separate resolution of the town council or, to the extent provisions for these matters are not so made, they may be fixed by the officers authorized to sign the bonds or notes. The proceeds derived from the sale of the bonds shall be delivered to the treasurer, and such proceeds exclusive of premiums and accrued interest shall be expended (a) to fund appropriations of the town for the March 1 to June 30 transitional period preceding the town's first July 1 to June 30 fiscal year (the "transitional period") or in payment of the principal of or interest on temporary notes issued under section four, or (c) in repayment of advances under section five. No purchaser of any bonds or notes under this act shall be in any way responsible for the proper application of the proceeds derived from the sale thereof. The proceeds of bonds or notes issued under this act, and the other moneys referred to in section 7 shall be deemed appropriated for the purposes of this act without further action than that required by this act. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 260,  1(3)) 
Sec. 4. - Notes-Authority to issue; terms. 
    The town council may by resolution authorize the issue from time to time of interest bearing or discounted notes in anticipation of the issue of bonds under section two. The amount of original notes issued in anticipation of bonds may not exceed the amount of bonds which may be issued under this act. Temporary notes issued hereunder shall be signed by the treasurer and by the president of the town council and shall be payable within three (3) years from their respective dates, but the principal of and interest on notes issued for a shorter period may be renewed or paid from time to time by the issue of other notes hereunder, provided the period from the date of an original note to the maturity of any note issued to renew or pay the same debt or the interest thereon shall not exceed three (3) years. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 260,  1(4)) 
Sec. 5. - Application of town funds. 
    Pending any authorization or issue of bonds hereunder or pending or in lieu of any authorization or issue of notes hereunder, the treasurer, with the approval of the town council, may, to the extent that bonds or notes may be issued hereunder, apply funds in the treasury of the town to the purposes specified in section three, such advances to be repaid without interest from the proceeds of bonds or notes subsequently issued or from other available funds. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 260,  1(5)) 
Sec. 6. - Disposition of proceeds. 
    Any proceeds of bonds or notes issued hereunder, pending their expenditure, may be deposited or invested by the treasurer in demand deposits, time deposits or savings deposits in banks which are members of the federal deposit insurance corporation or in obligations issued or guaranteed by the United States of America or by any agency or instrumentality thereof or as may be provided in any other applicable law of the State of Rhode Island. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 260,  1(6)) 
Sec. 7. - Costs and earnings resale. 
    Any accrued interest received upon the sale of bonds or notes hereunder shall be applied to the payment of the first interest due thereon. Any premiums arising from the sale of bonds or notes hereunder shall, in the discretion of the treasurer, be applied to the cost of preparing, issuing and marketing bonds or notes hereunder to the extent not otherwise provided, to the funding of appropriations of the town for the transitional period, to the payment of the principal of or interest on bonds or notes issued hereunder or to any one (1) or more of the foregoing. The cost of preparing, issuing and marketing bonds or notes hereunder may also, in the discretion of the treasurer, be met from bond or note proceeds exclusive of premium and accrued interest or from other moneys available therefor. Any balance of bond or note proceeds remaining after payment of operating costs of the town incurred for the transitional period and the cost of preparing, issuing and marketing bonds or notes hereunder shall be applied to the payment of the principal of or interest on bonds or notes issued hereunder. Any earnings or net profit realized from the deposit or investment of funds hereunder shall upon receipt be added to and dealt with as part of the revenues of the town from property taxes. In exercising any discretion under this section, the treasurer shall be governed by any instructions adopted by resolution of the town council. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 260,  1(7)) 
Sec. 8. - Obligation of town. 
    All bonds and notes issued under this act and the debts evidenced thereby shall be obligatory on the town in the same manner and to the same extent as other debts lawfully contracted by it and shall be excepted from the operation of Section 45-12-2 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956,  45-12-2]. No such obligation shall at any time be included in the debt of the town for the purpose of ascertaining its borrowing capacity. The town shall annually appropriate a sum sufficient to pay the principal and interest coming due within the year on bonds and notes issued hereunder to the extent that moneys therefor are not otherwise provided. If such sum is not appropriated, it shall nevertheless be added to the annual tax levy. In order to provide such sum in each year and notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, all taxable property in the town shall be subject to ad valorem taxation by the town without limitation as to rate or amount. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 260,  1(8)) 
Sec. 9. - Validity. 
    Any bonds or notes issued under the provisions of this act, if properly executed by officers of the town in office on the date of execution, shall be valid and binding according to their terms notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payment therefor any or all of such officers shall for any reason have ceased to hold office. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 260,  1(9)) 
Sec. 10. - Compliance requirements. 
    Bonds and notes may be issued under this act without obtaining the approval of any governmental agency or the taking of any proceedings or the happening of any conditions except as specifically required by this act for such issue. In carrying out any project financed in whole or in part under this act, all action shall be taken which is necessary to meet constitutional requirements whether or not such action is otherwise required by statute; but the validity of bonds and notes issued hereunder shall in no way depend upon the validity or occurrence of such action. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 260,  1(10)) 
Sec. 2[11]. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon passage. 
(Laws 1952, ch. 2892,  2; Laws 1986, ch. 260,  2) 
ARTICLE 13. - FIRE PROTECTION IN CENTREVILLE AREA 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
    The town of West Warwick is authorized and empowered to provide fire protection service to the Centreville section of the city of Warwick upon such terms and conditions and for such consideration as the town council of said town of West Warwick and the city council of the city of Warwick shall deem adequate and reasonable. 
(Laws 1953, ch. 3051,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Expenditures by Warwick authorized. 
    The city of Warwick is authorized and empowered to expend such sum or sums as may be required to pay the town of West Warwick for providing such fire protection service. 
(Laws 1953, ch. 3051,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Appropriations authorized. 
    The qualified electors of the town of West Warwick in regular or special financial town meeting assembled are authorized and empowered to appropriate such sums or sums as may be needed or required for the furnishing of fire protection to said Centreville section of the city of Warwick. 
(Laws 1953, ch. 3051,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Declared governmental function. 
    The furnishing by the town of West Warwick to the Centreville section of the city of Warwick pursuant to agreement with said city of Warwick shall be deemed for the purposes of any claims against said town arising therefrom to be the exercise of a governmental function. 
(Laws 1953, ch. 3051,  4) 
Sec. 5. - Area described. 
    The Centreville section of the city of Warwick shall be deemed to include the following described portion of said city: 
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Coit avenue and the center line of Centreville road; thence running northerly in a straight line to a point in the center line of New London avenue in range with the southerly corner of lot 345, assessors' plat No. 24 (on file in the office of the board of tax assessors of the town of West Warwick); thence running in a general southwesterly direction along the center line of New London avenue to the center line of Centreville road; thence running easterly along the center line of Centreville road to the point of beginning. 
(Laws 1953, ch. 3051,  5) 
Sec. 6. - Agreement ratified. 
    The agreement heretofore entered into on October 14, 1952 by and between the town of West Warwick and the city of Warwick for providing such fire protection is hereby ratified and affirmed. 
(Laws 1953, ch. 3051,  6) 
Sec. 7. - When act effective. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1953, ch. 3051,  7) 
ARTICLE 14. - VOTING PROCEDURES AT FINANCIAL TOWN MEETINGS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Town meetings generally, G.L. 1956,  45-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Special vote required on appropriations. 
    In the event any motion or resolution is presented to the annual financial town meeting the purpose of which is to increase the amount of any appropriation proposed by the town administration or to appropriate any money not proposed in the budget presented by the town administration, and such motion or resolution is seconded by not less than twenty-five (25) qualified electors present and adopted by an affirmative standing vote of not less than two-thirds of the qualified electors present, said motion or resolution shall be referred to a meeting of taxpayers of the town to be held on a date seven days after the annual meeting at which the motion or resolution was presented and adopted, at which meeting all taxpaying voters of the town of West Warwick shall be eligible to vote on any such proposition by secret ballot. 
(Laws 1956, ch. 3629,  1; Laws 1967, ch. 47,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Procedure for special vote. 
    In the event of the introduction of any such motion or resolution referred to in section 1, the town clerk shall give notice of the time and place of said meeting in some newspaper of general circulation in the town, and shall provide ballot boxes for the purpose of receiving the votes of the taxpayers, and shall cause to be printed ballots containing the substance of any motion or resolution so proposed providing upon said ballot the means of expressing the voters' choice thereon in printed boxes marked "Yes" and "No." The town clerk shall provide for the opening of the polls at 9:00 a.m. and for the closing of the polls at 9:00 p.m., on the date provided, and shall provide proper receptacles for the receipt of the taxpayers' ballots. At the closing of the polls said ballots shall be counted by the moderator of the town meeting and the town clerk, in public, and the results of the vote shall be publicly announced and recorded. If a majority of the votes cast are in favor of the motion or resolution it shall be valid and effective. If a majority of the votes are cast against the motion or resolution, or in the event of a tie vote, said motion or resolution shall be recorded as defeated. 
(Laws 1956, ch. 3629,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Special vote on bond issues. 
    All proposals presented at the annual financial town meeting for the issuance of bonds not proposed by the town administration shall be referred to the above adjourned financial town meeting in the manner above provided. 
(Laws 1956, ch. 3629,  3; Laws 1967, ch. 47,  2) 
Sec. 4. - Other business not affected. 
    The introduction or presentation of any such motion or resolution requiring a vote of all the taxpaying voters on a subsequent day shall not in any way restrict or interfere with the other business properly before the meeting. Said business may proceed without interruption, and shall be disposed of according to law. 
(Laws 1956, ch. 3629,  4) 
Sec. 5. - When act effective; repealer. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1956, ch. 3629,  5) 
ARTICLE 15. - PENSION PLAN FOR POLICEMEN AND FIREMEN[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Relief of injured and deceased fire fighters and police officers, G.L. 1956,  45-19-1 et seq.; retirement of municipal employees, G.L. 1956,  45-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
    The town council of the Town of West Warwick is hereby authorized and empowered to create and disburse a pension fund or funds for officers and members of the police and fire departments of said town, who by reason of age, physical or mental infirmity, injuries sustained or illness incurred while in the performance of duty, or for other causes, may be unfit to perform active duty. 
(Laws 1956, ch. 3698,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Financing. 
    The town council of said town is hereby authorized and empowered to collect and divert to said fund or funds not more than 5% of the annual salary due to each such officer and member, and from time to time to appropriate from the general funds of said town such sums of money as may be necessary for the proper carrying out of the purposes of this act and to establish by ordinance all rules and regulations pertaining to said fund or funds as to it shall seem necessary and expedient. 
(Laws 1956, ch. 3698,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Insurance authorized. 
    The town council of said town is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts of insurance with any company or companies authorized to do business in the state for the purposes aforesaid. 
(Laws 1956, ch. 3698,  3) 
ARTICLE 16. - TAX AND ASSESSMENT EXEMPTION FOR RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
    The town council of the Town of West Warwick is authorized and empowered to exempt from taxation and sewer assessments the parsonage or any religious organization or corporation and the real property of any such organization or corporation occupied by any religious order engaged in teaching in said Town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 62,  1) 
Sec. 2. - When act effective. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 62,  2) 
ARTICLE 17. - MODERATOR OF FINANCIAL TOWN MEETINGS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Moderators generally, G.L. 1956,  45-3-15 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Election required; compensation. 
    The qualified electors of the Town of West Warwick shall, at each general election of town officers hereafter held, elect, in addition to officers whose election now is provided for by law, a town moderator. 
    The town council of said town shall fix the compensation of said town moderator and may, from time to time, amend or alter same. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 125,  1; Laws 1965, ch. 122,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Duty to preside; term. 
    The town moderator shall preside at the annual and at any special financial town meetings of said town and shall serve until the next general election of town officers. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 125,  2) 
State Law reference- Moderator to preside, G.L. 1956,  45-3-17. 
Sec. 3. - Vacancy in office; absence. 
    In the event any vacancy shall occur in the office of town moderator because of the death or resignation of the town moderator, the town council of said town shall appoint a successor for the balance of the unexpired term. 
    In the event the town moderator shall absent himself from any meeting over which he is required to preside, the town council of said town shall appoint a moderator to preside over such meeting. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 125,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Manner of election. 
    The town moderator chosen at general elections shall be nominated and elected in the same manner and pursuant to the same statutes governing the nomination and election of elective town officers. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 125,  4) 
State Law reference- Election of officers, G.L. 1956,  45-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 5. - When act effective. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 125,  5) 
ARTICLE 18. - PROHIBITING INTERMENTS IN GROUNDS ON LOCKWOOD STREET 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
    The town council of the Town of West Warwick is authorized and empowered to adopt an ordinance prohibiting interment of bodies in a certain private burying ground or burying plat located on the easterly side of Lockwood street, a short distance to the north of the northeast corner of Lockwood street and Cowesett avenue. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 137,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Disinterment authorized. 
    The town council of the Town of West Warwick is authorized and empowered, at the petition of any owner or owners of land abutting said burying ground, to permit, subject to such conditions as said council may impose, the disinterment of any bodies in said burying ground or plat and the transfer of said bodies to some other place of burial. 
    The town council of the Town of West Warwick shall, before acting on any such petition for disinterment and reburial, publish in the Daily Times once per week for two (2) successive weeks of the filing of such petition and of hearing thereon. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 137,  2) 
Sec. 3. - When act effective. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 137,  3) 
ARTICLE 19. - RELEASE AND APPORTIONMENT OF SEWER LIENS 

Sec. 1. - Release authorized. 
    The Town of West Warwick, by its town council, is authorized and empowered, at the discretion of its town council, to release the lien of said town as to any portion of tracts impressed with a lien for payment of a sewer assessment or assessments. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 210,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Apportionment authorized. 
    The Town of West Warwick, by its town council, is authorized and empowered, at the discretion of its town council, to apportion the lien for payment of sewer assessments among the portions of any tract or parcel of land impressed with a lien for payment of a sewer assessment or assessments. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 210,  2) 
Sec. 3. - When act effective. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1958, ch. 210,  3) 
ARTICLE 21. - TAX EXEMPTION FOR THE ELDERLY 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
    The town council of the Town of West Warwick may by ordinance exempt from taxation the real property situated in said town, owned and occupied by any person over the age of sixty-five (65) years, which exemption shall be in an amount not exceeding three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) of valuation, and which exemption shall be in addition to any and all other exemptions from taxation to which said person may be otherwise entitled. Said exemption shall be applied uniformly and without regard to ability to pay, provided, however, that only one such exemption shall be granted to cotenants, joint tenants and tenants by the entirety, even though all of said cotenants, joint tenants and tenants by the entirety are sixty-five (65) years of age or over. Said exemption shall apply to a life tenant who has the obligation for the payment of the tax on such real property. 
(Laws 1965, ch. 129,  1; Laws 1981, ch. 47; Laws 1984, ch. 21,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Prior action validated. 
    The action heretofore taken by the qualified electors of the town of West Warwick qualified to vote upon a proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money with relation to the subject matter contained within this act is hereby validated and affirmed as if said action were taken pursuant to the provisions of this act. 
(Laws 1965, ch. 129,  2) 
Sec. 3. - When act effective; repealer. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and chapter 10 of the public laws, 1965, and all other acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1965, ch. 129,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Alternate exemption schedule. 
    The Town of West Warwick may provide by ordinance for a schedule of exemptions from the assessed valuation on real property located therein for any person who is sixty-five (65) years or older or to any person who is totally and permanently disabled regardless of age, which said exemption schedule shall be based upon annual adjusted gross income as defined for federal income tax purposes as follows: 
(a)  An exemption of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for those having an adjusted gross income of zero to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); 
(b)  An exemption of eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) for those having an adjusted gross income of five thousand and one dollars ($5,001.00) to six thousand dollars ($6,000.00); 
(c)  An exemption of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for those having an adjusted gross income of six thousand and one dollars ($6,001.00) to seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00); 
(d)  An exemption of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) for those having an adjusted gross income of seven thousand and one dollars ($7,001.00) to eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00); 
(e)  And an exemption of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for those having an adjusted gross income from eight thousand and one dollars ($8,001.00) to nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00). 
    Provided, however that said exemption schedule shall apply only to single-family dwellings in which said person resides; provided said person acquired said property for actual consideration paid or inherited the same; provided said person has resided in the Town of West Warwick for a period of three (3) years ending with the date of assessment (December 31st) for the year for which exemption is claimed; and provided, further, that such exemption shall not be allowed unless the person entitled thereto shall have presented to the assessors, on or before the last day on which sworn statements may be filed with the tax assessor for the year [for] which the foregoing is claimed, due evidence that he or she is so entitled, which evidence shall stand as long as his or her residence remains unchanged. In the case of married persons the age requirement will be met as soon as either the husband or wife reaches the age of sixty-five (65) years and, in the event the husband passes away, a widow sixty-two (62) years of age to sixty-five (65) years of age will be allowed the exemption as long as she remains unmarried. 
    Those persons granted tax relief under 44-3-16(b) [G.L. 1956,  44-3-16(b)], P.L. 1972, ch. 255, will have the option of retaining their current tax freeze or abandoning it to seek relief under this act. 
(Laws 1981, ch. 47) 
ARTICLE 22. - WARWICK WATER FACILITIES IN WEST WARWICK 

Sec. 1. - Acquisition authorized. 
    The city of Warwick is authorized and empowered to acquire land and easements by negotiations, purchase, condemnation, or otherwise to accommodate the construction of public water works facilities within the territory of the own of West Warwick, for the purpose of providing a connecting water main from the city of Warwick to a connection in the proposed Providence water supply board aqueduct in the vicinity of Wakefield street, so called, in the town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1966, ch. 34,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Construction, maintenance authorized. 
    Said city is further authorized and empowered to construct, own, maintain and operate public water works facilities in public ways, or public property, or in private ways or private property within the territory of the Town of West Warwick for the purpose outlined in section 1 above. 
(Laws 1966, ch. 34,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Authority declared additional. 
    The authority herein granted shall be in addition and auxiliary to authority granted said city by Chapter 1121 of the Public Laws, 1927 and all acts in amendment thereof and in addition thereto. 
(Laws 1966, ch. 34,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Applicability of general laws. 
    In exercising the authority granted herein said city is authorized and empowered to exercise all the powers and authority conferred upon towns by the provisions of Chapter 15 of Title 39 of the General Laws of Rhode Island 1956 [G.L. 1956,  39-15-1 et seq.], as amended, entitled "Water Supply." 
(Laws 1966, ch. 34,  4) 
Sec. 5. - Liability for damages. 
    The City of Warwick shall be liable in damages for injuries or damages occasioned by the laying or repairing of water pipes or water mains in the highways or roads of the Town of West Warwick, but it shall not be liable for the failure or neglect of the Town of West Warwick to repair or maintain its highways or roads after the completion of repairs to such highways or roads by the City of Warwick following the laying or repairing of water pipes or water mains in such highways or roads. 
(Laws 1966, ch. 34,  5) 
Sec. 6. - Tax exemption. 
    The City of Warwick shall also be exempt from local taxes on all pipelines and other waterworks appurtenances hereinafter located or installed in the Town of West Warwick for purposes of providing water supply lines to the Warwick water supply system. 
(Laws 1966, ch. 34,  6) 
Sec. 7. - When act effective; repealer. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1966, ch. 34,  7) 
ARTICLE 23. - TENURE OF TOWN CLERK[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Election of town clerks, G.L. 1956,  45-4-1. 

Sec. 1. - Declared. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law to the contrary, the town clerk of the Town of West Warwick shall be appointed by the town council and shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay, and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. Such tenure shall become effective as set forth in section 2. 
(Laws 1968, ch. 174,  1; Laws 1978, ch. 319,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Appointment of deputy clerk as town clerk; other appointments. 
(a)  Whenever the deputy town clerk shall be appointed town clerk, he or she shall enjoy tenure of office as recited above, provided he or she shall have served a minimum cumulative period of five (5) years in said capacity of deputy town clerk. 
(b)  In the event the person is appointed town clerk who has not served continuously for five (5) years as a deputy town clerk, then he or she shall not enjoy tenure until that person has served in the capacity of town clerk for a period of seven (7) years. 
(Laws 1968, ch. 174,  2; Laws 1978, ch. 319,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Termination at age sixty-two. 
    Such tenure so enjoyed by any person appointed or elected town clerk of West Warwick shall cease and terminate and all rights and privileges of tenure enjoyed in connection therewith shall cease and terminate upon the attaining by such town clerk of the age of sixty-two (62) years, and such town clerk shall thereafter continue to serve as town clerk of the Town of West Warwick at the will of the town council of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1968, ch. 174,  3) 
Sec. 4. - When act effective; repealer. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1968, ch. 174,  4) 
ARTICLE 24. - MUTUAL ASSISTANCE FIREFIGHTING AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 1. - Mutual firefighting assistance agreement with adjoining municipalities. 
    The Town of West Warwick is authorized and empowered to enter into agreements with the Cities of Cranston, Warwick and with the Anthony Fire District and East Greenwich Fire District for mutual firefighting assistance between West Warwick and said cities or districts under such terms as all parties shall deem adequate and reasonable. 
(Laws 1970, ch. 296,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Appropriation of moneys for furnishing of protection under agreements and payment of costs and expenses. 
    The qualified electors of the Town of West Warwick at a regular or special financial town meeting assembled, are authorized and empowered to appropriate such sum or sums of money as may be needed or required for furnishing of protection under agreements and for payment of cost and expenses that may occur as a result of performance of these agreements, and the said sums shall be added to and made part of the general appropriation of said department. 
(Laws 1970, ch. 296,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Firefighting assistance deemed governmental function. 
    The furnishing by the Town of West Warwick of firefighting assistance pursuant to these agreements shall be deemed for the purpose of any claims against said town arising, therefor, to be in the exercise of a governmental function. 
(Laws 1970, ch. 296,  3) 
Sec. 4. - When act effective. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1970, ch. 296,  4) 
ARTICLE 25. - TENURE OF TAX ASSESSOR; BOARD OF ASSESSMENT AND REVIEW 

Sec. 1. - Tenure of tax assessor declared. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law to the contrary the chairman of the board of tax assessors of the Town of West Warwick whether appointed or elected shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. 
(Laws 1973, ch. 70,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Prerequisite length of service. 
    Any person appointed or elected chairman of the board of tax assessors before or after the passage of this act who shall have served a cumulative period of three (3) years, shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. 
(Laws 1973, ch. 70,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Termination at age sixty-two. 
    Such tenure so enjoyed by any person appointed or elected chairman of the board of tax assessors of West Warwick shall cease and terminate and all rights and privileges of tenure enjoyed in connection therewith shall cease and terminate upon the attaining by such chairman of the board of tax assessors of the age of sixty-two (62) years, and such chairman of the board of tax assessors shall thereafter continue to serve as chairman of the board of tax assessors of the Town of West Warwick at the will of the town council of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1973, ch. 70,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Board of assessment review. 
    Tax assessors shall no longer be elected in the Town of West Warwick. Upon the expiration of the term of office of the two (2) members of the board of tax assessors whose terms expire November 1976 there shall be a board of assessment review. 
(a)  Appointment and vacancies. There shall be a board of assessment review consisting of three (3) members appointed by the council for a term of three (3) years, no more than two (2) of whom shall be members of the same political party, and all of whom shall be residents of the Town of West Warwick. The members first appointed shall serve for terms of one (1), two (2) and three (3) years respectively. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term. If a member of such board shall cease to be a resident, his office shall thereby become vacant. 
(b)  Duties. 
(1)  The board of assessment review shall hear and consider the appeal of any property owner concerning the amount of his assessed valuation as determined by the assessor. The board shall keep an accurate record of its proceedings which shall be available for public inspection. 
(2)  The town council shall furnish to the board such clerical and other assistance that may from time to time be required. 
(Laws 1973, ch. 70,  4) 
Sec. 5. - Correction of assessment. 
    If it shall appear that the valuation of any property has been erroneously or incorrectly assessed, the board shall have authority to order a correction. Such determination shall be certified by the board to the assessor whose duty it shall be to make such corrections in the valuation as the board may determine. If the tax roll has been certified by the assessor, he shall transmit the findings of the board to the council, which shall cancel in whole or in part the tax based on such valuation in order to effect a correction. 
(Laws 1973, ch. 70,  5) 
Sec. 6. - Procedure. 
    The council shall provide by ordinance for the organization and procedure of the board of assessment review and for the manner of receiving, considering and disposing of appeals. 
(Laws 1973, ch. 70,  6) 
Sec. 7. - Appeal. 
    The taking of an appeal to the board of assessment review or any action thereon shall not be construed to limit or restrict the right of any taxpayer to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief from any assessed valuation or tax originally determined by the assessor. 
(Laws 1973, ch. 70,  7) 
Sec. 8. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1973, ch. 70,  8) 
ARTICLE 26. - SCHOOL COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP 

Sec. 1. - Membership; vacancy. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law to the contrary, the school committee of the Town of West Warwick shall consist of five (5) members elected at large by the qualified electors of all of said town for terms of four (4) years each. At the election on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November, 1976, two (2) members of the school committee shall be elected for terms of four (4) years and two (2) members for a term of two (2) years. At the election to be held on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November, 1978 and biennially thereafter, three (3) members of said school committee shall be elected for terms of four (4) years, and until their respective successors have been elected and qualified. At the election to be held on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November, 1980, two (2) members of said school committee shall be elected for terms of four (4) years, and until their respective successors have been elected and qualified. 
    In case of a vacancy by death, removal out of town, resignation, failure to elect by reason of a tie vote or otherwise, neglect or refusal to qualify, or for any other cause, such vacancy shall be filled by the town council until the next regular biennial election, when a member shall be elected for the unexpired term thereof. 
(Laws 1975, ch. 137,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Term of office. 
    The term of office of those members of the school committee of the Town of West Warwick, who were elected to said office at the general election held in November, 1974 shall not be affected by this act. 
(Laws 1975, ch. 137,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Council to appoint two members. 
    Upon the passage of this act, the town council of the Town of West Warwick shall appoint two (2) members to the school committee whose term shall expire after the election of 1976 and their successors are duly qualified. 
(Laws 1975, ch. 137,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1975, ch. 137,  4) 
ARTICLE 27. - HOUSING CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; TENURE 

Sec. 1. - Tenure of housing code enforcement officer declared. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law to the contrary the minimum housing code enforcement officer of the Town of West Warwick shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. 
(Laws 1975, ch. 138,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Prerequisite length of service. 
    Any person appointed before or after the passage of this act who shall have served the cumulative period of three (3) years, shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. 
(Laws 1975, ch. 138,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Termination of tenure. 
    Such tenure so enjoyed by any person as minimum housing code enforcement officer of West Warwick shall cease and terminate and all rights and privileges of tenure enjoyed in connection therewith shall cease and terminate upon the attaining by such minimum housing code enforcement officer of the age of sixty-two (62) years, and such minimum housing code enforcement officer shall thereafter continue to serve as minimum housing code enforcement officer of the Town of West Warwick at the will of the town council of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1975, ch. 138,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1975, ch. 138,  4) 
ARTICLE 28. - COPIES OF PROPOSED ANNUAL BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL TOWN MEETING 

Sec. 1. - Clerk to supply copies. 
    Commencing in the year 1977 and every year thereafter, the town council of the Town of West Warwick shall cause to be published or to be printed and have available for distribution, at least five (5) days prior to the financial town meeting, the proposed budget that the administration will propose at the said financial town meeting. In the event that the publication be by newspaper it shall be printed once in any newspaper of general circulation at least five (5) days prior to said financial town meeting, and in lieu of publication, then in that event by having copies available in the office of the town clerk five (5) full days before said financial town meeting. 
(Laws 1976, ch. 175,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Compliance required prior to financial meeting. 
    Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, until the provisions of section 1 hereof are complied with the financial town meeting shall not be held. 
(Laws 1976, ch. 175,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Laws 1976, ch. 175,  3) 
ARTICLE 29. - TENURE OF TOWN PLANNER 

Sec. 1. - Declared. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law to the contrary, the town planner of the Town of West Warwick shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. 
(Laws 1978, ch. 316,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Prerequisite length of service. 
    Any person appointed before or after the passage of this act who shall have served the cumulative period of five (5) years, shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. 
(Laws 1978, ch. 316,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Termination of tenure. 
    Such tenure so enjoyed by any person as town planner of the Town of West Warwick shall cease and terminate and all rights and privileges of tenure enjoyed in connection therewith shall cease and terminate upon the attaining by such town planner of the age of sixty-two (62) years, and such town planner shall thereafter continue to serve as town planner of the Town of West Warwick at the will of the town council of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1978, ch. 316,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1976, ch. 175,  4) 
ARTICLE 30. - TENURE OF FEDERAL EMPLOYMENT PROGRAM COORDINATOR 

Sec. 1. - Declared. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law to the contrary, the federal employment program coordinator of the Town of West Warwick shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay, and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. 
(Laws 1978, ch. 318,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Prerequisite length of service. 
    Any person appointed before or after the passage of this act who shall have served the cumulative period of five (5) years, shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay, and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. 
(Laws 1978, ch. 318,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Termination of tenure. 
    Such tenure so enjoyed by any person as federal employment program coordinator of the Town of West Warwick shall cease and terminate and all rights and privileges of tenure enjoyed in connection therewith shall cease and terminate upon the attaining by such federal employment program coordinator of the age of sixty-two (62) years, and such federal employment program coordinator shall thereafter continue to serve as federal employment coordinator of the Town of West Warwick at the will of the town council of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1978, ch. 318,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1978, ch. 318,  4) 
ARTICLE 31. - ELECTION OF TOWN COUNCIL; WARD BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1. - Town council-Election of members. 
    The members of the town council of the Town of West Warwick shall be elected at a general election biennially and shall hold their respective offices for two (2) years beginning on the Tuesday in November next succeeding their election and qualification and until the election and qualification of their respective successors. 
(Laws 1980, ch. 258,  1; Laws 1984, ch. 23,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Same-Composition. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick shall consist of five (5) members; each member shall be elected from one of the five (5) wards of the town, by the majority of the qualified electors casting ballots in each ward, commencing at the next general election. 
(Laws 1980, ch. 258,  2; Laws 1984, ch. 23,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Ward boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the five (5) wards are as follows: 
    Ward 1. Beginning at a point at the intersection of Providence Street and the City of Cranston/Town of West Warwick boundary line; thence westerly on said boundary line to Garnet Street; thence southerly on Garnet Street to Phenix Avenue; thence northeasterly on Phenix Avenue to Eagle Street; thence southerly on Eagle Street to Centracchio Street; thence southwesterly on Centracchio Street to Mello Street; thence southerly and easterly on Mello Street to Cleveland Street; thence southerly on Cleveland Street to Wakefield Street; thence westerly on Wakefield Street to Grandview Drive; thence southerly on Grandview Drive to the New York, New Haven and Hartford right-of-way; thence easterly on said right-of-way to the Pawtuxet River; thence northerly, easterly, southeasterly and southwesterly on the Pawtuxet River to Providence Street; thence easterly on Providence Street to New London Avenue at the City of Warwick boundary line; thence easterly and northerly along said boundary line to the point of beginning. 
    Ward 2. Beginning at a point at the intersection of Garnet Street at the City of Cranston/Town of West Warwick boundary line; thence westerly on said boundary line to the Town of Coventry boundary line; thence southerly on said boundary line to Shippee Avenue; thence easterly on Shippee Avenue to McNiff Street; thence northerly on McNiff Street to Curson Street; thence easterly on Curson Street to Main Street; thence northerly on Main Street to Providence Street; thence northerly on Providence Street to Factory Street; thence easterly on Factory Street to the Pawtuxet River; thence easterly, northerly, westerly, and southerly to the right-of-way of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railway; thence westerly along said right-way to Grandview Avenue; thence northerly on Grandview Avenue to Wakefield Street; thence easterly on Wakefield Street to Cleveland Street; thence northerly on Cleveland Street to Mello Street; thence westerly and northerly on Mello Street to Centracchio Street; thence easterly on Centracchio Street to Eagle Street; thence northerly on Eagle Street to Phenix Avenue; thence southwesterly on Phenix Avenue to Garnet Street; thence northerly on Garnet Street to the point of beginning. 
    Ward 3. Beginning at a point at the intersection of Shippee Avenue and the Town of Coventry/Town of West Warwick boundary line; thence easterly on Shippee Avenue to McNiff Street; thence northerly on McNiff Street to Curson Street; thence easterly on Curson Street to Main Street; thence northerly on Main Street to Providence Street; thence northerly on Providence Street to Factory Street; thence easterly on Factory Street to the Pawtuxet River; thence easterly and northerly on the Pawtuxet River to Providence Street; thence easterly on Providence Street to New London Avenue at the Town of West Warwick/City of Warwick boundary line; thence southerly on said boundary line to Legris Avenue; thence westerly on Legris Avenue to Main Street; thence northerly on Main Street to West Warwick Avenue; thence westerly on West Warwick Avenue to the New York, New Haven and Hartford right-of-way; thence westerly on said right-of-way to the Town of Coventry/Town of West Warwick boundary line; thence northerly on said boundary line to the point of beginning. 
    Ward 4. Beginning at a point at the intersection of Legris Avenue and Quaker Lane at the City of Warwick/Town of West Warwick boundary line; thence southerly on Quaker Lane to Cowesett Avenue; thence westerly on Cowesett Avenue to Main Street; thence northerly on Main Street to Pulaski Street; thence westerly on Pulaski Street to Roundway Drive; thence southerly on Roundway Drive to the Town of Coventry/Town of West Warwick boundary line; thence northerly on said boundary line to the right-of-way of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railway; thence easterly on said right-of-way to West Warwick Avenue; thence easterly on West Warwick Avenue to Main Street; thence southerly on Main Street to Legris Avenue; thence easterly on Legris Avenue to the point of beginning. 
    Ward 5. Beginning at a point at the intersection of Cowesett Avenue and Quaker Lane at the Town of West Warwick/City of Warwick boundary line; thence westerly on Cowesett Avenue to Main Street; thence northerly on Main Street to Pulaski Street; thence westerly on Pulaski Street to Roundway Drive; thence southerly on Roundway Drive to the Town of Coventry/Town of West Warwick boundary line; thence southerly on said boundary line to the Town of East Greenwich/Town of Coventry/Town of West Warwick boundary line; thence easterly along the Town of East Greenwich/Town of West Warwick boundary line to Quaker Lane at the Town of East Greenwich/Town of West Warwick boundary line; thence northerly on Quaker lane to the point of beginning. 
(Laws 1980, ch. 258,  3; Laws 1984, ch. 23,  3) 
ARTICLE 32. - ESCROW FUND FOR REPAIRING DAMAGE TO STREETS, CURBINGS AND SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 1. - Authority. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick may provide by ordinance for the creation of an escrow fund for the purpose of repairing damage to town streets, curbings and sidewalks. Said escrow fund is to be administered by the town's building inspector, as follows: 
(a)  A separate account will be created and entitled "Town of West Warwick, building inspector's escrow fund." 
(b)  Every application for a building permit which requires the installation of a foundation will be accompanied by a fee of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Said fee to be in addition to all other fees required by law. Any fee so collected in accordance with this act shall be placed in the building inspector's escrow fund. 
(c)  Before a certificate of occupancy may be issued on the above mentioned permit, the building inspector and the commissioner of highways will inspect the roadway, curbing and sidewalk bounding the property covered by the permit, to determine if the recent construction has caused any damage to town owned property. 
(d)  Should the building inspector and commissioner of highways determine that damage has been caused to town owned property, they shall forthwith issue a statement to the applicant itemizing all damages claimed, including costs to repair said damages. 
(e)  With the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the building inspector shall return to the applicant the fee deposited into the escrow fund, less any charges for repairs as outlined in paragraph (d). 
(f)  Any monies not returned to the applicant shall be transferred forthwith to the town's general fund, and credited to the highway department's account for repairs to roads, curbs and sidewalks. 
(g)  Upon notification of said transfer, the commissioner of highways shall complete repairs to the damaged town owned property. 
(Laws 1981, ch. 45) 
ARTICLE 33. - TENURE OF THE TOWN TAX COLLECTOR 

Sec. 1. - Declared. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law to the contrary, the tax collector of the Town of West Warwick shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 70,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Prerequisite length of service. 
    Any person appointed before or after the passage of this act who shall have served the cumulative period of five (5) years shall enjoy tenure of office with no decrease in pay and shall be removed only for good and sufficient cause. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 70,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Termination of tenure. 
    Such tenure so enjoyed by any person as tax collector of the Town of West Warwick shall cease and terminate and all rights and privileges of tenure enjoyed in connection therewith shall cease and terminate upon the attaining by such tax collector of the age of sixty-two (62) years, and such tax collector shall thereafter continue to serve as tax collector of the Town of West Warwick at the will of the town council of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 70,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon passage. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 70,  4) 
ARTICLE 34. - FILLING OF VACANCIES ON TOWN COUNCIL 

Sec. 1. - Failure of council to act; special election. 
    Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the town council of the Town of West Warwick and the town council for any reason has failed to fill the vacancy within thirty (30) days after the office became vacant then the town clerk shall call for a special election in the manner provided by law; however, no such special election shall be called where such vacancy occurs with nine (9) months of the next general election. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 304,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon passage. 
(Laws 1986, ch. 304,  1) 
ARTICLE 35. - BLIND PERSON'S EXEMPTION FROM LOCAL PROPERTY TAXES 

Sec. 1. - Taxation amendment. 
    Section 44-3-12 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956,  44-3-12] in Chapter 44-3 entitled "Property Subject to Taxation" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
44-3-12. Blind person's exemption. 
    (a) The property of each person who has permanent impairment of both eyes of the following status: Central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye, with corrective glasses, or central visual acuity of more than 20/200 if there is a field defect in which the peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field subtends an angular distance no greater than twenty (20) degrees in the better eye, shall be exempted from taxation to the amount of six thousand dollars ($6,000), which exemption shall apply to such property in the municipality where such person resides; and if there is not sufficient property to exhaust such exemption, such person may proclaim the balance in any city or town where he or she may own property; provided, further, that the city or town council of any city or town may by ordinance increase the exemption within the city or town to an amount not to exceed eighteen thousand dollars ($18,000); and, further provided, however, that such exemption shall not be allowed in favor of any person who is not a legal resident of the state, or unless the person entitled to such exemption shall have presented to the assessors, on or before the last day on which sworn statements may be filed with the assessors for the year for which an exemption is claimed, due evidence that he or she is so entitled, which evidence shall stand so long as his or her legal residence remains unchanged; and provided, further, that the exemption herein provided for, to the extent that it shall apply to any city or town, shall be applied in full to the total value of such person's real and tangible personal property located in such city or town and shall be applied to intangible personal property only to the extent that there is not sufficient real property or tangible personal property to exhaust such exemption. Such exemption shall be in addition to any other exemption provided by law except as provided in Section 44-3-25 [G.L. 1956,  44-3-25]. 
    (b) In each city or town that has not increased the exemption provided by Subsection 44-3-12(a) [G.L. 1956,  44-3-12(a)] above the minimum of six thousand dollars ($6,000), such exemption shall increase automatically each year by the same percentage as the percentage increase in the total amount of taxes levied by such city or town. Such automatic increase shall not apply to cities or towns that have increased the exemption provided by Subsection 44-3-12(a) [G.L. 1956,  44-3-12(a)] above the minimum of six thousand [dollars] ($6,000); provided, however, that if the application of such automatic increase to an exemption of six thousand dollars ($6,000) on a continuous basis from the effective date of this subsection to any subsequent assessment date would result in a higher exemption than the exemption enacted by the city or town council, then the amount provided by the automatic increase shall apply. 
(Laws 1987, ch. 44-3,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Explanation. 
    This act would provide an automatic inflation increase in the blind person's property tax exemption. 
(Laws 1987, ch. 44-3,  1) 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
    The act would take effect with respect to taxes levied on valuations assessed as of December 31, 1987. 
(Laws 1987, ch. 44-3,  1) 
ARTICLE 36. - AN ACT VALIDATING AND RATIFYING THE HOME RULE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF WEST WARWICK 

Sec. 1. - Ratification. 
    In all respects in which the Home Rule Charter of the Town of West Warwick, approved on November 4, 1986, may require ratification, confirmation, validation or enactment by the general assembly, but in no other respects, the provisions of the Home Rule Charter so adopted are hereby ratified, confirmed, validated and enacted. It is the express intention of the general assembly by the passage of this act to give effect to, ratify, confirm, validate and enact those certain provisions of the Home Rule Charter of the town of West Warwick, approved on November 4, 1986, which require ratification, confirmation, validation or enactment; but nothing in this act shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers now or hereafter granted to towns and cities by Article XXVIII of the amendments to the constitution and other applicable laws of the State of Rhode Island or those rights retained by said town in said Charter. 
(Laws 1987, ch. 606,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this act or the application thereof to the Town of West Warwick or to any person or circumstance is held invalid by reason of being deemed in violation of any provision of the constitution of the State of Rhode Island or otherwise, the remainder of this act or the application of such provision to said town or to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Laws 1987, ch. 606,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage, and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1987, ch. 606,  3) 
ARTICLE 37. - ENACTING AN ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A JUVENILE HEARING BOARD 

Sec. 1. - Purpose of ordinance; provisions. 
    For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals or general welfare, the town council of the Town of West Warwick, shall have the power in accordance with the provisions of this act within the limits of said town, by ordinance, to pass, ordain, establish and amend an ordinance to establish a juvenile hearing board. 
    Without limiting the generality of the aforementioned, such ordinance may include the following provisions: 
(1)  Establishment of juvenile hearing board. There is hereby established within the Town of West Warwick a juvenile hearing board with the powers set forth in this ordinance for the purpose of hearing all cases referred to such board by the juvenile division of the police department, with respect to persons resident in the Town of West Warwick, under the age of eighteen (18), who are charged with violating the criminal laws of the State of Rhode Island or the Town of West Warwick. 
(2)  Referral to juvenile hearing board. Persons who are residents of the Town of West Warwick, who are under the age of eighteen (18) may be referred to the juvenile hearing board, established herein, which shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the family court if the offense is one which, if committed by an adult, would be a misdemeanor; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply in the case of any person: 
(a)  Charged with the crime of assault or battery; or 
(b)  Who shall have been twice previously referred to the juvenile hearing board or have been once previously referred and refused or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or make the restitution recommended; and/or 
(c)  Who, at the time of the commission of such juvenile offense, shall be within the custody and control of the family court. 
The juvenile division of the West Warwick Police Department may offer referral to the juvenile hearing board [of] any other juvenile offender where, in the opinion of the juvenile division, such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile concerned and the community at large. No referral to the juvenile hearing board shall be made by the juvenile division until such person, together with his legal guardians, shall have in writing waived such person's right to a hearing in the family court with respect to the offense charged, has agreed to guilt, and shall have agreed to abide by the decision of the juvenile hearing board. 
(3)  Composition of juvenile hearing board. The membership of the juvenile hearing board shall consist of five (5) persons over the age of eighteen (18) years, to be appointed by the town council of the Town of West Warwick, all of whom shall have been a resident for at least three (3) years within the Town of West Warwick, and none of whom shall be attorneys admitted to practice before the supreme court of the State of Rhode Island. The town council shall appoint one (1) member whose term shall expire on December 1, 1989; and, thereafter, until his/her successor is appointed and qualified, two (2) members whose term shall expire on December 1, 1990; and, thereafter, until their successors are appointed and qualified, two (2) members whose terms shall expire on December 1, 1991; and, thereafter, until their successors are appointed and qualified. During the month of November, 1989, and annually thereafter, the town council shall appoint a member to succeed the member or members whose terms will then next expire to serve for a term of three (3) years, commencing on the first day of December, and, thereafter, until their successors are appointed and qualified. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the office of a member by death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled in like manner as the original appointment but only for the remainder of the term of the former member. No member of the juvenile hearing board shall be entitled to receive any compensation by reason of his or her service on the board. 
(4)  Duties of juvenile hearing board. The juvenile hearing board shall hear all cases referred to it by the juvenile division and shall recommend sanctions (other than incarceration), including, but not limited to, fines (up to a maximum of fifty dollars ($50.00)) and community service and shall direct restitution for any injuries and/or damages, where appropriate, resulting from the commission of such offense. In any such proceeding, the juvenile hearing board, prior to imposing sanctions, shall request the juvenile offender and his/her parents or legal guardians to agree to the sanctions imposed and the amount of restitution and the manner of making the same. In ordering restitution, the juvenile hearing board shall take into account the juvenile offender's ability to pay and the amount of actual damage caused as a result of the commission of such offense. 
(5)  Juvenile hearing board meetings. The juvenile hearing board shall meet not less than once each month. It shall give notice of date and time of meetings to the juvenile division and the juvenile offender and his/her parents not less than seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing. Any juvenile offender may be represented by counsel and present evidence in his/her behalf. A majority of the members of the juvenile hearing board shall constitute a quorum, and its proceedings shall be closed to the public. 
The juvenile hearing board shall elect one (1) from its members as its chairman and one (1) as its vice chairman. In the absence of the chairman, the vice chairman shall be the presiding officer. A majority of the members present shall be required to take any action. The juvenile hearing board shall have the power from time to time to draft rules governing its proceedings or to amend or repeal any rules theretofore adopted. 
(Laws 1988, ch. 88-54,  1) 
Sec. 2. - To whom applicable; effective date; repeal. 
    This act shall apply to all juveniles alleged to have committed an offense after the date of its enactment and shall take effect and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances, Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island; upon its passage and all ordinances and parts of the Code of Ordinances, Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1988, ch. 88-54,  2) 
ARTICLE 38. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 1. - General Laws amended. 
    Section 45-2-26 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956,  45-2-26] in Chapter 45-2 entitled "General Powers" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
45-2-26. Town of West Warwick-Municipal Court. 
    (a) The town council of the town of West Warwick may establish a municipal court and confer upon the court original jurisdiction, notwithstanding any other provisions of the general laws, to hear and determine causes involving violation of any ordinance, including minimum housing ordinances of the town and any violation of the provisions of chapter 24.3 of this title entitled, The Rhode Island Housing Maintenance and Occupancy Code; provided, however, that any defendant found guilty of any offense, excluding violations of the minimum housing ordinances or chapter 24.3 within the jurisdiction of the court, may within seven (7) days of conviction, file an appeal from the conviction to the superior court and be entitled in the latter court to a trial de novo; and provided, further, however, that any defendant found guilty of any violation of a minimum housing ordinance or of chapter 24.3, may, within seven (7) days of the conviction, file an appeal from the conviction to the third division of the district court and be entitled to a trial de novo in accordance with sections 8-8-3(a)(4) and 8-8-3.2 [G.L. 1956,  8-8-3(a)(4) and 8-8-3.2]. 
    (b) With respect to violations of either municipal ordinances dealing with minimum housing or chapter 24.3 et seq., of this title dealing with housing maintenance and occupancy, the town council may also confer upon the municipal court, in furtherance of the aforesaid jurisdiction, the power to proceed according to equity: (a) to restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate or correct a violation; (b) to order the repair, vacation or demolition of any dwelling existing in violation; or (c) to otherwise compel compliance with all of the provisions of the ordinances and statutes. 
    (c) The town council of the town of West Warwick shall be authorized and empowered to appoint a judge of said municipal court. The town council of said town shall be authorized and empowered to enact ordinances governing the personnel, operation and procedure to be followed in the court and to establish a schedule of fees and costs, and to otherwise provide for the operation and management of the court. The municipal court may impose a sentence not to exceed thirty (30) days in jail and impose a fine of not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500) or both. The court shall be empowered to administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and punish persons for contempt. 
(Laws 1989, ch. 521,  1) 
ARTICLE 39. - OFFICIALS EMPOWERED TO JOIN PERSONS IN MARRIAGE 

Sec. 1. - General Laws amended. 
    Section 15-3-5 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956,  15-3-5] in Chapter 15-3 entitled "Solemnization of Marriages" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
15-3-5. Officials empowered to join persons in marriage. 
    Every ordained clergy or elder in good standing, every justice of the supreme court, superior court, family court, or district court, every associate justice, the clerk of the supreme court, every clerk of a superior court, family court, or district court, every former justice of these courts and every former chief clerk of the district court may join persons in marriage in any town in this state; and every justice and every former justice of the municipal courts of the cities of Providence, Pawtucket, Warwick, Cranston, and every justice and every former justice of the municipal court of the town of West Warwick, and of the police court of the town of Johnston may join persons in marriage in any city or town in this state, and wardens of the town of New Shoreham may join persons in marriage in New Shoreham. 
(Laws 1990, ch. 139,  1) 
ARTICLE 40. - SEWER FEES 

Sec. 1. - Sewer impact fee. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick may enact by ordinances a sewer impact fee. Such a fee shall be levied for the cost of any project or projects for the construction, completion, extension, enlargement or improvement of the sewage disposal system. The fee shall be levied upon the owners of property which abut that portion of any street or highway in or along which any sewer constituting any portion of such project or projects may be located, or which otherwise may benefit in any manner from any such project or projects. 
    The town council may provide for such an impact fee based upon a fixed rate, a computation by building square footage or a combination of both methods. Further, the town council may provide for the calculation of the fee for residential properties and commercial/industrial properties by using different methods of [or] formulas, provided that the rate is equitable. 
    The town council may provide for the payment of such fee in its entirety when levied or in installments. In the event that the town council provides for installment payments, it can require payment in full of the impact fee when a property subject to such fee is sold or otherwise alienated. Such a requirement could exempt involuntary alienations such as by death of a joint property owner or probate of a sole owner's interest. 
    The town council may provide for the conversion of any existing sewer assessment levied by existing special acts and/or ordinance to an impact fee. Such conversion may provide for credits to any property owner for principal payments made toward any existing assessment. 
    The town council shall not provide for an impact fee for any property owner who has paid or is paying an existing sewer assessment for land and buildings. 
(Laws 1990, ch. 226,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Improvement impact fee. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick may enact by ordinance an improvement impact fee. Such a fee may be based upon the method of payment described in section 1 for additions to dwellings and buildings subject to an impact fee. Such a fee could also be levied for the completion of dwellings and other buildings and other improvements. 
(Laws 1990, ch. 226,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Capital improvement fee. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick may provide by ordinance for a capital improvement fee. Such a fee may be levied upon all property owners having properties that utilize the existing sewer system or otherwise benefit from the existing sewer system. 
    The town council may levy such a fee based upon a fixed rate, a computation by building square footage or a combination of both methods. Such a fee could be levied for the purpose of defraying costs and expenses incurred for capital improvements to the sewer system. 
    Such a fee would be payable in a manner stated in section 1. 
(Laws 1990, ch. 226,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Levy; billing; collection. 
    In levying any of the fees described in sections 1, 2 and 3, the town council shall provide that the tax collector shall name the owners subject to any fee, describe the property subject to such fee and state the amount of the fee. No error or omission in the name or description shall invalidate the levying of any fee, as long as either the owner or property is substantially identified. 
    Any such fee may bear interest as determined by the town council and shall constitute a lien upon the respective properties on a parity with the lien for town taxes until paid in full. The collector of taxes shall have the same rights to enforce such liens against the subject properties and to collect such fees and interest from the owners as he has for town taxes. 
    Property owners shall be billed for such fees in a manner as set forth by the town council. Any person aggrieved by any such fee may within three (3) months of the mailing of such bill file a petition for relief pursuant to R.I.G.L. 44-5-26. The filing of such a petition shall not relieve the property from the lien provided for, but any final judgment reducing a fee shall reduce the amount due accordingly. The remedy provided herein shall be exclusive and no action or proceeding questioning the validity of any such assessment shall be begun after the expiration of said ninety (90) day period. 
    The town council shall be authorized to correct the levying of any fee and make any necessary abatements and to replace any invalid fee with a valid one. 
    The town council may provide for the apportionment of any fee in the case of the subdivision of a property subject to any such fee. 
(Laws 1990, ch. 226,  4) 
ARTICLE 41. - LEVY AND ASSESSMENT OF LOCAL TAXES 

Sec. 1. - General Laws amended. 
    Section 44-5-11 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956,  44-5-11] in Chapter 44-5 entitled "Levy and Assessment of Local Taxes" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
44-5-11. Assessment of valuations-Apportionment of levies. 
    (a) The assessors in the several towns and cities shall assess all valuation and apportion the levy of all taxes legally ordered under the rules and regulations, not repugnant to law, as the town meetings and city councils, respectively, shall from time to time prescribe; provided, however, that the assessors shall revalue all taxable real estate and implement the revaluation within three (3) years after December 31, 1980 unless a town or city shall have completed and implemented such revaluation within seven (7) years prior to December 31, 1980 and each town or city shall complete and implement a revaluation of all real estate property each tenth (10th) year after its first revaluation is implemented under this section unless an earlier date for revaluation is established; provided further, however, the city of Woonsocket and the town of Cumberland shall have until December 31, 1984 to revalue all taxable real estate and implement the revaluation. Those towns and cities which have both completed and implemented a revaluation within seven (7) years prior to December 31, 1980 shall revalue and implement the revaluation within ten (10) years of the date of the prior revaluation and each and every tenth (10th) year thereafter; provided, however, that the city of Providence shall have until December 31, 1987 to revalue all taxable real estate; provided, however, that the town of West Warwick shall have until December 31, 1993 to revalue all taxable real estate and implement the revaluation. 
    (b) The assessors of the respective cities and towns shall certify in writing to the department of administration of their proposed schedule of each revaluation and shall further certify in writing to the department when the revaluation is completed. At the completion of the revaluation, the certification shall include a tax rate, based upon the new valuation, which would have provided the same ad valorem revenue for the town or city as is being raised during the current town or city budget year. 
(Laws 1991, ch. 18,  1) 
ARTICLE 42. - REAL ESTATE TAXATION 

Sec. 1. - G.L. 1956,  44-5-13.2.1 added. 
    Chapter 44-5 of the General Laws entitled "Levy and Assessment of Local Taxes" is hereby amended by adding thereto the following section: 
44-5-13.2.1. Assessment and taxation of new real estate construction in West Warwick. 
    (A) Completed new construction of real estate, in West Warwick completed after any assessment date shall be liable for the payment of municipal taxes from the date the certificate of occupancy is issued or the date on which such new construction is first used for the purpose for which same was constructed, whichever is earlier, prorated for the assessment year in which the new construction is completed. Said prorated tax shall be computed on the basis of the rate of tax applicable with respect to such property, including the applicable rate of tax in any tax district in which such property is subject to tax following completion of such new construction, on the date such property becomes liable for such prorated tax in accordance with this section. 
    (B) The building inspector issuing the certificate shall, within ten (10) days after issuing the same, notify, in writing, the assessor of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
    (C) Not later than ninety (90) days after receipt by the assessor of such notice from the building inspector or from a determination by the assessor that such new construction is being used for the purpose for which same was constructed, the assessor shall determine the increment by which assessment for the completed construction exceeds the assessment on the tax roll for the immediately preceding assessment date. He or she shall prorate such amount from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or the date on which such new construction was first used for the purpose for which same was constructed, as the case may be, to the assessment date immediately following and shall add said increment as so prorated to the tax roll for the immediately preceding assessment date and shall within five (5) days notify the record owner as appearing on such tax roll and tax collector of such additional assessment. 
    (D) Any person claiming to be aggrieved by the action of the assessor hereunder may appeal the doings of the assessor to the assessment board of review within sixty (60) days from notification of such additional assessment or to superior court as provided. 
    (E) Upon receipt of such notice from the assessor, the tax collector shall, if such notice is received after the normal billing date, within ten (10) days thereafter mail or hand a bill to the owner based upon an amount prorated by the assessor. Such tax shall be due and payable and collectible as other municipal taxes, and subject to the same liens and processes of collection; provided such tax shall be due and payable in an initial or single installment due and payable not sooner than thirty (30) days after the date such bill is mailed or handed to the owner, and in any remaining, regular installments, as the same are due and payable, and the several installments of a tax so due and payable shall be equal. 
    (F) Nothing herein shall be deemed to authorize the collection of taxes twice in respect of the land upon which the new construction is located. 
    (G) This section shall only apply to taxes levied and property assessed in the town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1992, ch. 327,  1) 
Sec. 2. - G.L. 1956,  44-5-13.3 amended. 
    Section 44-5-13.3 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956,  44-5-13.3] in Chapter 44-5 entitled "Levy and Assessment of Local Taxes" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
44-5-13.3. Reduction in assessed value of real estate upon removal of damaged buildings. 
    Whenever a building is so damaged as to require total reconstruction before it may be used for any purpose related to its use prior to such damage and following which, the owner provides for complete demolition of such building with the material from demolition being removed from the parcel of real property on which the building was situated or used as fill on such parcel for purposes of grading, such parcel shall be assessed for purposes of property tax as of the date such demolition, removal and grading are completed, to the satisfaction of the building inspector and such assessment shall reflect a determination of the assessed value of such parcel, exclusive of the assessment value of the building so damaged, demolished and removed. The adjusted assessment shall be applicable with respect to such parcel from the date demolition, removal and grading are completed, as determined by said building inspector, until the thirty-first (31[st]) day of December next succeeding and the amount of property tax payable with respect to such parcel for the assessment year in which demolition, removal and grading are completed shall be adjusted accordingly in such manner as determined by the assessor. The preceding shall not be applicable in the event of natural disasters such as, but not limited to, erosion or demolition resulting from floods or hurricanes. This section shall only apply to assessments and taxes in the town of South Kingstown and the town of West Warwick. 
(Laws 1992, ch. 327,  2) 
ARTICLE 43. - FINANCIAL TOWN MEETING 

Sec. 1. - Presentation of budget at all-day referendum. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special act to the contrary, whenever any annual or special financial town meeting for the Town of West Warwick shall adjourn or recess without having adopted a budget or ordering a tax, the town council may by ordinance provide for the presentation of a budget less than or equal to the budget previously presented to the voters at an annual or special financial town meeting, as well as any other warrant items as may be directed by the council, to a meeting of the voters of the town to be held on a date specified in the ordinance, at which meeting all of the voters of the town shall be eligible to vote on the budget by secret ballot. 
(Laws 1993, ch. 23,  1) 
Sec. 2. - Procedure for vote at all-day referendum. 
    In the event of the passage of the ordinance as set forth in Section 1, the town clerk shall give notice of the time and place of the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, and shall provide ballot boxes for the purpose of receiving the votes of the voters, and shall cause to be printed ballots containing the following question: "Shall the budget for the Town of West Warwick for the fiscal year 19___ through 19___, be adopted in the total amount of $_____ which would result in an estimated tax increase (decrease) of $_____." The ballot shall also include such additional warrant items for approval of the voters as the town council may deem appropriate. The ballots shall provide for the means of expressing the voters' choice[s] thereon in printed boxes marked "YES" and "NO." The town clerk shall provide for the opening of the polls at 9:00 a.m. and for the closing of the polls at 9:00 p.m. on the date specified, and shall provide proper receptacles for the receipt of the voters' ballots. At the closing of the polls the ballots shall be counted under the supervision of the moderator of the town meeting and the town clerk, in public, and the results of the vote shall be publicly announced and recorded. If a majority of the votes are cast in favor of the budget it shall be valid and effective for the purpose of levying a tax. If a majority of the votes cast are against the budget, or in the event of a tie vote, the budget shall be recorded as defeated. The results of the vote on warrant items shall be treated in like manner. 
(Laws 1993, ch. 23,  2) 
Sec. 3. - Other business not affected. 
    The presentation of any budget requiring the vote of the voters as set forth in Section 2 shall not in any way restrict or interfere with the other business properly before the meeting. Business may proceed without interruption, and shall be disposed of according to law. 
(Laws 1993, ch. 23,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Retroactive effect. 
    Upon approval of the question presented in section 5, this act shall be given retroactive effect to May 18, 1993, and all acts or parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Laws 1993, ch. 23,  4) 
Sec. 5. - Referendum question. 
    The provisions of this act shall be presented to the voters of the town of West Warwick for their approval at any special or general election to be held within said town, in the following form: 
    "Shall a special act for the town of West Warwick providing for an all-day referendum on the budget and on any additional warrant items submitted by the town council, if the financial town meeting adjourns or recesses without approving a budget, be approved?" 
(Laws 1993, ch. 23,  5; Laws 1993, ch. 76,  1) 
ARTICLE 44. - VETERANS' AND SENIORS' EXEMPTIONS FROM LOCAL PROPERTY TAXES 

Sec. 1. - General Laws amended. 
    Sections 44-3-4 and 44-3-13.1 of the General Laws [G.L. 1956,  44-3-4 and 44-13.1] in Chapter 44-3 entitled "Property Subject to Taxation" are hereby amended to read as follows: 
44-3-4. Veterans' exemptions. 
    (a) The property of each person who served in the military or naval service of the United States in the war of the rebellion, the Spanish-American war, the insurrection in the Philippines, the China-relief expedition, or World War I, and the property of each person who served in the military or naval service of the United States in World War II at any time during the period beginning December 7, 1941, and ending on December 31, 1946, and the property of each person who served in the military or naval services of the United States in the Korean conflict at any time during the period beginning June 27, 1950 and ending January 31, 1955, or in the Vietnam conflict at any time during the period beginning December 22, 1961 and ending May 7, 1975, or who actually served in the Grenada or Lebanon conflicts of 1983-1984, and who was honorably discharged therefrom, or who was discharged therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable, or who, if not discharged, served honorably, or of the unmarried widow or widower of such person, shall be exempted from taxation to the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000) except in: 
    Burrillville, where the exemption shall be four thousand dollars ($4,000); 
    Cumberland, where the town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption of a maximum of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500); 
    Cranston, where the exemption shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000); 
    Jamestown, where the town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000); 
    Lincoln, where the exemption shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000), and where the town council may also provide for a real estate tax exemption not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000) for those honorably discharged active duty veterans who served in operation desert storm; 
    Newport, where the exemption shall be four thousand dollars ($4,000); 
    New Shoreham, where the town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption of a maximum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000); 
    North Kingstown, where the exemption shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000); 
    North Providence, where the town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption of a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000); 
    Smithfield, where the exemption shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000); and 
    Warren, where the exemption shall not exceed three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500); 
    Which exemption shall be applied to the property in the municipality where the person resides and if there is not sufficient property to exhaust the exemption, the person may claim the balance in any other city or town where the person may own property; provided, however, that the exemption shall not be allowed in favor of any person who is not a legal resident of the state, or unless the person entitled to the exemption shall have presented to the assessors, on or before the last day on which sworn statements may be filed with the assessors for the year for which exemption is claimed, due evidence that he or she is so entitled which evidence shall stand so long as his or her legal residence remains unchanged; and, provided, further, that the exemption herein provided for to the extent that it shall apply in any city or town, shall be applied in full to the total value of the person's real and tangible person[al] property located in the city or town; and, provided, further, that there shall be an additional exemption from taxation in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000), except in: 
    Central Falls, where the additional exemption shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000); 
    Cranston, where the exemption shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000); 
    Cumberland, where the town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption of a maximum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000); 
    Lincoln, where the exemption shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000); 
    Newport, where the exemption shall be four thousand dollars ($4,000); 
    New Shoreham, where the town council may, by ordinance, provide for exemption of a maximum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000); 
    North Providence, where the town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption of a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000); 
    Smithfield, where the exemption shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000); and 
    Warren, where the exemption shall not exceed seven thousand dollars ($7,000); of the property of every honorably discharged veteran of World War I or World War II, Korean or Vietnam, Grenada or Lebanon conflicts, who is determined by the veterans' administration of the United States of America to be totally disabled through service-connected disability and who presents to the assessors a certificate from the veterans administration that the person is so totally disabled, which certificate shall remain effectual so long as the total disability continues. Provided, however: 
    Burrillville may exempt real property of the above named persons in the amount of six thousand dollars ($6,000); 
    Cumberland town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption of a maximum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000); 
    Little Compton may, by ordinance, exempt real property of each of the above named persons in the amount of six thousand dollars ($6,000); 
    Middletown may exempt the real property of each of the above named persons in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000); 
    New Shoreham town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption of a maximum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000); 
    North Providence town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption of a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000); 
    Tiverton town council may, by ordinance, exempt real property of each of the above named persons in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000), subject to voters' approval at the financial town meeting; and 
    West Warwick town council may exempt the real property of each of the above named persons in an amount of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000). 
    There shall be an additional exemption from taxation in the town of Warren where the town council of the town of Warren may by ordinance provide for an exemption not to exceed five thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($5,250), of the property of every honorably discharged veteran of World War I or World War II, or Vietnam, Grenada or Lebanon conflicts, who is determined by the veterans' administration of the United States of America to be partially disabled through a service connected disability and who presents to the assessors a certificate that he is so partially disabled, which certificate shall remain effectual so long as the partial disability continues. Provided, however, that the: 
    Barrington town council may exempt real property of each of the above named persons in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000); 
    Warwick city council may, by ordinance, exempt real property of each of the above named persons in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000); 
    There shall be an additional exemption from taxation in the town of Lincoln for the property of each person who actually served in the military or naval service of the United States in the Persian Gulf conflict and who was honorably discharged therefrom, or who was discharged therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable, or who, if not discharged, served honorably, or of the unmarried widow or widower of such person, shall be exempted from taxation to the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000). 
    (b) In addition to the exemption provided heretofore, there shall be a ten thousand dollar ($10,000) exemption from local taxation on real property for any veteran and the unmarried widow or widower of a deceased veteran of the military or naval service of the U.S.A. who shall be determined, under applicable federal law by the veterans administration of the U.S.A., to be totally disabled through service connected disability and who by reason of the disability has received assistance in acquiring "specially adopted housing" under laws administered by the veterans' administration provided, that the real estate is occupied as his or her domicile, by the person and provided further that if the property be designed for occupancy by more than one family then only that value of so much of the house as is occupied by the person as his or her domicile shall be exempted, and provided, further, that satisfactory evidence of receipt of the assistance is furnished to the assessors except in: 
    Cranston, where the exemption shall not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000); 
    Cumberland town council may provide for an exemption not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500); 
    Newport, where the exemption shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or ten percent (10%) of assessed valuation, whichever is greater; 
    New Shoreham, where the town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption of a maximum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000); and 
    North Providence town council may, by ordinance, provide for an exemption not to exceed twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($12,500). 
    (c) In addition to the exemptions provided heretofore, any veteran of the military or naval service of the U.S.A. who shall be determined, under applicable federal law by the veterans' administration of the U.S.A. to be totally disabled through service connected disability may by ordinance passed in the city or town where the veteran's property is assessed receive a ten thousand dollar ($10,000) exemption from local taxation on his or her property whether real or personal and if the veteran owns real property may be exempt from taxation by any fire and/or lighting district. 
    (d) In determining whether or not a person is the widow or widower of a veteran for the purposes of this section, the remarriage of the widow or widower shall not bar the furnishing of the benefits of the section if the remarriage is void, has been terminated by death, or has been annulled or dissolved by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
    (e) In addition to the exemptions provided heretofore, there may by ordinance passed in the city or town where the person's property is assessed be an additional fifteen thousand dollar ($15,000) exemption from local taxation on real and personal property for any veteran of military or naval service of the U.S.A. who has been or who shall be classified as, or determined to be, a prisoner-of-war by the veterans' administration of the United States. 
    (f) Cities and towns granting exemptions under this section shall use the eligibility dates specified in this section. 
44-3-13.1. Exemption of persons over the age of 65, West Warwick. 
    The town council of the town of West Warwick may by ordinance exempt from taxation the real property situated in the town, owned and occupied by any person over the age of sixty-five (65) years, and which exemption shall be in an amount not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000) of valuation, and which exemption shall be in addition to any and all other exemptions from taxation to which the person may be otherwise entitled. The exemption shall be applied uniformly and without regard to ability to pay, provided, however, that only one such exemption shall be granted to co-tenants, joint tenants, and tenants by the entirety, even though all of the co-tenants, joint tenants, and tenants by the entirety are sixty-five (65) years of age or over. The exemption shall apply to a life tenant who has the obligation for the payment of the tax on the real property. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 124,  1) 
ARTICLE 45. - SEWER COMMISSION AND SEWER DISTRICT 

Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings unless the context shall indicate another or different meaning: 
(a)  Bonds and notes as used herein, shall mean and include the bonds, notes, securities, or other obligations or evidence of indebtedness issued by the commission pursuant hereto all of which shall be issued under the name of or known as obligations of the town of West Warwick Sewer Commission and shall be secured solely by the revenues provided herein. 
(b)  Commission shall be construed to mean the "West Warwick Sewer Commission," as constituted and created by Article XVII of the Home Rule Charter for the town of West Warwick. 
(c)  District shall mean and include: 
(1)  The town of West Warwick and those portions of the town of West Greenwich and Coventry currently served by the commission; 
(2)  Any portions of such municipalities as may by resolution request that such portions be served by the district and which are accepted by the commission as part of the district; and 
(3)  Any other cities or towns or districts in Rhode Island or portions thereof as may, from time to time, join the district pursuant to agreement with the commission, providing for the acquisition of the sewage disposal system of such city, town or district, or the merger and consolidation of such district into the commission, or the management and operation of the sewage disposal system of such city, town or district by the commission. 
(d)  Pollutant shall be construed to mean the same as defined in section 46-12-1 of the Rhode Island general laws [G.L. 1956,  46-12-1]. 
(e)  Person shall include an individual, firm, partnership, association, and private or municipal corporation and federal or state agencies. 
(f)  Project shall be construed to mean and include the acquisition, ownership, design, operation, maintenance, construction, repair, rehabilitation, extension, improvement, development, sale, lease or disposition of, or the provision of financing for, all or any portion of the sewage disposal system. 
(g)  Sewage shall be construed to mean the same as "pollutant" as defined in section 46-12-1 of the Rhode Island general laws [G.L. 1956,  46-12-1]. 
(h)  Sewage disposal system means facilities for the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage, including, but not limited to, any sewage treatment plant, structure, combined sewer overflows, equipment, interceptors, mains, lateral sewers, pumping stations, or other property, real, personal, or mixed, for the treatment, storage, collection, transporting, or disposal of sewage, or any property or system to be used in whole [or] in part for any of the aforesaid purposes, or any other property or system incidental to, or which has to do with, or the end purpose of which is any of the foregoing. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  1) 
Sec. 2. - District created. 
    There is hereby created a district to be known as the West Warwick Sewer District. The commission is hereby authorized to acquire all right, title and interest of the town of West Warwick in all sewage disposal systems for such consideration as the commission may determine. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  2) 
Sec. 3. - General powers. 
    The commission shall have the following powers, together with all powers incidental thereto or necessary for the performance of those stated in this chapter: 
(a)  To sue and be sued, complain and defend, in its corporate name. 
(b)  To have a seal which may be altered at pleasure and to use the seal by causing it, or a facsimile thereof, to be impressed or affixed or in any other manner reproduced. 
(c)  To purchase, take, receive, lease, or otherwise acquire, own, hold, improve, use, and otherwise deal in and with, real or personal property, or any interest therein, wherever situated for the sewage disposal system. 
(d)  To make and execute agreements of lease, construction contracts, operation contracts, and all other contracts or instruments necessary or convenient in the exercise of the powers and functions of the commission granted by this chapter. 
(e)  To borrow money for any of its projects and purposes, including the refunding of indebtedness of the town of West Warwick related to the sewage disposal system, and to issue negotiable bonds, notes, certificates, securities or other obligations or evidence of indebtedness, payable solely from the revenues pledged for their payment, and to fund and refund the same, all as provided in this chapter. 
(f)  To borrow in anticipation of the receipt of user fees or state or federal funds, as provided in this chapter. 
(g)  To incur or assume liabilities as the commission may deem appropriate, including, but not limited to, the assumption of indebtedness of the town of West Warwick related to the sewage disposal system. 
(h)  To invest and reinvest its funds. 
(i)  To secure the cooperation and assistance of the United States, and any of its agencies, and of agencies of this state and its municipalities in the work of the commission. 
(j)  To accept grants, donations, drafts, loans of funds, and contributions of money, services, materials, or otherwise from the United States or any of its agencies, from this state and its agencies, or from any other source, and to use or expend those moneys, services, materials, or other contributions in carrying out the purposes of this chapter. 
(k)  To fix, revise and collect from time to time assessment for the costs of the construction, completion, extension, enlargement or improvement of the sewage disposal system, and user charges for the use of the facilities of or rendered by the commission, such as to provide revenues sufficient at all times to pay, as the same shall become due, the principal and interest on the bonds and notes of the commission, together with the maintenance of proper reserves therefore, in addition to paying the expense of operating and maintaining the properties of the commission, together with proper reserves for depreciation, maintenance, and contingencies and other obligations and indebtedness of the commission. 
(l)  To establish a sewage pretreatment program, and to require as a condition, to the grant or reissuance of any approval, license, or permit required under the program, that the person applying for the approval, license, or permit, pay to the commission a reasonable fee based on the cost of reviewing and acting upon the application and based on the costs of implementing the program. In addition, where violations of the provisions of chapter 15 of the West Warwick Code of Ordinances, or of any permit, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto have occurred, the violator shall reimburse the commission for the actual costs of implementing and enforcing the terms of the permit, rule, regulation, or order as a condition to the grant or reissuance of any approval, license, or permit. 
(m)  To acquire or contract to acquire, from any person, the federal government or the state, or any agency of either the federal government or state, by grant, purchase, lease, gift, condemnation, or otherwise, or to obtain options for the acquisition of any property, real or personal, improved or unimproved, and interests in land less than the fee thereof for the sewage disposal system; and to own, hold, clear, improve, develop, and rehabilitate, and to sell, assign, exchange, transfer, convey, lease, mortgage, or otherwise dispose of or encumber the property for the purposes of carrying out the provisions and intent of this chapter for such consideration as the commission shall determine. 
(n)  To elect or appoint officers and agents of the commission, and to define their duties and fix their compensation, including authority to employ attorneys, accountants, architectural, and engineering consultants, and such other employees or agents as the commission shall deem necessary in its judgment. 
(o)  To make and alter bylaws, not inconsistent with this chapter, for the administration and regulation of the affairs of the commission, and the bylaws may contain provisions indemnifying any person who is or was a member of the commission. 
(p)  To make provision for management of its projects. 
(q)  To prepare or cause to be prepared plans, specifications, designs, and estimates of costs of construction, reconstruction, rehabilitations, improvements, alteration, or repair of its projects, and to modify the same. 
(r)  To issue orders of general or specific applicability to carry out the purposes of its projects. 
(s)  To have and exercise all powers necessary or convenient to effect its purposes. 
(t)  To impose administrative penalties in accordance with the provisions of chapter 15 of the West Warwick Code of Ordinances. 
(u)  To secure certain payments on its revenue bonds and notes, in whole or in part, by insurance or by letters or lines of credit or other credit facilities. 
(v)  To enter into intermunicipal agreements for any lawful corporate purpose necessary or desirable to effect the purposes of this chapter. 
(w)  To enter into intergovernmental agreements with the town of West Warwick for any lawful corporate purpose necessary or desirable to effect the purposes of this chapter. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  3) 
Sec. 4. - Power to acquire land. 
    For any purposes of this chapter, the commission may, at any time and from time to time, take by eminent domain or acquire by purchase or otherwise, such land, water rights, easements, and other property or interests in property, public and private, for the sewage disposal system, as it may determine necessary or desirable for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  4) 
Sec. 5. - Interests in land taken. 
    Any taking under this chapter may be in fee or otherwise, perpetual in duration or for a limited period of time, as the commission shall determine and set forth in the order of taking. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  5) 
Sec. 6. - Eminent domain procedure. 
    The commission shall exercise its power of eminent domain by the methods prescribed by chapter 7 of title 24 of the Rhode Island general laws [G.L. 1956,  24-7-1 et seq.]. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  6) 
Sec. 7. - Notes issued in anticipation of receipts of state or federal funds. 
    The principal and interest of all notes of the commission issued in anticipation of the receipts of state or federal funds shall be payable no later than the fourth anniversary of the date of issue thereof, and shall be payable from state or federal funds either legally available to the commission or appropriated for that purpose. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  7) 
Sec. 8. - Bonds and notes of the commission. 
(a)  The commission shall have the power and is hereby authorized to issue, from time to time, its negotiable bonds and notes in one or more series in such principal amounts as in the opinion of the commission shall be necessary to provide sufficient funds for achieving its purposes, including the payment of interest on bonds and notes of the commission to the extent permitted by law, the establishment of reserve funds as may be necessary for its purposes, including, but not limited to, debt service reserve funds, insurance reserve funds, and replacement reserve funds, and the making of all other expenditures of the commission incident to and necessary or convenient to carrying out its corporate purposes and powers. 
(b)  The bonds and notes may be executed and delivered by the commission at any time, from time to time, may be in such form and denominations and of such tenor and maturities, and may be in bearer or registered form, as to principal and interest or as to principal alone, all as the commission, in its sole discretion, may determine. 
(c)  Bonds may be payable in such installments, and at such times not exceeding forty (40) years from the date thereof, as shall be determined by the commission. 
(d)  Except as provided in section 7 of this chapter with respect to notes issued in anticipation of receipts of state or federal funds and notes issued in anticipation of receipt of user fees, notes may be payable in such installments and at such times not exceeding five (5) years from the date of the original issue of such notes, as shall be determined by the commission. 
(e)  Bonds and notes may be payable at such places, whether within or without the state of Rhode Island, may bear interest at such rate or rates payable at such time or times and at such place or places evidenced in such manner, and may contain such provisions not inconsistent herewith, all as shall be provided in the proceedings of the commission under which they shall be authorized to be issued. 
(f)  There may be retained, by provision made in the proceedings under which any bonds or notes of the commission are authorized to be issued, an option to redeem all or any part thereof at such prices and upon such notice, and on such further terms and conditions, as shall be set forth on the record of the proceedings and on the face of the bonds and notes. 
(g)  Any bonds or notes of the commission may be sold, from time to time, at such prices, at public or private sale, and in such manner as shall be determined by the commission, and the commission shall pay all expenses, premiums, and commissions that it shall deem necessary or advantageous in connection with the issuance and sale thereof. 
(h)  Moneys of the commission, including proceeds from the sale of bonds or notes, and revenues, receipts, and income from any of its projects, may be invested and reinvested in such obligations, securities, and other investments consistent with this chapter, and to the extent permitted by the general laws of the state of Rhode Island, and/or as shall be specified in the resolutions under which the bonds or notes are authorized. 
(i)  Issuance by the commission of one or more series of bonds or notes for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds or notes, but the proceedings whereunder any subsequent bonds or notes may be issued shall recognize and protect a prior pledge or mortgage made for a prior issue of bonds or notes, unless in the proceedings authorizing the prior issue, the right is reserved to issue subsequent bonds or notes on a parity with the prior issue. 
(j)  The commission is authorized to issue bonds or notes for the purpose of refunding its bonds or notes then outstanding, including the payment of any redemption premium thereon and any interest accrued or to accrue to the earliest or subsequent date of redemption, purchase or maturity, of the bonds or notes, and, if deemed advisable by the commission, for the additional purpose of paying all or part of the cost of acquiring, financing, extending, operating, maintaining, constructing, reconstructing, rehabilitating, developing, planning, or improving any project. The commission is further authorized to refund outstanding bonds or notes of the Town of West Warwick related to the sewage disposal system, if deemed beneficial by the Town, as evidenced by a resolution of the West Warwick town council to that effect. The proceeds of bonds or notes issued for the purpose of refunding outstanding bonds or notes may be applied, in the discretion of the commission, to the purchase, retirement at maturity, or redemption of the outstanding bonds or notes either on their earliest or a subsequent redemption date, and may, pending an application, be placed in escrow. Any escrowed proceeds may be invested and reinvested in obligations of the United States of America, and, to the extent permitted by the proceedings authorizing the issuance of the bonds to be refunded, in obligations guaranteed by the United States, or in certificates of deposit or time deposits secured or guaranteed by the state of Rhode Island or the United States, or an instrumentality of either, maturity at such time or times as shall be appropriate to assure the prompt payment, as to principal, interest, and redemption premium, if any of the outstanding bonds or notes to be so refunded. To the extent permitted by applicable laws, the interest, income, and profits, if any, earned or realized on any investment may also be applied to the payment of the outstanding bonds or notes to be so refunded. After the terms of the escrow have been fully satisfied and carried out, any balance of the proceeds and interest, income, and profits, if any, earned or realized on the investments thereof, may be returned to the commission for its use. The portion of the proceeds of bonds or notes issued for the additional purpose of paying all or part of the cost of acquiring, financing, extending, operating, maintaining, constructing, reconstructing, rehabilitating, developing, planning, or improving any project, may be invested and reinvested in such obligations, securities, and other investments consistent herewith as shall be specified in the resolutions under which the bonds or notes are authorized. To the extent permitted by applicable laws, the interest, income, and profits, if any, earned or realized on the investments may be applied to the payment of all parts of the costs or may be used by the commission otherwise in furtherance of its purposes. 
(k)  The members, the officers of the commission and other persons executing the bonds or notes shall not be subject to personal liability or accountability by reasons of the issuance thereof. 
(l)  Bonds or notes may be issued under the provisions of this section without obtaining the consent of any department, division, commission, board, body, bureau, or agency of the state of Rhode Island, and without any other proceedings or the happening of any conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions, or things which are specifically required by this section and by the provision of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or notes or the trust agreement or indenture securing the bonds or notes. 
(m)  The commission, subject to such agreements with noteholders or bondholders as may then be in force, shall have the power, out of any funds available therefor, to purchase bonds or notes of the commission, which shall thereupon be canceled, at a price not exceeding: 
(1)  If the bonds or notes are then redeemable, the redemption price then applicable plus accrued interest to the next interest payment date, or 
(2)  If the bonds or notes are not then redeemable, the redemption price applicable on the earliest date that the bonds or notes become subject to redemption, plus the interest that would have accrued to such date. 
(n)  Whether or not the bonds and notes are of such form and character as to be negotiable instruments under the terms of the Rhode Island Uniform Commercial Code, the bonds and notes are hereby made negotiable instruments within the meaning of and for all the purposes of the Rhode Island Uniform Commercial Code. 
(o)  If an [any] member or officer of the commission whose signature appears on the bonds, notes, or coupons shall cease to be a member or officer before the delivery of the bonds or notes, the signature shall, nevertheless, be valid and sufficient for all purposes, the same as if the member or officer had remained in office until the delivery. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  8) 
Sec. 9. - Security for bonds or notes. 
(a)  The principal of, premium, if any, and interest on any bonds or notes issued by the commission may be secured by the full faith and credit of the commission and may be payable solely out of the revenues, earnings, and receipts of the commission or such other property pledged for payment. 
(b)  The resolution, under which the bonds or notes are authorized to be issued and any such mortgage, lease, sales agreement, or loan agreement, or other instrument may contain agreements and provisions respecting the maintenance of the facilities covered thereby, the fixing and collection of rents, payments or repayments, or other revenues, therefrom including moneys received in repayment of loans, and interest thereon, the creation and maintenance of special funds from such rents or other revenues, and the rights and remedies available in the event of default, all as the commission shall deem advisable. 
(c)  The revenues derived from the project or projects or portion or portions thereof, in connection with which the bonds or notes shall have been issued, may be pledged as provided in the resolution, trust agreement or indenture. The pledge shall be valid and binding from the time when the pledge is made; the revenues, or other moneys so pledged, and thereafter, received by the commission, shall immediately be subject to the lien of the pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract, or otherwise against the authority, irrespective of whether the parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution nor any trust agreement, nor any indenture by which a pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the records of the commission. The use and disposition of revenues shall be subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust agreement or indenture. 
(d)  Each pledge, agreement, mortgage, or other instrument made for the benefit or security of any of the bonds or notes of the commission shall continue in effect until the principal of and interest on the bonds or notes for the benefit of which the same was made shall have been fully paid, or until provision shall have been made for the payment in the manner provided in the resolutions under which the bonds or notes were authorized. 
(e)  The commission may provide, in any proceedings under which bonds or notes may be authorized, that any project or part thereof may be constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated, or improved by the commission, and may also provide in proceedings for the time and manner of and requisitions for disbursements to be made for the cost of such construction, and for all such certificates and approvals of construction and disbursements as the commission shall deem necessary and provide for in proceedings. 
(f)  Any resolution under which bonds or notes of the commission are authorized to be issued (and any trust agreement or indenture established thereby) may contain provisions for vesting in a trustee or trustees such properties, rights, powers, and duties in trust as the commission may determine, including any or all of the rights, powers, and duties of the trustee appointed by the holders of any issue of bonds or notes pursuant hereto, in which event the provisions hereof authorizing the appointment of a trustee by holders of bonds or notes shall not apply. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  9) 
Sec. 10. - Trust funds. 
    All moneys received pursuant to the issuance of bonds or notes or as revenues, receipts or income, shall be trust funds if such is provided for in the proceedings under which the bonds or notes are authorized. Any officer with whom, or any bank or trust company with which, moneys shall be deposited as trustee hereof shall hold and apply the same for the purposes thereof, subject to the applicable provisions of this chapter, the proceedings authorizing the bonds or notes, and the trust agreement securing the bonds or notes, if any. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  10) 
Sec. 11. - Exemption of the commission's bonds and notes from taxation. 
    Bonds and notes of the commission, and the income (including any gain from sale or exchange) therefrom, shall at all times be free from taxation of every kind of the state of Rhode Island and the municipalities and all political subdivisions thereof. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  11) 
Sec. 12. - Bonds and note as legal investments. 
    The notes and bonds of the commission are hereby made securities in which all public officers, state agencies, public corporations, and bodies of this state, and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions, all insurance companies and associations, and other persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks and savings associations, including savings and loan association, building and loan associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking business, administrators, guardians, executors, trustee and other fiduciaries, and all other persons whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state of Rhode Island, may properly and legally invest funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  12) 
Sec. 13. - Agreement of the state of Rhode Island. 
    The state of Rhode Island does hereby pledge to and agree with the holders of any bonds or notes issued hereunder, that the state will not limit or alter the rights hereby vested in the commission to fulfill the terms of any agreements made with the holders until the bonds or notes, together with the interest thereon, with interest on any unpaid installments of interest, and all costs and expenses in connection with any action or proceeding by or on behalf of the holders, are fully met and discharged. The commission is authorized to include this pledge and agreement of the state in any agreement with the holders of the bonds or notes. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  13) 
Sec. 14. - Credit of the state of Rhode Island. 
    Obligations issued under the provisions hereof shall not constitute a debt, liability, or obligation of the state or of any political subdivision thereof, other than the commission, or a pledge of the faith and credit of the state or any political subdivision, other than the commission, but shall be payable solely from the revenues or assets of the commission. Each obligation issued pursuant thereto shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the effect that the commission shall not be obligated to pay the obligation or interest thereon except from revenues or assets pledged therefor, and that neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the state or any political subdivision thereof, other than the commission, is pledged to the payment of the principal of or the interest on the obligation. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  14) 
Sec. 15. - Remedies of bondholders and noteholders. 
(a)  In the event that the commission shall default in the payment of principal of or interest on any revenue bonds or revenue notes, issued pursuant to the provisions hereof, after the bonds or notes shall become due, whether at maturity or upon call for redemption, and the default shall continue for a period of thirty (30) days, or in the event that the commission shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or shall default in any agreement made with the holders of an issue of revenue bonds or revenue notes of the commission, the holders of twenty-five percent (25%) of the aggregate principal amount of the revenue bonds or revenue notes of the issue then outstanding, by instrument or instruments filed in the office of the secretary of state and proved or acknowledged in the same manner as a deed to be recorded, may appoint a trustee to represent the holders of the bonds or notes for the purposes herein provided. 
(b)  The trustee may, and upon written request of the holders of twenty-five percent (25%) of the aggregate principal amount of the bonds or notes than outstanding shall, in his or her or its own name: 
(1)  Enforce all rights of the bondholders or noteholders, including the right to require the commission to collect rent, interest, repayments, and payments on the leases, mortgages, loan agreements, and sales agreements held by it to carry out any agreement as to, or pledge or, the rent, interest repayments, and payments, and to require the commission to carry out any other agreements with the holders of the bonds or notes and to perform its duties under this chapter; 
(2)  Enforce all rights of the bondholders or noteholders, so as to carry out any contract as to, or pledge of, revenues, and to require the commission to carry out and perform the terms of any contract with the holders of its bonds or notes or its duties under this chapter; 
(3)  Bring suit upon all or any part of the bonds or notes; 
(4)  By action or suit, require the commission to account as if it were the trustee of an express trust for the holders of the bonds or notes; 
(5)  By action or suit, enjoying any acts or things which may be unlawful or in violation of the rights of the holders of the bonds or notes; 
(6)  Declare all the bonds or notes due and payable and, if all defaults shall be made good, then, with the consent of the holders of twenty-five [percent] (25%) of the aggregate principal amount of the bonds or notes then outstanding, to annul the declaration and its consequences. 
(d)  [(7)] The trustee shall, in addition to the foregoing, have and possess all the powers necessary or appropriate for the exercise of any functions specifically set forth herein or incident to the general representation of bondholders or note holders in the enforcement and protection of their rights. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  15) 
Sec. 16. - Other statutes and ordinances. 
    Nothing herein contained shall restrict or limit the powers of the commission arising under any laws of this state, or any charter or ordinances of any municipality, except if the powers are expressly contrary to the provisions of this chapter. All powers granted to the Town Council pursuant to Chapter 2005 of the Public Laws of 1920, are hereby transferred to the Sewer Commission. This chapter shall be construed to provide a complete additional alternative method for doing the things authorized hereby, and shall be regarded as supplemental and in addition to the power conferred by other laws. The issuance of all bonds, notes, and other obligations of the commission, under the provisions hereof, need not comply with the requirements of any other statute applicable to the issue of the bonds, notes, and other obligations. No proceedings or notice of approval shall be required for the issuance of any bonds, notes, or other obligations, or any instrument of security therefor except as herein provided. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  16) 
Sec. 17. - Inconsistent provisions. 
    Insofar as the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any other law, charter, or ordinance, general, special or local, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  17) 
Sec. 18. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  18) 
Sec. 19. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect upon its approval by the people of the town of West Warwick at the next general or special election. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  19) 
Sec. 20. - Referendum. 
    The question of the approval of this act shall be submitted to the electors of the town at a general or special election to be held on a date designated by the town council. The question shall be submitted in substantially the following form: 
    "Shall an act, passed at the January, 1994 session of the general assembly, entitled, `An Act Relating to West Warwick Sewer Commission and Authorizing the West Warwick Sewer Commission to Issue Revenue Bonds and Notes' be approved?" 
    The warning for the election shall contain the question to be submitted. The question to be submitted may be submitted to the electors with, and/or placed on the same ballot with, any other bond question which is being submitted to the electors of the town for approval. From the time the election is warned and until it is held, it shall be the duty of the town clerk to keep a copy of the act available at his office for public inspection, but the validity of the election shall not be affected by this requirement or by the requirements of section[s] 17-5-5 and 17-5-6 of the general laws [G.L. 1956,  17-5-5 and 17-5-6]. The polling place or places shall be designated by the local board (as defined in section 17-1-2 [G.L. 1956,  17-1-2] of the general laws) and the local board shall forthwith after the election notify the secretary of state of the result of the vote upon the question submitted. To the extent of any inconsistency between this act and the town charter, this act shall prevail. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 324,  20) 
ARTICLE 46. - HOME RULE CHARTER AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 1. - Amendments ratified. 
    In all respects in which the amendments to the Home Rule Charter of the town of West Warwick, which amendments were adopted and approved by the electors of the town of West Warwick on February 8, 1994, may require ratification, confirmation, validation or enactment by the general assembly, but in no other respects, the provisions of said amendments to the Home Rule Charter of the town of West Warwick are hereby ratified, confirmed, validated and enacted. It is the express intention of the general assembly, by the passage of this act, to give effect to, ratify, conform, validate and enact those provisions of the said amendments to the Home Rule Charter of the town of West Warwick which require ratification, confirmation, validation or enactment and by the passage of this act, the legislature does hereby ratify, confirm, validate and enact said provisions, but nothing in this act shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers now or hereafter granted to towns by the Home Rule amendment and other applicable laws of the State of Rhode Island or those rights retained by said town of West Warwick in its Home Rule Charter. 
(Laws 1994, ch. 364,  1) 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS NOT COMPILED 
    The following table contains a listing, in chronological order, of special acts relating to West Warwick which are not set out in the preceding compilation. The reason for their omission is briefly stated in the right-hand column. 
Year Chapter Subject Reason Omitted 1913 1013 Hours for polls Covered G.L. 1956 1914 1155 Bonds authorized Not general 1156 Caucuses Covered G.L. 1956, Ch. 17-15 1915 1329 Elections Superseded 1916, Ch. 1448 1916 1448 Elections Superseded G.L. 1956, 
 45-4-1 1921 2023 Hours for polls Covered G.L. 1956 2150 Building & zoning Superseded G.L. 1956, 
 23-27-1 2151 Building & zoning Superseded G.L. 1956, 
 23-27-1 2152 Bonds authorized Not general 1922 2296 Fire districts Superseded 1933, Ch. 2077 1926 918 Bonds authorized Not general 1930 1526 Representation in legislature In G.L. 1956 1932 2006 Bonds authorized Not general 1934 2184 Traffic fines Superseded G.L. 1956,  12-14-1 1938 2583 Laundries Covered G.L. 1956,  5-16-5 1940 969 Highway condemnation Superseded G.L. 1956, Ch. 24-1 1941 1112 Terminate sewer comm. Superseded 1969, Ch. 196 1944 1427 Hours for polls Covered G.L. 1956 1509 Establish boundary comm. Commission terminated 1945 1569 Water authority Repealed 1946, Ch. 1740 1948 2008 Transfer fire dist. assets Not prospective 1949 2227 Charter Not ratified 2347 Correct 1949, Ch. 2227 Not ratified 2401 Validate contract Authority expired 1950 2436 Conveyance authorized Not prospective 1951 2697 Amend 1940, Ch. 969 Superseded G.L. 1956, Ch. 24-1 1952 3005 Amend 1940, Ch. 969 Superseded G.L. 1956, Ch. 24-1 1954 3328 Voting at meetings Repealed 1956, Ch. 3650 1955 3867 Charter Not ratified 1956 3629 Voting procedures at financial town meetings Repealed G.L. 1971, Ch. 74 3640 Bonds authorized Not general 3650 Repeal 1954, Ch. 3328 Not prospective S358 Validate property purchase Not general 1957 H1261 Authorize conveyance Not general 1 Bonds authorized 46 Authorize conveyance Not general 1958 125 Moderator of financial town meetings Repealed G.L. 1971, Ch. 74 1959 84 Amend bond authorization Not general 1960 198 County medical examiners Not affecting town gov't. 1962 59 Bonds authorized Not general 1964 237 Budget commission Not ratified 1965 10 Tax exemption Repealed 1965, Ch. 129 122 Amend 1958, Ch. 125 Superseded G.L. 1971, Ch. 74 1966 103 Property acquisition authorized Not general 1967 41 Moderators & clerks In G.L. 1956,  17-11-7 47 Amend 1956, Ch. 3629 Superseded G.L. 1971, Ch. 74 62 Bonds authorized Not general 109 Bonds authorized Not general 1968 30 Bonds authorized Not general 1969 92 Bonds authorized Not general 103 Bonds authorized Not general 1971 74 Charter Not ratified 75 Bonds authorized Not general 1984 316 Bonds authorized Not general 1989 86 Bonds authorized Not general 1989 105 Appropriating money Not general 1990 11 Bonds authorized Not general 1990 14 Bonds authorized Not general 1990 28 Authorizes land acquisition Not general 1993 19 Bonds authorized Not general 1993 138 Appropriations Not general  
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
Year Chapter Section Part II 
Article       Section 1913 1012 1-25  1        1-25 1915 1326 1  1       13  1       19 1920 2004 1  1       13 2005 1-19  2        1-19 1921 2148 1  I       20-22 2149 1  1       13 1923 2420 1  3        1 2          2 3          3 4          4 5          5 1925 745 1  1       23-25 1926 919 1-6  4       1-6 1927 1124 1, 2  5       1, 2 1933 2065 1-9  6       1-9 11         11 2077 1  7        1 2         2 21/2          21/2 3-10          3-10 1934 2169 1  2        4 1942 1183 1  2        4 1944 1426 1  8        1 2  8        2 1946 1688 1  7        4 1947 1967 1  7        6 1949 2179 1  7        21/2 2180 1  3        21/2 2407 1-3  9        1-3 1951 2687 1-4 10        1-4 2710 1-5 11        1-5 1952 2892 1 12        1 2         2 2925 1  2        4 1953 3051 1-7 13        1-7 1954 3320 1  3        21/2 1956 3269 1-5 14        1-5 3698 1-3 15        1-3 1958 62 1 16        1 2          2 125 1-5 17        1-5 137 1 18         1 2          2 210 1, 2 19        1, 2 1963 42 1, 2 20        1, 2 1965 122 1 17        1 129 1-3 21        1-3 1966 10         Rpld  6       10 34 1-7 22        1-7 237 1  3        21/2 1967 47 1 14        1 2          3 1968 174 1-4 23        1-4 226 1  6        8 1969 107 1  2        1-19 196 1  2        1-19 1970 296 1-4 24        1-4 1972 107 1  2       19 1972 255 1 21(note) 1973 37 1  2       20 70 1-8 25        1-8 1975 137 1-4 26        1-4 138 1-4 27        1-4 1976 90  2        9 1976 175 1-3 28        1-3 1977 161 1  2        9 2  2       19 1978 314 1  6        8(note) 316 1-4 29        1-4 318 1-4 30        1-4 319 1 23        1, 2 336 1  2        9 1979 82 1-11, 13  2       31-42 1980 151 1-11  2       31-41 1980 258 1-3 31        1-3 1981 45 32        1 1981 47 21        1, 4 1983 10 1  2       21 1984 23 1-3 31        1-3 1984 38 1 21        1 1984 140 1, 2       Rpld 20        1, 2 1986 70 1-4 33        1-4 1986 260 1, 2 12       1-2[11] 1986 304 1, 2 34        1, 2 1987 44-3 1 35        1-3 1987 606 1-3 36        1-3 1988 88-54 1, 2 37        1, 2 1989 521 1 38        1 1990 139 1 39        1 1990 26 1-4 40        1-4 1991 18 1 41        1 1992 327 1, 2 41        1, 2 1993 23 1-5 42        1-5 1993 76 1 43        5 1994 118 1 2        1 1994 124 1 44        1 1994 324 1-20 45        1-20 1994 364 1 46        1  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation, citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and in the following chapters shall be designated and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island." 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances hereafter enacted, the following interpretations shall be placed on the words and phrases hereinafter mentioned, unless such construction or interpretation shall be manifestly inconsistent with the evident intent of the town council or repugnant to the context or to the evident purport of any ordinance: 
    Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-13. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits. Whenever the words "corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "town limits" are used they shall mean the legal boundary of the Town of West Warwick. 
    Council. The words "the council" shall mean the town council of the Town of West Warwick. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Kent in the State of Rhode Island. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the town to do some act or to make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer of the town, as the case may be, to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-3. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-5. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-12. 
    Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given it shall be construed as though the words "of the Town of West Warwick" were added. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-4. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-11. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, club, society, body corporate or politic, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-6. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-16. 
    Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
    President. Whenever the word "president" is used it shall mean the president of the town council. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall include, without limitation, any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, and all beaches, canals or other waterways, and any public street or way. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments and rights thereto and interests therein. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-10. 
    Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Seal. Whenever the word "seal" is used it shall mean the town or corporate seal. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the vertical curbline or edge of pavement or edge of travelled way and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways; such portion or "sidewalk" is sometimes designated and known as the pavement "border" area. 
    Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Rhode Island. 
    Streets, highways, ways. The words "streets," "highways" and "ways" when used in an ordinance, shall be construed as including public boulevards, avenues, courts, lanes, alleys, squares, drives, roads, corners and sidewalks. 
    Tenant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The words "the town" shall mean the Town of West Warwick in the County of Kent and the State of Rhode Island. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-16. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-12. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and unless otherwise expressly so provided, shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  43-3-22-43-3-24. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the Code, since the same would have been enacted by the town council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the town council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of the Code in substantially the following language: "That section ___ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island, is hereby amended to read as follows: (set out new provisions in full) ." 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation, as the case may be), to be numbered ___ which reads as follows: (set out new provisions in full) ." 
(d)  In lieu of the foregoing paragraph, when the town council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the town council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "It is the intention of the town council, and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances, Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances to be numbered consecutively. 
    The town clerk shall number all ordinances consecutively in the order of their adoption from the number of the latest chapter of town ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3-29-27,  2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, numbering of laws, G.L. 1956,  43-2-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - Publication of ordinances. 
    In addition to the procedures as defined and set forth in section 409 of the town Charter, the town council ordains that at the time of the advertising of public hearings pursuant to section 409(C) of the town Charter, the town clerk shall also publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the town a notice summarizing the subject matter of all proposed ordinances to be heard at such public hearing. This publication shall be in addition to the posting of the ordinance in its entirety at town hall. 
(Ord. of 10-5-93,  1-1) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Oct. 5, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of  1-1 of said ordinance as  1-8 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the town to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of West Warwick to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 hereof. 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the town an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance or resolution shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day any violation of this Code or of any such ordinance or resolution shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 1-31-68,  1; Ord. of 10-9-74,  1; Res. of 3-3-87) 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, G.L. 1956,  45-6-2. 
Sec. 1-11. - Prosecution where same act unlawful under different provisions. 
    In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable, or shall be created by different clauses or sections of the ordinance of the town, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense. 
Sec. 1-12. - Fees and charges. 
(a)  All fees and charges imposed by the town, specifically including but not limited to, fees and charges for permits, licenses, services or copies, shall from time to time be set, repealed and/or changed by the town council by resolution. 
(b)  Upon the passage and taking effect of this section and the passage and taking effect of a resolution setting the fees and charges of the town, all fees and charges, whether established by ordinance or elsewhere, that are inconsistent with any fee or charge established by said resolution are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-45, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 1-13. - Town manager. 
    Any reference in the Code of Ordinances of the Town of West Warwick to the "mayor" is hereby amended to "town manager". 
(Ord. No. 2018-15 , 6-5-18) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Use of town hall and council chamber. 
    The town hall and council chamber shall be used for town purposes, and for no other purpose whatsoever, unless specially ordered by the town council. 
(Comp. Ords. ch. 27,  1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Compliance with P.C. 1935, ch. 219. 
    The director of public welfare, the town treasurer, and all other officers of the town are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to comply with the provisions of chapter 2191 of the Public Laws of the State of Rhode Island, approved April 18, 1935. 
(Ord. of 6-25-35,  1) 
Sec. 2-3. - Playgrounds, recreation placed under playground and recreation department. 
    Playgrounds and the recreation program for the town are hereby placed under the direction of the playground and recreation department. 
(Res. of 5-10-49) 
Sec. 2-4. - Indemnification of public officials. 
(a)  The town council hereby specifically indemnifies the hereinafter named elected and appointed public officials of the Town of West Warwick from all loss, costs, expense and damage, including legal fees and court costs, if any, arising out of any claim, action, compromise, settlement or judgment by reason of any intentional tort; or by reason of any alleged judgment by reason of any alleged error or misstatement or act or omission or neglect or violation of the rights of any person under any federal or state law, including misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance; or any act, omission or neglect contrary to any federal or state law which imposes personal liability on any such employee, official or member, if such employee, official or member, at the time of such intentional tort or act, omission or neglect, was acting within the scope of his or her official duties or employment. 
(b)  The council hereby specifically excludes from such indemnification any employee or official covered by this section from any misstatement, error, act, omission or neglect, if the same results from willful, wanton or malicious conduct on the part of such covered official. It shall be the sole province of the council to decide whether said acts are covered or omitted under this section. Covered under this section are payment or counsel fees or other expenses incurred in connection with the conduct of such defense, including payment of the judgment thereon or any settlement or compromise thereof. 
(c)  The public officials and/or employees covered by this section are as follows: All members of the town council, town manager, town treasurer, tax collector, town planner, solicitor, assistant town solicitors, federal coordinator/personnel director, department heads for the water pollution control facility and public works department, building inspector electrical inspector, tax assessor, town clerk, deputy town clerk, minimum housing inspector, recreation director, fire chief, police chief, and all members of the West Warwick School Committee. 
(d)  In the event that public officials and/or employees covered by this section are sued in any civil proceedings arising out of or related to the actions performed in the course of their service to or employment with the Town of West Warwick. The town shall defend such individual(s) against the civil claim and pay any judgment and costs resulting therefrom. The town shall have the right to deny a defense or pay such judgment if it is finally determined that such individual(s) acted outside the scope of his or her service or employment. 
(Ord. of 9-2-86; Ord. of 1-2-96; Res. No. 96-04, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 2003-10, 8-5-03) 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory ordinance of September 2, 1986 (Res. No. 86-528), has been included herein as  2-4 at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference- Indemnification of public officials, employees, G.L. 1956,  45-15-16, as amended. 
Sec. 2-5. - Residency. 
    No person shall be eligible for appointment to any or remain on any board or committee or public office unless said person is a resident and elector of the town; provided, however, that the town council may by resolution waive this requirement as the circumstances so require. 
(Res. of 3-1-88) 
Editor's note- A resolution of March 1, 1988 (No. 88-126), added  2-30, which section has been redesignated by the editor as  2-5 in order to conform to Code format. 
Sec. 2-6. - Records retention schedule. 
(a)  The town council herewith formally adopts for usage by the town and all its municipal departments, department heads and town officials, the records retention schedule as promulgated by the Rhode Island Local Government Records Program of the State Archives, a division of the office of the secretary of state, State of Rhode Island, together with any subsequent updates as may be issued by the office of the secretary of state. 
(b)  As of the effective date of this section, the Town of West Warwick, its municipal departments, department heads and town officials shall comply with the records retention schedule and its directives regarding the retention and destruction of town and city council records. A copy of said records retention schedule and all updates shall be maintained by the town clerk for the Town of West Warwick, with copies distributed to all municipal departments, department heads and town officials. 
(Ord. of 10-5-93,  1-1, 1-2) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Oct. 5, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of  1-1 and 1-2 of said ordinance as  2-6(a) and (b) herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-7. - Procedures for termination or removal of town employees. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases and words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
    Employee. All officials and employees of the town appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the town council, including but not limited to all department head positions. 
    Employer. Town of West Warwick, by and through its town council (sometimes referred to as "town council" or "employer"). 
(b)  Procedures. An employee, as herein defined, may be terminated or removed from office for cause. Pursuant to the terms of section 916 of the West Warwick town Charter, the town council herewith establishes the following procedures for such termination/removal: 
(1)  The mayor may request the removal of an employee upon written request to the town council, with a copy filed with the town clerk. Said written request shall set forth the reason for the proposed removal. 
(2)  A copy of the written request shall be mailed to the employee by the clerk by certified mail, return receipt requested at the home address of the employee. 
(3)  Pursuant to section 916 of the Town Charter, a public hearing shall be scheduled relating to the request for removal, which hearing shall be held no earlier than 20 days nor later than 30 days after the filing of the written request. Notice of such meeting shall be given to the employee at the time of the mailing of the written request. 
(4)  The employee or his or her counsel may, within ten days of receipt of the written request, respond in writing to the town council with a copy to the clerk. The employee's response, if any, shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(5)  During the course of the public hearing the employee shall have the right to respond to the reasons stated for removal and to be represented by counsel. 
(6)  After a public hearing, the town council, by a majority vote in the affirmative, may adopt a resolution of removal, which removal shall become effective immediately. 
(7)  This public hearing is subject to Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  42-46-1 et seq., open meetings. 
(Ord. of 10-5-93,  1-1, 1-2) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted October 5, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of  1-1 and 1-2 of said ordinance as  2-7(a) and (b) herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 2-8-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of January 11, 1972, did not expressly amend this Code; hence, inclusion of  1-6 herein as Art. II,  2-16-2-21, was at the discretion of the editors. The substantive provisions of said ordinance are set out as enacted; however, "ordinance" was changed to "article" and  7 and 8, separability and effective date provisions, were omitted from codification. 

Sec. 2-16. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, a capital improvement project shall be defined as the type of project or acquisition which fits within one or more of the following categories: 
(a)  Acquisition or lease of land. 
(b)  Construction of new buildings or facilities, including engineering, design and other preconstruction costs. 
(c)  Improvements or additions to existing buildings or facilities, not including annual replacements or items of routine maintenance and repair. 
(d)  Purchase of major items of equipment under the following conditions: 
(1)  The equipment shall have an anticipated life of two years or more. 
(2)  The cost of the equipment shall be in excess of $2,000.00. 
(Ord. of 1-11-72,  1) 
Sec. 2-17. - Participating town agencies and officials. 
    Not later than November 1 of each year, the following town agencies and officials shall submit requests for capital improvement projects to the West Warwick Planning Board: 
(a)  Board of canvassers. 
(b)  Building and zoning department. 
(c)  Director of welfare. 
(d)  Fire department. 
(e)  Highway and sanitation and garbage. 
(f)  Housing authority. 
(g)  Police department. 
(h)  Housing authority. 
(i)  Redevelopment agency. 
(j)  School commission. 
(k)  Tax assessor. 
(l)  Tax collector. 
(m)  Town clerk. 
(n)  Town council. 
(o)  Town engineer. 
(p)  Town solicitor's department. 
(q)  Town treasurer. 
(r)  Trustees of West Warwick Library System. 
(s)  Any other town agency, official or department having need for capital acquisitions as defined by section 2-16 of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-72,  2) 
Sec. 2-18. - Procedure for submitting requests. 
    Requests for capital improvement projects shall be submitted on forms supplied by the West Warwick Planning Board in accordance with instructions contained in the "Capital Improvement Manual" to be supplied to each participating agency, department and official by the planning board. Each request shall be reviewed by the planning board in the light of current development plans and programs of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Ord. of 1-11-72,  3) 
Sec. 2-19. - Project priority. 
    In evaluating requests and recommending a capital improvement program, the West Warwick Planning Board shall base its recommendations on the following major criteria and others that may be considered essential to the general welfare of the community: 
(a)  Protection of life. 
(b)  Maintenance of public health. 
(c)  Protection of property. 
(d)  Conservation of resources. 
(e)  Provision of necessary public services. 
(f)  Replacement or improvement of obsolete facilities. 
(g)  Reduction of operating costs. 
(h)  Public comfort and convenience. 
(Ord. of 1-11-72,  4) 
Sec. 2-20. - Financial aspects. 
    The West Warwick Planning Board, in consultation with the town treasurer and town council, shall review the requests with respect to the financial resources of the town and shall prepare a schedule showing the effect of requested projects upon the current annual budget and the future debt and debt service charges for the town. 
(Ord. of 1-11-72,  5) 
Sec. 2-21. - Presentation to the town council. 
    Not later than January 1 of each year, the West Warwick Planning Board shall forward to the town council and make public a recommended capital budget and capital improvement program for the following six-year period. The first year of this six-year program shall be designated as the capital budget. The town council shall consider this recommended program in assembling the budget for presentation to the annual financial town meeting. 
(Ord. of 1-1-72,  6) 
Secs. 2-22-2-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-25. - Acceptance and administration of private funds. 
(a)  Organizations and/or individuals desiring to donate funds designated for municipal and school functions or activities may do so by delivering such funds to the town finance director. Such organizations or individuals shall also provide the town finance director with written instructions as to their intent regarding the disbursement of said funds. 
(b)  The town finance director, upon written approval of the mayor, is authorized to accept said funds and administer said funds in accordance with the instructions of the donors. 
(Ord. of 1-7-92,  1, 2) 
Sec. 2-26. - Escrow account for equipment for police department. 
    There is hereby created an escrow fund for the purpose of replacing and updating police department equipment. Said escrow fund is to be administered by the town's police chief, as follows: 
(1)  A separate account will be created and entitled "Town of West Warwick, Police Department Equipment Escrow Fund." 
(2)  The proceeds of every sale, through auction, of police equipment shall be placed in the police department equipment escrow fund. 
(3)  The monies in the escrow fund shall be used to purchase equipment for the police department, as needed in the reasonable discretion of the chief of police, subject to the approval of the town council as recommended by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 2010-1, 5-25-10) 
Secs. 2-27-2-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING AND BIDDING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory ordinance of March 16, 1989 (No. 89-2), was codified herein by the editor as art. III,  2-31-2-67. Subsequently,  2-31-2-67 were redesignated as div. 2 of art. III, at the discretion of the editor. 
Charter reference- Competitive bidding,  706. 
Cross reference- Town solicitor's department to participate in capital improvements,  2-17(p). 

Sec. 2-31. - Short title. 
    The provisions of this division shall be known as the "Purchasing Ordinance of the Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island." 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  1) 
Sec. 2-32. - Purposes of division. 
    The purposes of this division are to prescribe the manner in which the town shall control the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and certain contractual services of the town and to maintain a high ethical standard of all officers and employees of the town in connection therewith. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  2) 
Sec. 2-33. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases and words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
    Contractual services shall mean and include maintenance service, contracts relating to office and general equipment and the leasing of office equipment, vehicles and other equipment; and the repair and maintenance of automotive, office and other equipment, and the rental of automotive, office and general equipment. The term "services" shall not include professional services which are unique in their nature and are not subject to competition. 
    Shall is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Supplies shall mean and include all supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services. 
    Using agency means any department, division, agency, commission, board, committee, authority or other unit in the town government using supplies or procuring contractual services as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  3) 
Sec. 2-34. - Purchasing agent, generally. 
(a)  There shall be within the department of finance a purchasing agent who shall be the finance director or someone appointed by him in accord with applicable personnel rules and regulations. He shall perform all duties required by law and such other duties as may be assigned and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this article. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall perform the duties specified in this article in connection with the purchase of or contract for all supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services, as required by any department, office or agency of the town, when duly authorized in accordance with purchasing procedures as prescribed by this article and such rules and regulations as may be adopted for the internal management and operation of the purchasing division. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  4) 
Sec. 2-35. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall establish and amend, with the approval of the mayor, when necessary, all rules and regulations authorized by this article and any others necessary to its operation not in conflict herewith. 
(b)  The purchasing agent is hereby authorized and directed to adopt such written regulations and procedures as may be necessary for the implementation of this article. Such regulations and procedures shall become effective when approved in writing by the mayor and the town council. Copies of the regulations shall be on file in the office of the purchasing agent and also shall be made available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  5) 
Sec. 2-36. - Unauthorized purchases. 
    It shall be unlawful for any town officers or employees to order the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services, or make any contract within the preview of this article, other than through or with the approval of the purchasing agent; and any purchase, order or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved and the town shall not be bound thereby. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  6) 
Sec. 2-37. - Subdividing purchase of contract to avoid article requirements. 
    No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  7) 
Sec. 2-38. - Procurement at least expense to town. 
    The purchasing agent shall keep informed of the current highest quality in supplies, fixed charges and other services and contractual services at the least expense to the town. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  8) 
Sec. 2-39. - Encouragement of competition. 
    The purchasing agent shall discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  9) 
Sec. 2-40. - Purchasing agent's duties-To keep informed on current trends, etc. 
    The purchasing agent is to keep informed on current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products and secure for the town benefits conducted in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdiction, national ethical societies, trade associations having national recognition and by private businesses and organizations. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  10) 
Sec. 2-41. - Same-Purchasing manual. 
    The purchasing agent may prescribe and maintain a standard purchasing manual for all using agencies. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  11) 
Sec. 2-42. - Same-Forms. 
    The purchasing agent may prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find reasonably necessary to the operation of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  12) 
Sec. 2-43. - Same-Standard nomenclature. 
    The purchasing agent may prepare and adopt a standard purchasing nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  13) 
Sec. 2-44. - Same-Vendor's catalog file. 
    The purchasing agent may prepare, adopt and maintain a vendor's catalog file. Such catalog shall be filed according to materials and shall contain descriptions of vendor's commodities, prices and discounts. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  14) 
Sec. 2-45. - Same-Bulk purchases. 
    The purchasing agent shall exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take full advantage of discounts. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  15) 
Sec. 2-46. - Same-Tax exemptions. 
    The purchasing agent shall act so as to procure for the town all tax exemptions to which it is entitled. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  16) 
Sec. 2-47. - Same-Cooperation with using agencies. 
    The purchasing agent shall cooperate with using agencies so as to secure for the town the maximum efficiency in budgeting and accounting. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  17) 
Sec. 2-48. - Filing of requisitions or estimates of requirements by using agencies. 
(a)  All using agencies, either by or with the authorization of the head of the department under which the using agency operates, shall file with the purchasing agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in supplies, equipment and contractual services in such manner, at such time and for such future period as the purchasing agent shall prescribe. 
(b)  A using agency shall not be prevented from filing, in the same manner with the purchasing agent at any time, a requisition or estimate for any supplies and contractual services, the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  18) 
Sec. 2-49. - Competitive bidding, generally. 
(a)  Except in the case of contracts for consultants retained to perform town services not able to be performed by a town employee, before the town makes any purchase of, or contract for, supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services or work to be performed in excess of the minimum amount as stated in section 706 of the town Charter, opportunity shall be given for competitive bidding after public notice as hereinafter described. No such transaction which is essentially a unit shall be defined into a series of orders for the purpose of circumventing the requirement of this section for competitive bidding. 
(b)  All such purchases or contracts for more than said minimum amount shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, except that the purchasing agent may be directed by the council to reject any and all bids and then to readvertise for bids. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  19) 
Sec. 2-50. - Notice inviting bids. 
(a)  Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper having general circulation in the town and at least five working days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. 
(b)  The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold and shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  20) 
Sec. 2-51. - Solicitation of bids from bidders' list. 
    The purchasing agent shall solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a "bidders' list, " which the purchasing agent shall maintain, by sending them a copy of the newspaper notice provided for in section 2-50 or such other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidders' list shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  21) 
Sec. 2-52. - Bid deposits. 
    When specified by the town council, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to a return of surety where the purchasing agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the town council upon failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten days after the award. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  22) 
Sec. 2-53. - Sealing and identification of bids. 
    Bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the outside of the envelope. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  23) 
Sec. 2-54. - Opening of bids. 
    Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices, and the opening shall be witnessed. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  24) 
Sec. 2-55. - Bid tabulation. 
    A tabulation of all bids received shall be made and shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  25) 
Sec. 2-56. - Rejection of bids and readvertising. 
(a)  The town council, in the case of bids above the minimum amount, shall have the authority to reject any and all such bids. 
(b)  If the lowest and best bid exceeds the budgeted amount, and the town council does not make additional funds available, then the appropriate authority who initiated such bidding shall have the power to readvertise for bidding after making sufficient changes in the project plan to bring the cost within the limit of money available. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  26) 
Sec. 2-57. - Disqualification of bidders. 
    The purchasing agent shall have the authority to declare vendors who default their quotations irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving any business from the town for a stated period of time. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  27) 
Sec. 2-58. - Waiver of irregularities in bids. 
    The town council shall have the authority to waive any and all irregularities in formal bids above the minimum amount. The purchasing agent, with the approval of the mayor, shall have the authority to waive any and all irregularities in bids or purchases below the minimum amount. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  28) 
Sec. 2-59. - Award of contract, generally. 
    All contracts shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. In addition to price, there shall be considered the following: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract within the time specified without delay or interference. 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and the efficiency of the bidder. 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts. 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract. 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service. 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the suppliers or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  29) 
Sec. 2-60. - Preference for local bidders. 
    Bids, specifications and other factors being equal, in awarding contracts and making purchases, preference shall be given to the bidder whose place of business is located in the town. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  30) 
Sec. 2-61. - Required statement when award given to other than low bidder. 
    When an award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the purchasing agent, typed on the tabulation sheet, which must be signed by the purchasing agent, and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  31) 
Sec. 2-62. - Tie bids. 
    Award of all tie bids under the minimum amount, as stated in section 706 of the town Charter, shall be made by the purchasing agent with the approval of the mayor. All tie bids in excess of said minimum amount shall be awarded by the mayor with the approval of the council. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  32) 
Sec. 2-63. - Standardization, cooperative purchasing and governmental contracts. 
(a)  Where standardization is determined to be desirable by the purchasing agent, the purchase of materials, supplies and equipment and certain contractual services may be negotiated with the written approval of the mayor. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing ventures where the best interest of the town is served thereby, and the same is in accordance with the town and state law. 
(c)  The bidding requirements of this article shall not apply to established State of Rhode Island contracts or Federal General Services Administration contracts. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  33) 
Sec. 2-64. - Performance and payment bonds. 
    A contractor or vendor shall provide a corporate surety bond from a surety company authorized to do business in Rhode Island to guarantee the full and faithful performance of his contract obligations and the payment of labor and material expended pursuant to the contract whenever and in such amounts as is deemed necessary by the town council. All such bonds shall be approved as to form by the town solicitor. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  34) 
Sec. 2-65. - Inspection and testing of deliveries and samples. 
(a)  The purchasing agent or an authorized town employee shall inspect or supervise the inspection, or cause to be inspected, all deliveries of supplies, equipment or contractual services to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to authorize using agencies having the staff and facilities for adequate inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such using agencies under rules and regulations which the purchasing agent shall prescribe. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the town or of any outside laboratory, as deemed necessary within the restrictions of this article, the town Charter and state laws. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  35) 
Sec. 2-66. - Surplus stock. 
(a)  All using agencies shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or scrapped. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to other using agencies. 
(c)  The purchasing agent, subject to town council approval, shall have the authority to sell all supplies and equipment which have become unsuitable for public use or to exchange the same for or trade in the same on new supplies and equipment. Sales under this section shall be made to the highest responsible bidder and be in conformance with competitive conditions. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  36) 
Sec. 2-67. - Storerooms. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall control and supervise storerooms and shall administer the same. 
(b)  Requisitions from supplies in a storeroom shall be credited by the purchasing agent to the storeroom's revolving fund by a charge against the appropriation of the agency. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall maintain a perpetual inventory record of all materials, supplies or equipment stored in the storeroom. 
(Ord. of 3-16-89,  37) 
Sec. 2-68. - [Bid procedures to be conducted in an equitable, ethical and professional manner.] 
(a)  No individual or private company shall be given an unfair advantage in the bid process by having their company name or particular product(s) referenced therein. 
(b)  The respective department head for the department most impacted or involved with the bid shall initial each page of the request for proposal prior to forwarding said document to the town manager for publication. By initialing each page, the department head is acknowledging that they have reviewed the entire document and it meets the goals and policies of bids stated herein. 
(c)  Further, in a separate document that shall be forwarded to the town manager and town council as a whole, the department head shall disclose who, including any private business, professional, or consultant, was involved in the preparation of the bid and what if any compensation they received. 
(d)  The town manager, along with a member of the town council who shall be duly appointed by the council president at the 1st meeting in January of each year to perform this particular duty, shall also review each request for proposal and initial same prior to forwarding the document to the finance office for publication. 
(e)  If the finance department receives any objections to the bid, filed pursuant to RIGL, regarding the bid process a copy of said complaint shall be provided to the town manager and the town council as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10, 5-3-05) 
Secs. 2-69-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL LAND TRUST[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted February 3, 1994, amended this art. IV to read as herein set out. Formerly, art. IV consisted of  2-81-2-86, which pertained to municipal land trust and derived from  2-7 of an ordinance adopted August 1, 1989. 

Sec. 2-81. - Established; purpose. 
    There is hereby established the Town of West Warwick Land Trust (hereinafter called the "trust"), public instrumentality. The trust shall act as a review and advisory commission relative to the acquisition of land by gift or by purchase by the Town of West Warwick. The trust shall also have the authority, through town council authorization, to acquire, hold and manage any real property and interest therein including development rights situated in the town consisting of open, residential, agricultural, recreational, historical or littoral property, including existing and future wellfields and aquifer recharge areas, fresh and saltwater marshes, and adjoining uplands, barrier beaches, wildlife habitats, land and buildings providing access to or views of the ocean, harbors, and ponds, land or bicycling and hiking paths and for future public recreational use, and land for agricultural use or airspace thereof. With the exception of property acquired for public historical preservation or recreational purposes, the trust shall hold all property or development rights, with town council approval, solely as open space or for agricultural uses or for water purposes or for public access or to prevent the accelerated residential or commercial development thereof, as the trustees may determine. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94) 
Sec. 2-82. - Membership; appointment; requirements. 
    The trust shall be administered by five trustees, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the town council. The trustees who are first appointed shall be designated to serve for terms of one, two, three, four and five years respectively, thereafter, trustees shall be appointed as aforesaid for a term of office of five years, except that all vacancies occurring during a term shall be filled for the unexpired term. No more than three of the trustees shall at any one time be members of the same political party. 
    The trustees must be resident electors of the town and their term shall be deemed expired at the end of the appointed period, or if they cease to be residents of the town. No elected officer of the town of or the State of Rhode Island, and no person who has been employed by the town may be appointed trustee for at least one year after serving in elected office, or one year after leaving town employment. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94) 
Sec. 2-83. - Meetings. 
    The trustees, after appointment, and each year thereafter, shall appoint a chairperson, vice chairperson, and recording secretary. All meetings shall be held in compliance with the open meetings law, chapter 46, title 42. Meeting minutes shall be submitted to the mayor for distribution to the town council and other interested persons. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94) 
Sec. 2-84. - Rules and regulations; acquisition and review. 
    The trustees shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of trust affairs, including its review of any proposed land acquisitions as submitted by the town, its mayor and town council and the management of any holdings as authorized by the town council and mayor. All rules and regulations of the trust are subject to the approval of the mayor and the town council. Decisions of the trustees shall be by a majority of those present and voting, excepting any recommendations made on land acquisition, easements, rights-of-way and other uses referred to in section 2-81 of this article, which must be by a majority vote of all trustees. The trustees shall prepare and submit to the mayor and the town council an annual report on the activities of the trust as well as any periodic reports that may be requested by the mayor and the town council concerning particular acquisitions or holdings. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94) 
Sec. 2-85. - Powers and duties. 
    The trust shall have the power to: 
(1)  Evaluate and investigate any proposed land acquisitions by the town, for the purpose of determining whether or not problems, of any nature whatsoever, exist, including but not limited to environmental violations or potential environmental hazards, which problems would adversely affect the town upon acceptance of such real estate; 
(2)  Upon approval of the mayor and town council, purchase, receive by give, or otherwise acquire fee simple or lesser interests in real property, including development rights as defined in G.L. 1956,  42-82-2, or any interest in real property consistent with purposes of this article, including other development rights of any kind whatsoever; 
(3)  Accept gifts, grants or loans of funds or services from any source, upon approval by the mayor and town council, and comply, subject to the provisions of this article, with any terms and conditions thereof; 
(4)  Accept from state and/or federal agencies, upon approval of the mayor and town council, loans or grants for use in carrying out the trusts purposes and enter into agreements with such agencies respecting such loans or grants; 
(5)  Administer and manage land and interests in land held by the town, at the direction and authorization of the town council and mayor, in a manner which allows public use and enjoyment consistent with the natural and scenic resources thereof, including conveyance of any such land or interests in land to, and contracts with, nonprofit organizations, provided such land shall continue to be used in a manner consistent with the purposes of this article and with the terms of any grant or device by which such land was acquired by the town; 
(6)  The trustees shall prepare and submit to the mayor and the town council annual budget requests in the same manner as town departments do under applicable Charter provisions, which funds shall be paid by the town finance director in accordance with the accepted accountant procedures that are in place in the town at that time; 
(7)  Employ counsel, auditors, engineers, appraisers, private consultants, advisors, secretaries or other personnel needed to perform its duties upon authorization by the mayor and the town council; 
(8)  The trust is authorized to incur debt, if authorized by the town council and then only after authorization in each by a vote of the municipal budget or special appropriation process used by the town. The trust shall be obligated to pay debt service on all such debts to the extent funds are available and to reimburse the town for any town funds expended to pay such debt service; 
(9)  Recommend the disposition of property owned or acquired by the town and to dispose by sale or otherwise, upon authorization of the mayor and town council and only after approval by a financial town meeting, of all or any portion of the real estate managed by it, when in the opinion of the trustees and upon recommendation by the trustees to the town council and mayor, such land or properties have become unsuitable or have ceased to be used for the purposes set forth in this article or unless the best interests of the trust shall be served by such sale or other disposition. Such recommendation for disposition or sale shall be made only by a vote of the trustees in which at least four members vote in favor of such a disposition or sale and further only after having been approved by the mayor and town council; 
(10)  Otherwise to do all things necessary for the performance of its duties, the fulfillment of its obligations and the conduct of its business as may be authorized from time to time by the mayor and the town council. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94) 
Secs. 2-86-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LAND ACQUISITIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted February 3, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of  1-1-1-6 of said ordinance as art. V,  2-91-2-96, was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-91. - Donation of land; presentation of offers. 
    Any individual, firm or corporation who wishes to donate land, whether vacant or improved (hereinafter "real estate") to the town, or any real estate offered to be purchased by the town, ("offer") shall be presented to the mayor, which offer shall include a full and complete description of said real estate. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94,  1-1) 
Sec. 2-92. - Evaluation and investigation of offers; purpose. 
    The mayor shall immediately forward such offer to the town council and to the following departments, committees and/or other municipal authorities (hereinafter "municipal departments"), for the purpose of evaluation and investigation: director of public works, planning board for the town, fire department, building inspector, town engineer, municipal land trust, insurance adjusters and/or representatives of the interlocal trust. Such evaluation and investigation shall be for the purpose of determining whether or not problems, of any nature whatsoever, exist (including but not limited to environmental violations or potential environmental hazards) with respect to the real estate, which problems would adversely affect the town upon acceptance of such real estate. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94,  1-2) 
Sec. 2-93. - Expenditure of town funds; conformance with established criteria. 
    In any case involving the expenditure of town funds, such acquisitions shall be in general conformance with the comprehensive community plan, budgetary conditions and criteria as established and approved through financial town meetings and the town Charter. Any authorized expenditure of funds shall be paid by the town finance director in accordance with the accepted accounting procedures that are in place in the town at that time. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94,  1-3) 
Sec. 2-94. - Reports. 
    Upon completion of each investigation and evaluation, each municipal department shall forward its full report to both the mayor and town council. Said reports shall include the municipal department's recommendations as to acceptance or rejection of said acquisition and the reasons therefor. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94,  1-4) 
Sec. 2-95. - Review by town council. 
    After receipt of department reports, the matter shall be reviewed by the town council at a public hearing and the recommendation of the town council as to acceptance or rejection shall be submitted to the mayor for final approval. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94,  1-5) 
Sec. 2-96. - Transfer of property to municipal land trust. 
    Upon final approval of such acquisition, the town council and mayor may transfer the property so acquired to the municipal land trust, which trust shall manage and hold the property, pursuant to the provisions of chapter 2, article IV of the West Warwick Code of Ordinances. The town council and the mayor shall review the annual reports and any periodic reports submitted by the municipal land trust to the mayor and town council concerning all land acquisitions and any recommendations made by the municipal land trust. 
(Ord. of 2-3-94,  1-6) 
Secs. 2-97-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 2-101. - Declaration of policy. 
    There is hereby created within the town of West Warwick an emergency management agency (hereafter referred to as the "agency"), to be headed by a director, who shall be the town manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93,  1; Ord. No. 2016-13 , 10-4-16) 
Sec. 2-102. - Director and agency authority; advisory council. 
(a)  The director and the agency shall have the following authority: 
(1)  The director may employ, with the approval of the town manager, if the director be a designee, such volunteer technical, clerical, stenographic and other personnel services and may make such expenditures within the appropriation thereof, or from other funds available, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of emergency management, consistent with other applicable provisions of law. 
(2)  The agency may, with the approval of the town manager, provide itself with appropriate office space, furniture, equipment, supplies, stationery and printing as afforded through the appropriations of the annual budget or funded by other sources. 
(3)  The director, subject to the direction and control of the town manager if the director be a designee, shall be executive head of the agency, and shall be responsible to the town manager if the director be a designee for carrying out the program of emergency management for the town. The director shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency management within the town, and shall maintain liaison with and cooperate with other disaster agencies and organizations of the town, other towns, the State of Rhode Island and federal government. The director shall have the additional authority, duties and responsibilities authorized by law as may be prescribed by the town manager if the director be a designee. 
(b)  There shall also be an emergency management advisory council, hereafter referred to as the EMA council, comprised of, but not limited to the following: 
Director of emergency management; 
Civil defense director assistant; 
Chief of the fire department; 
President of the town council; 
Town solicitor; 
Director of public works; 
Town planner; 
Director of human services; 
Building inspector; 
Minimum housing inspector; and 
Other department heads as directed by the town manager. 
    It shall be the duty of the EMA counsel director to advise the [town manager] if the director be a designee on all matters pertaining to emergency management. The director shall serve as chairman of the council. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93,  2; Ord. No. 2016-13 , 10-4-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-13 , adopted Oct. 4, 2016, changed the title of  2-102 from "definitions; advisory council" to the present title. 
Secs. 2-103-2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COMMEMORATIVE DESIGNATIONS AND MEMORIAL DEDICATIONS 

Sec. 2-121. - Purpose. 
    In order to provide an appropriate method by which to commemorate and dedicate various public areas within the town, the town council wishes to establish procedures for the review of existing commemorative and memorial designations as well as to establish procedures for future commemorative recommendations. 
(Ord. of 2-7-95,  1-1) 
Sec. 2-122. - Scope. 
    For the purposes of this article, all commemorative and memorial designations and dedications shall include, but shall not be limited to all commemorative and memorial plaques, signs, markers, kiosks, and inscriptions of any type or kind honoring any person or groups of persons, as well as any and all pictures, paintings and the like situated on town owned property, whether outdoors in parks, streets, etc., or located within town owned buildings. 
(Ord. of 2-7-95,  1-2) 
Sec. 2-123. - Committee established. 
    The town council hereby establishes a committee for the purpose of reviewing all existing commemorative and/or memorial designations as well as to make recommendations for any future commemorative and/or memorial designations and/or dedications within the town. Said committee shall consist of five residents of the town who shall each serve for a term of five years, which terms shall be staggered. Said members shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the town council until their successors are duly appointed. 
(Ord. of 2-7-95,  1-3) 
Sec. 2-124. - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the committee to review all existing commemorative and/or memorial dedications and designations as well as all other commemorative plaques, pictures, paintings, markers, kiosks and signs to make a determination as to the continued appropriateness of said designations and whether such dedications and/or designations are fitting and proper. The committee shall report to the town council on their recommendations and findings concerning the existing dedications and designations. 
(b)  The committee shall also be responsible for making recommendations to the council for future commemorative and/or memorial dedications and designations within the town. 
(c)  Any suggestions or recommendations for future commemorative and/or memorial dedications and/or designations shall be submitted to the committee for their initial review and determination prior to submission to the town council for final approval. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the town council to act upon and make final determination as to the committee's recommendations. 
(Ord. of 2-7-95,  1-4) 
Secs. 2-125-2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-201. - Compensation of probate judge. 
(a)  The compensation for the judge of the probate court shall be set by the town council, through ordinance. 
(b)  The judge of the probate court for the Town Of West Warwick shall receive an annual salary in the sum of $5,000.00, without benefits. 
(c)  The compensation of the judge of the probate court may be increased and/or otherwise adjusted by the town council, as from time to time, it shall deem appropriate and necessary. 
(Res. No. 97-86,  1, 4-1-97) 
Editor's note- Res. No. 97-86,  1, adopted Apr. 1, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as  2-201 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-202. - Sealer of weights and measures. 
(a)  Purpose. Pursuant to Chapter 47 of the Rhode Island General Laws, and pursuant to Section 2003 of the West Warwick Town Charter, the town council shall appoint a sealer of weights and measures, who shall serve at the pleasure of the town council. 
(b)  Certificate and other requirements. Pursuant to Charter provisions, the sealer of weights and measures shall be a resident of the town during his or her continuance in office. Said sealer of weights and measures shall obtain an annual certificate of training from the director of labor for the state, as set forth in  47-1-1.1 of the Rhode Island General Laws. Said certificate of training shall cause a sealer of weights and measures to be "certified". The requirements for the certificate of training shall be set by the director of labor pursuant to  47-1-1.1. Said sealer, once certified, shall maintain his or her status by complying with the rules and regulations promulgated. 
(c)  Duties. The duties of the sealer of weights and measures shall consist of those duties as set forth in chapters 47-2 through 47-15 of the Rhode Island General Laws, including but not limited to those duties and responsibilities relating to testing and sealing of hay scales and platform balances; gasoline and petroleum products; firewood and charcoal and containers, as well as the duties set forth in any amendments to said general laws; rules and regulations promulgated by the director of labor for the state, the United States Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards including but not limited to any other state or federal authority. In addition, the sealer of weights and measures shall comply with and familiarize himself or herself with the Administrative Procedures Act adopting the "National Bureau of Standards Handbook 130, the Uniform Weights and Measures Law" and "Method of Sale of Commodities Regulation", as well as updates, amendments thereto and any other laws and regulations and standards handbooks issued or promulgated by any government authority. 
(d)  Custody and maintenance of standards. The sealer of weights and measures shall have custody and control and maintain standards and provide a place for the safekeeping and preservation of the weights, measures and balances furnished by the state, for which the sealer of weights and measures shall have care and oversight thereof, pursuant to Rhode Island General Laws  47-2-1 through  47-2-6, as well as any amendments thereto, including but not limited to standards established by any federal or state governmental authority, the sealer of weights and measures. 
(e)  Fees. The sealer of weights and measures shall receive a fee for every weight sealed by him or her at his or her office, in accordance with the fee schedule as provided  47-2-7 through  47-2-9 of the Rhode Island General Laws. Pursuant to  47-2-7, however, if the town council fixes an annual salary to be paid to the sealer of weights and measures, then in such event, any fees received by the sealer shall be paid over to the town immediately upon receipt by the sealer or any other time as may be determined by the town council. 
(f)  Offenses. The sealer of weights and measures, pursuant to  47-3-1 et seq. is authorized to issue fines in the amounts as set forth in the Rhode Island General Laws and any amendments thereto. The sealer of weights and measures in addition to the director of labor for the state shall, by virtue of their respective offices, have the power to prosecute all persons violating the provisions of chapter 47 of the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island, pursuant to the provisions of  47-3-4. 
(Ord. No. 96-05,  1-6, 9-3-96) 
Secs. 2-203-2-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-231. - Pension benefits for non-union employees. 
(a)  Non-union employees shall be eligible to participate in the town's pension plan, however, effective July 1, 2014, newly hired non-union employees will participate in the town's sponsored International City and County Management Association Retirement Corporation (ICMARC) 457 plan. Under the ICMARC plan the town will contribute seven percent of the non-union employee's annual wage. 
(b)  Terms of the pension plan are addressed in the pension plan of the Town of West Warwick and in the Personnel Policies and Practices for the Town of West Warwick. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, 11-14-00; Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-4-02; Ord. No. 2005-13, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2018-19 , 6-19-18) 
Secs. 2-232-2-250. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Firemen's and Policemen's Disability Pensions 

Sec. 2-251. - Definitions. 
    The words, terms and phrases when used in this subdivision shall have the meanings as ascribed in the "Firemen's and Policemen's Pension Fund for the Town of West Warwick," dated December 12, 1990 (restated as of July 1, 1990). 
(Ord. of 2-7-95; Ord. No. 2005-13, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 2-252. - Disability retirement. 
(a)  Occupational disability benefit. The monthly occupational disability benefit payment to a member who becomes entitled thereto shall be an amount equal to 66 2/3 percent of the annualized weekly rate of pay of the rank of the member held at the date of disability commencing at the occupancy disability retirement date. 
(1)  Whenever an adjustment is made to the rate of pay for the rank the member held at his date of disability, a proportional adjustment shall be made to the occupational disability benefit payment to a member receiving occupational disability benefits. 
(2)  For the purposes of calculating occupational disability benefits, effective July 1, 2001, the longevity percentage to be received by a disability retiree shall be that percentage in existence the time of retirement and shall remain constant throughout the course of his or her retirement and receipt of such disability payments. 
(3)  Effective July 1, 2001, the longevity percentage received by disability retirees who retired prior to July 1, 2001, shall be that percentage which he or she is receiving as of June 30, 2001, and shall remain constant throughout the remaining course of his or her retirement and receipt of such disability payments. 
(b)  Ordinary disability benefit. The monthly ordinary disability benefit payable to a participant who becomes entitled thereto shall be an amount equal to the normal retirement benefit set forth section 5.03 of the firemen's and policemen's pension fund, and based upon the participant's years of service and average compensation at his ordinary disability retirement date. The minimum ordinary disability benefit shall be 50 percent of the participant's average compensation. 
(c)  Definition of occupational disability. In the event that a participant becomes totally and permanently disabled as a natural and proximate result of accident while in the performance of his duty and such disability is not the result of willful negligence or misconduct on the part of the participant who has been examined by a physician appointed by the town and remained away from regular employment as a member of the police or fire department for a period of 18 months, such participant shall be entitled to retire due to an occupational disability upon being deemed physically unfit for duty. The town shall direct the pension commission to place such participant on disability retirement as of the first day of the month following such determination. In the event that the participant shall apply for an occupational disability retirement prior to the expiration of the 18-month period described above, the pension committee shall cause the participant to submit to a medical examination by three physicians engaged by the pension committee. Such participant shall be considered to be totally and permanently disabled for purposes of this chapter and section 4.04 of the firemen's and policemen's pension fund if a majority of the physicians agree that the participant is physically or mentally disabled for the performance of duty and such disability is not due to age or length of service. 
(d)  Definition of ordinary disability. In the event that a participant becomes disabled as the result of injury or illness for any reason other than as provided in section 4.04 of the firemen's and policemen's pension fund and he has completed seven years of service under the plan, he shall be entitled to retire. A participant shall be considered disabled for the purposes of this chapter and section 4.03 of the firemen's and policemen's pension fund if he is unable to perform the duties of his position and examinations by a majority of three physicians engaged by the pension committee determine that the participant is physically or mentally disabled from the performance of further duty and ought to be retired. 
(e)  Continuing evidence of disability. Once each year the pension committee may require any disability pensioner who has not reached the number of years of service to otherwise receive a normal retirement benefit to undergo a medical examination by a physician engaged by the pension committee. If such an examination indicates that the disability pensioner is able to engage in a gainful occupation; and if he is engaged in any gainful occupation or if he is offered employment with the town, the pension committee shall adjust, and from time to time readjust, his retirement benefit to an amount which when combined with his earnings shall not exceed his compensation at the time he became disabled. If any disability pensioner who has not reached the minimum number of years of service for a normal retirement benefit refuses to submit to a medical examination in any year, by a physician engaged by the pension committee, his retirement benefits may be discontinued by the pension committee until he submits to such an examination. 
(f)  Time of payment. The participant may elect to have payment of benefits commence on the first day of the month following the date on which a determination of disability is made by the pension committee pursuant to the rules specified in articles 4 and 5 of the firemen's and policemen's pension fund. 
(g)  Form of payment. Payment shall be made in accordance with the provisions of article five of the firemen's and policemen's pension fund. Payments shall be deemed disability income until the earlier of the first of the month following the participant's death, recovery from disability or attainment of normal retirement date. Any further payment after such event shall be governed by the form of payment selected at the time of disability. 
(h)  Recertification of certain prior retirees. Members of the town police and fire departments who, prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 94-02 and this amendment, retired on disability due to injuries or sickness incurred in the line of duty, may elect to be recertified as disabled due to occupational disability (as defined in the ordinance). Upon application by the retiree for recertification, the pension committee shall have the option to require the retiree to either submit to a medical examination by a physician engaged by the pension committee or, in the alternative, submit the existing medical records of the retiree for examination and review by a physician engaged by the pension committee. Evidence of disability due to occupational injury will be determined by the evaluation of the physician who either examined the individual or reviewed and examined the individual's existing medical records. In the event said physician does not find evidence of disability due to occupational injury, then the retiree may appeal such finding, in which event the retiree shall then be required to submit to a medical examination by three physicians engaged by the pension committee. Evidence of disability due to occupational injury will be determined by the evaluation of the majority of the physicians who examined the individual. Retirees who elect such recertification must apply with the pension committee no later than March 31, 1995. 
(i)  Retroactive recertification. It is the intention of the town council that any retiree who elects recertification would be deemed to be eligible under this subdivision from the date of its adoption. 
(j)  Severability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this subdivision are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this subdivision shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of the Internal Revenue Service or any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this subdivision, since the same would have been enacted by the town council without the incorporation in this subdivision of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. of 2-7-95; Ord. No. 2001-8, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 2005-13, 6-21-05) 
Secs. 2-253-2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PERSONNEL POLICIES AND STANDARDS MANUAL[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 2006-22, adopted November 1, 2006, amended the Code by repealing art. IX,  2-301-2-303, 2-321-2-324, 2-341-2-345, 2-351-2-372, 2-391-2-395, 2-411-2-419 and 2-431-2-437, and adding a new art. IX. Former art. IX pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Res. No. 97-64, adopted Mar. 3, 1997; Res. No. 97-232, adopted September 2, 1997; Res. No. 97-339, adopted December 2, 1997; Res. No. 98-79A, adopted April 7, 1998; Res. No. 99-04, adopted January 5, 1999; Ord. No. 2000-15, adopted November 14, 2000; Ord. No. 2000-90, adopted May 2, 2000; Ord. No. 2001-3, adopted March 6, 2001; Ord. No. 2003-8, adopted June 17, 2003. 

DIVISION 1. - NATURE AND APPLICATION OF PERSONNEL POLICIES AND STANDARDS 

Sec. 2-301. - Authority for policies and standards. 
    The purpose of these policies and standards is to establish personnel policies necessary for the effective administration of employees of the town's departments, offices and agencies pursuant to section 901 of the Town Charter and the personnel ordinance,  2-7 of the West Warwick Code. These policies and standards shall be known as the personnel policies and standards of the town, and shall be construed in a manner consistent with the Charter and Code. The Charter, and secondarily the Code, shall have precedence over these policies and standards in the event of conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-302. - Applicability of policies and standards. 
    The Policies and Standards Handbook shall apply to all town administrative employees, unless stated otherwise. The town will, by ordinance, from time to time, amend, delete, modify or change any of the provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06; Ord. No. 2018-12 , 4-24-18) 
Sec. 2-303. - Definitions. 
    Administrative employee. A non-union employee. 
    Allocation. The placing of a position in its proper class, based upon duties performed and authority and responsibilities exercised. 
    Anniversary date. The date of initial employment. 
    Applicant. An individual who has completed and submitted an application or resume for employment with the town. 
    Appointment. The act of the appointing authority in selecting the person whom it deems best qualified for the position which is to be filled in accordance with the provisions of the Town Charter, the personnel ordinance or the personnel policies and standards. 
    Appointing authority. The town manager or the person to whom the town manager has delegated the power to make an appointment pursuant to the Town Charter. 
    Break in service. Any separation from the career service of one scheduled workday or more by resignation, layoff, dismissal or retirement, or by absence without leave for one workweek or more when the employee is subsequently reemployed. An authorized leave with or without pay shall not be considered a break in service for purposes of these policies and standards. 
    Career service. As defined by the Town Charter, all employees who are not in the exempt service. 
    Class. A group of positions which are sufficiently alike in general duties and responsibilities to warrant the use of the same title, qualifications, class specification and pay range. 
    Class specification. A written description of a class consisting of a class title, a general statement of the nature and distinguishing features of work, some examples of duties and the desirable qualifications for the class. 
    Classification plan. The official, approved system of grouping positions into appropriate classes. 
    Continuous service. Employment without interruption, except for absences on approved leaves or absences that by state or federal law must be deemed to be continuous service. 
    Demotion. Assignment of an employee from one position to another which has a lower rate of pay. 
    Department. The primary organizational unit which is under the immediate charge of a department head who reports directly to the town manager. 
    Department head. The employee responsible for administering a department of the town. He/she shall be responsible, under the direction and supervision of the town manager, for hiring, training, instructing, assigning work, disciplining and terminating the employment of all subordinate employees in the department and for the overall functioning, performance and administration of the department. 
    Dismissal. Permanent separation from town employment for reasons other than layoff, resignation or retirement. 
    Employee. An individual who is legally employed by the town and is compensated through the town payroll for his/her services. Individuals or groups compensated on a fee or contract basis are not included. 
    Examination. The process of testing, evaluating or investigating the fitness and qualifications of applicants and employees. 
    Exempt service. As defined by the Town Charter, the exempt services shall consist of all officers elected by the people or by the council; all members of boards and commissions; persons employed on non-recurring projects of limited duration; persons employed as consultants or counsel, who are rendering temporary professional services; volunteers and persons appointed to service without pay; positions involving seasonal or part-time employment; employees of the school committee; and appointed officers and department heads. 
    FLSA. Fair Labor Standards Act. 
    Full-time employment. Employment in a permanent position in which the employee regularly works or is scheduled to work at least five days and 35 or 40 hours per week, according to job description or assignment. 
    Full-time employee. An individual who is assigned full-time employment. 
    Grievance. A wrong, real or perceived, considered by a classified employee as grounds for complaint. 
    Immediate family. A spouse, child, mother or father. 
    Layoff. The involuntary, non-disciplinary separation of an employee from town service, either permanently or temporarily. 
    Leave of absence without pay. Time off without pay or benefits granted to an employee by the town without loss of seniority. 
    Newly-appointed employee. An employee holding a position for the first time through original appointment, transfer, or promotion. 
    Original appointment. Appointment to a position other than by promotion or transfer from another position. 
    Overtime. Authorized time worked by a town employee which is compensable at time and one-half the employee's regular rate under federal law, state law, or collective bargaining agreement. 
    Overtime pay. Compensation paid to an employee for overtime work performed in accordance with these policies and standards. 
    Part-time employment. Employment in a permanent or temporary position in which the employee works less than full time. 
    Part-time employee. An individual who is assigned less than a full-time work schedule. 
    Pay grade. A symbol indicating the pay range of a class of positions. 
    Pay plan. The official schedule of pay approved by the town council assigning one or more rates of pay to each class. 
    Pay rate. A specific dollar amount, expressed as either an annual rate, a weekly rate, or an hourly rate. 
    Permanent employee. An employee appointed to a permanent position, generally for an indefinite term. 
    Permanent position. A position without fixed limitation on duration and intended to last for an indefinite span of years until or unless abolished due to reorganization or otherwise. 
    Position. Any office or employment whether occupied or vacant, full-time or part-time, permanent or temporary, consisting of duties and responsibilities assigned to one individual by the appointing authority. 
    Probationary period. A working test period during which an employee is required to demonstrate fitness by actual performance of the duties for the position to which the employee is appointed. 
    Promotion. Assignment of an employee from one class to another which has a higher actual or potential rate of pay. 
    Separation. Vacating a position for any reason including resignation, layoff, dismissal, retirement, permanent disability or death. 
    Supervisor. The employee to whom another employee reports. 
    Suspension. A forced, temporary leave of absence for disciplinary purposes or pending investigation of charges made against an employee. 
    Temporary employee. An employee appointed to a temporary position. 
    Temporary position. A position designed or intended to be of limited, casual, or seasonal duration. 
    Transfer. Assignment of an employee from one position to another position. Transfers can take place within a department, between departments, between positions of the same or different pay ranges, between positions of the same class or between positions of different classes. 
    Vacancy. A position which has been newly established or which has been vacated by a previous employee and which the town intends to fill promptly with another employee. 
    Work day. Scheduled number of hours an employee is required to work per day. 
    Work week. Scheduled number of hours an employee is required to work per week, measured from Sunday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06; Ord. No. 2018-12 , 4-24-18) 
Secs. 2-304-2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPOINTMENTS 

Sec. 2-311. - General policies. 
    It shall be the general policy of the town to place employees according to the following principles: 
(1)  Employees shall be selected solely on the basis of merit and qualifications for the job as determined by the appointing authority; 
(2)  The appointing authority shall not unlawfully discriminate on the basis of race, national origin, ancestry, sex, religion, age, disability, or other characteristic(s) protected by law; 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-312. - Residence. 
    All employees shall furnish to their department head any change in address, and the notice of such change shall be forwarded to the personnel director to be filed in the employee's personnel record. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-313. - Nepotism. 
    No town employee or official shall interview or decide on any candidate for appointment or promotion who is a member of his or her immediate family, first cousin or closer, or household, as set forth in section 2-339(a) of these personnel rules. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-314. - Probationary period. 
(a)  Purpose. All newly-appointed career employees shall complete a probationary period. The employee's supervisor shall use the probationary period to closely observe and evaluate the work of the newly-appointed employee. 
(b)  Duration. Pursuant to section 909 of the Town Charter, the probationary period of all career administrative employees will last for the first six months of employment unless the period is extended by the town manager. 
(c)  Rights of probationary employees. Probationary employees may be dismissed at any time, for any reason, by the appointing authority with the approval of the personnel director. Probationary employees shall have none of the leave rights granted by these personnel policies and standards unless specifically stated otherwise. For purposes of any rights or benefits conferred by these personnel policies and standards, a newly-appointed career employee is deemed to be hired upon the successful completion of the probationary period, unless specifically provided otherwise by these policies and standards or the personnel ordinance or by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06; Ord. No. 2018-12 , 4-24-18) 
Secs. 2-315-2-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VACANCIES, PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS 

Sec. 2-321. - Vacancies in entry level positions. 
    Entry level positions are open to any qualified applicant and announcements for such positions will be posted on appropriate bulletin boards and advertised in a paper having at least a general circulation in the town. This does not preclude the personnel director from placing job announcements in other locations. Entry level positions will be filled according to the principles and procedures set forth in division 2. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-322. - Vacancies in higher positions. 
    Vacancies in positions above the entry level may be filled by promotion whenever, in the judgment of the appointing authority, it is in the best interests of the town to do so. Promotions will be on a competitive basis except when the appointing authority finds that the number of persons qualified is insufficient to justify competition. If, in the judgment of the appointing authority, the position may not or should not be filled from among existing personnel, but rather should be filled by original appointment, public announcement and open competitive procedures will be followed as stated in section 2-321. All promoted employees will serve a probationary period of one year in their new position. Promoted employees will not be eligible to be returned to their former position unless, in the sole discretion of the town manager, it is in the town's best interest to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-323. - Transfers. 
    Employees may be transferred between departments on a permanent or temporary basis if it is in the best interest of the town, as determined by the town manager. Employees may request transfers, and requests will be granted upon the recommendations of the two department heads involved and the approval of the town manager. Transfers within a department are effected at the direction of the department head. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-324. - Creation, abolition and modification of positions by town. 
    Except as expressly limited by the Town Charter, the personnel ordinance, and collective bargaining agreements, the town retains the exclusive right to create, abolish, modify and/or combine positions to meet the needs of the town. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Secs. 2-325-2-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 2-331. - Work week. 
(a)  Exempt employees. Unless otherwise determined by the town council, exempt employees will work such hours as are prescribed by the town manager or his/her designee. Actual hours of work will depend upon the needs of the department and will vary. 
(b)  Career employees. The normal work week for career service employees generally consists of five days. No employee assigned to less than 35 hours per week shall be deemed full-time. Employees who work less than a full-time schedule shall not be entitled to benefits of employment beyond salary or wages. Employees of the various departments may be required to work additional hours to meet existing conditions or emergency needs. When work beyond the normal week is required, and authorized by the department head or town manager, such additional work shall be treated and compensated as overtime in accordance with section 2-334. 
(c)  Part time employment. Employees may be hired for part-time work as necessary and as determined by the town manager and depending on budget appropriations. Anyone working less than 20 hours will not be eligible for benefits. Those working between 20 and 35 hours may receive pro-rated benefits. 
(d)  Weather closing/acts of god. When it is deemed to be in the best interest of the town to close the offices or curtail services as a result of "Acts of God", such as snowstorms, tornadoes, etc., such determination shall be made by the town manager through appropriate sources and employees who can be released, in the opinion of the town manager, will be released. Employees will receive their normal compensation, excluding overtime, for any such time. Compensation, if any, shall be determined and paid in accordance with federal and state law and applicable collective bargaining agreements. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-332. - Department hours. 
    The hours during which town offices and departments shall be open for business shall be determined by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-333. - Absenteeism and tardiness. 
    Employees shall regularly and promptly be at their place of work, ready and able to commence work, at the time they are scheduled to begin the workday. Absences will only be excused if provided for by these personnel policies and standards. Excessive absenteeism and/or tardiness may result in disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-334. - Attendance records. 
    All departments shall maintain daily attendance records indicating the hours worked, absences, and reasons for absences for all employees in the department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-335. - Overtime and compensatory time. 
(a)  Employees in the career service are categorized as FLSA exempt and non-exempt for overtime purposes. Employees in the career service shall work overtime when necessary at the direction of their department heads. Non-exempt employees in the career service who work in excess of their normal hours in a work week shall be compensated at the rate of time and one-half to the extent required by federal and state law or collective bargaining agreement. Paid holidays shall count as time worked for purposes of calculating the number of hours worked in a week. Overtime for non-exempt employees in the career service must be approved in advance by the department head or town manager. Employees in the exempt service and FLSA exempt employees in the career service are not eligible for or entitled to overtime compensation unless overtime compensation is required by federal or state law or collective bargaining agreement. Nonetheless, the town manager may approve use of compensatory time on an hour-for-an-hour basis for employees in the exempt service and FLSA exempt employees in the career service who are not entitled to overtime compensation. 
(b)  Employees in the career service who work overtime may elect to receive compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay, as allowed by law. Use of compensatory time shall be mutually agreed to between the employee and their supervisor or department head. Compensatory time shall be used in the pay period immediately following the one in which it was earned, unless otherwise agreed to by the employee and their department head or the personnel director. If an employee is not authorized to use compensatory time within this time period and no agreement is made, the employee shall receive overtime pay instead of compensatory time. 
(c)  Any clerical employees not otherwise subject to terms of a written contract required to return to work after their regularly scheduled working hours in order to take minutes for any board or commission meeting shall be compensated at time and one half the employee's regular rate. If the employee is called back to work after leaving on a non-scheduled or non-routine basis, then the employee shall be entitled to a minimum of four hours work or pay in lieu thereof at the overtime rate. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-336. - Holidays. 
(a)  Employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement shall observe the same holidays as the employees in their department covered by a collective bargaining agreement. In the case of the police chief, he or she shall observe the holidays set forth in the collective bargaining agreement with the IBPO. 
(b)  All non-union employees will follow the AFSCME schedule for holidays off. 
(c)  Career employees who do not work on a holiday or the day it is observed shall be paid at their regular rate for the hours they are normally scheduled to work. If a holiday is observed on a day other than the holiday, a career employee shall only receive pay for the day the holiday is observed. 
(d)  An employee who is absent on leave without pay shall not be paid for official holidays. 
(e)  An employee who is absent on leave with pay on an official holiday shall be credited with one leave day. 
(f)  Employees wishing to observe religious holidays not listed in this section must submit a written request two weeks in advance to the personnel director. Upon approval by the personnel director, the employee may, at his or her option, either be given time off without pay or have the time off charged to the employee's vacation allowance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-337. - Vacations. 
(a)  Vacation is not intended as a bonus. It is granted for the purpose of allowing the employee to leave his/her duties for rest and relaxation in order that he/she may serve the town more efficiently throughout the balance of the year. 
(b)  Each regular full-time administrative employee shall be allowed a vacation with normal pay, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Six months of continuous service shall be required before any vacation is granted. Thereafter, vacation time shall be accumulated the same as other unionized employees. 
(2)  Administrative employees shall receive vacations on the basis of the following schedule: 
1 to less than 4 years - 15 days 
4 to less than 8 years - 18 days 
8 to less than 12 years - 21 days 
12 to less than 20 years - 24 days 
Over 20 years - 26 days 
(3)  Vacation time can be accumulated for one calendar year and carried over to the next year. In no case shall it be accumulated for more than one calendar year, i.e., vacation time in excess of the employee's annual entitlement will be lost if it is not used in any year by December 31. In other words, any amount of vacation time beyond the current allotment and the previous year's allotment will be lost on December 31 of each year. 
(4)  Payment of unused time. An employee may opt to be paid for unused vacation time, up to one full year at straight time. Payments under this section shall be requested in writing on or before April 1 and will be paid on or before June 30. Payouts shall be for previous fiscal years-accumulated vacation time according to schedule set forth in subsection (2). Said disbursement will be made separate and apart from the normal weekly payroll. 
(5)  A vacation schedule for employees in all departments shall be developed by the department head, keeping in mind the desires of the employees. It shall be the policy of each department head to schedule vacations over as wide a period as possible in order to maintain operations without resorting to hiring additional help. 
(6)  The town will, on or before May 1, post a vacation schedule for all employees to be taken during the period commencing June 1 and terminating October 1. The town agrees employees may select their vacations in the order of seniority, provided such selections do not prevent an orderly conduct of the operation of the department in which the employee works. Employees with the consent of the town, may select a vacation at any other time of the year. 
(7)  All vacation pay will be figured on a normal day rate. 
(8)  If an employee becomes ill and is under the care of a duly licensed physician during his or her vacation, his/her vacation shall be rescheduled. A vacation may not be waived by an employee provided, however, if an employee becomes ill or physically incapacitated and is under the care of a physician during his vacation, his/her vacation will be rescheduled. 
(9)  Vacation time shall be accrued monthly, based upon the employee's date of hire or anniversary date. e.g., an employee with two years service is entitled to 12 days, accrued at a rate of 1.0 days per month. 
(10)  Vacations will be granted at such times during the year as requested by the employee and approved by the town, in advance, considering the operation needs of the employer. 
(11)  Vacation days shall not be allowed in advance of being earned. 
(12)  If a regular pay day falls during an employee's scheduled vacation, and the employee would like the check in advance, he/she will be required to make a written request at least three weeks in advance in order to receive same on the last day of work prior to the start of vacation. 
(13)  Employees will be paid their current rate of pay based on their regular scheduled work day while on vacation and will receive credit for any benefits provided for those personnel policies and standards. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06; Ord. No. 2018-12 , 4-24-18) 
Sec. 2-338. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Sick leave shall be for the purpose of relieving an employee of his/her duties when he/she is incapacitated from performing his/her duties because of actual illness or when his/her presence at home is necessary because of the serious illness of his/her immediate family, sister, brother, parents-in-law, or member of the employee's immediate household and may not be used under any other circumstances. Employees who use their earned sick leave for any other reason may be dismissed from town service. 
(b)  All full-time administrative employees shall receive one and one-fourth days per month for sick leave, which they may accumulate from year to year to a maximum of 150 days. Sick leave may not be used until earned. When an administrative employee is separated from town service for reasons other than involuntary termination, the administrative employee will be compensated for all unused accumulated sick leave credited to such employee on the date of separation, but not in excess of 150 days. 
Said payment shall be made within 30 days of the employee's departure. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Time towards early retirement. 
(1)  An administrative employee may elect to have up to 150 days of such unused accumulated sick leave credited towards his/her retirement in which event, the administrative employee would be entitled to take what in effect amounts to an early retirement but would receive during such periods his full pay until the date of his/her normal retirement. 
(2)  Any employee wishing to utilize the time towards early retirement clause of this agreement must, in writing, notify the town of his/her desire, and said time shall be used consecutively and without recourse for return to duty. Said employee will not be allowed to accrue any additional time for vacation, sick or personal time however, said employee shall receive all other benefits and privileges afforded to that employee in accordance with this agreement. 
(3)  With regards to the vacancy created by the departure of any employee utilizing the time towards early retirement, the town shall construe the vacancy to have occurred on the first day that that employee utilizes toward early retirement. Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with this agreement. 
(e)  When an employee finds it necessary to be absent because of illness, he/she shall provide notice of the reason for and anticipated duration of the absence to his/her supervisor or department head or the personnel director (if either of the former are unavailable) before the regular starting time for work, but in no case later than 10:00 a.m. Failure to do so may result in denial of sick leave with pay, at the town's option. 
(f)  No employee may use paid sick leave when the illness or injury is attributable to the willful misconduct of the employee or improper or excessive use of alcohol or controlled substances, all as determined by the personnel director. 
(g)  If an administrative employee has exhausted all of his/her earned sick leave and is still unable to work because of illness, he may apply in writing to the personnel director for a leave of absence without pay pursuant to section 2-342. 
(h)  The town may require a certificate from a licensed physician as evidence of an employee's illness. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06; Ord. No. 2018-12 , 4-24-18) 
Sec. 2-339. - Bereavement leave. 
(a)  In the event of death in the administrative employee's immediate family (spouse, common-law spouse, child, foster child, mother, father, sister, brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law, forced the parents and the stepchild and domestic partner) said administrative employee shall be entitled to absence with full pay for five working days not chargeable to the employee's sick leave accumulation. In the event additional days are needed the employee may request that time from the director of human resources and may charge approved time to vacation or said request may be unpaid at the administrative employee's choice. 
(b)  In the event of death of an administrative employee's grandmother, grandfather, grandchild, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law and daughter-in-law, said administrative employee shall be entitled to absence with full pay for three working days for a period of mourning and attendance at the funeral not chargeable to the administrative employee's sick leave accumulation. 
(c)  In the events of an administrative employee's niece, nephew, uncle, aunt or any relative said employee is caring for, said administrative employee shall be entitled to absence with full pay for one working day not chargeable to the administrative employee's sick leave accumulation to attend services. 
(d)  Cohabitation and/or primary caregiver. In the event of a death of an individual, not listed above, with whom the administrative employee is cohabitating or the administrative employee is the primary caregiver, the administrative employee shall be granted the following days off with pay as listed in the table below. Cohabitation means that the other individual has maintained the same legal residence as the employee. 
Cohabitation/Caregiver Time Days Off 
With Pay 1 year or more 3 days 6 months up to one year 2 days Less than 6 months 1 day  
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06; Ord. No. 2018-12 , 4-24-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-12 , adopted April 24, 2018, changed the title of  2-339 from "funeral leave" to the present title. 
Sec. 2-339.1. - Paid time off (PTO) policy. 
    Effective July 1, 2015 all administrative employees, not vested as of that date, will participate in the paid time off (PTO) plan. All administrative employees vested as of July 1, 2015 shall participate in the accrual system of sick, vacation and personal days. Administrative employees participating in the PTO plan accrue PTO weekly and hourly increments based on the length of service as hereinafter defined. Eligibility to accrue PTO is based on the administrative employee working or using accrued PTO for the entire weekly pay. PTO is not earned in pay periods which unpaid leave or workers compensation leave are taken. 
PTO Accruals Years #Days Weekly Accrual of Hours 1-3 years 26.40 days 3.55 3.81 4.06 4-7 years 28.80 days 3.88 4.15 4.43 8-11 years 31.20 days 4.20 4.50 4.80 12-19 years 33.60 days 4.52 4.85 5.17 20+ years 35.20 days 4.74 5.08 5.042  
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , 4-24-18) 
Sec. 2-340. - Jury service or court leave. 
    Employees who are required by law to render jury service shall submit all such fees received to the town finance director and receive their regular pay during such period and the time spent in such service shall be reported as jury service leave provided that the employee returns promptly to work when excused from jury duty during his/her regular work day. Mileage allowances received for such service may be retained by the employee. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-341. - Military leave. 
    Any permanent employee who is a member of the National Guard or military reserves of any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States and who is required to undergo activation or field training therein shall be entitled to leave without pay for the period of time military orders require the employee to be away from his or her town duties. An employee may elect to use earned vacation time during his or her military leave and retain the payment received by the state or federal government. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-342. - Absence without authorized leave. 
    An absence of an employee from duty, including an absence for a single day or part of a day, that is not specifically authorized by a department head, the personnel director or town manager, or leave of absence under the provisions of these policies and standards, shall be deemed an absence without leave. Any such absence shall be without pay and may warrant disciplinary action, including dismissal. Absence without leave for three consecutive work days, or for any duration on three separate occasions within a 30-day period without authorized leave, shall involuntarily terminate employment for cause upon the happening of the third such day or occasion. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-343. - Family and medical leave. 
(a)  Generally. Employees who have worked at least 1250 hours for the town in the previous twelve months and have completed one year of service with the town may take unpaid leave: 
(1)  For the birth of a child, or placement of a child for adoption or foster care; 
(2)  To care for a seriously ill member of the immediate family or parent-in-law; or 
(3)  Because of an employee's own serious illness. 
(b)  Duration and form of leave. An employee may take up to 13 weeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period for any of the reasons stated above. The personnel director has discretion to extend the period of leave if it is deemed to be in the town's best interest in accordance with section 2-343 of this chapter. Although family and medical leave is generally unpaid, the employee may choose to have any of the employee's accrued paid leave used as family or medical leave, but only if the accrued paid leave corresponds to the reason for the family or medical leave. 
(c)  Benefits. All insurance benefits will remain in force during the leave, provided that the employee continues to pay his or her share, if any, of the premiums no later than the date on which the employee normally receives his or her paycheck. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-344. - Other unpaid leaves of absence. 
    The town manager may grant to any employee a leave of absence without pay for any reason not provided by these policies and standards which the town manager, in his or her discretion, deems meritorious. Any such leave of absence shall not exceed one year and shall be granted only when the town manager determines that the leave is in the best interests of the town. An employee returning to town service following a leave granted under this section will be placed in the position held prior to the commencement of the leave unless such position is unavailable, in which case the employee will be placed in a comparable position for which the employee is qualified if such a position is available. An employee who takes an unpaid leave of absence under this section bears the risk that no positions are available at the end of the employee's leave. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-345. - Procedure for requesting leave. 
    An employee requesting a leave of absence for any reason, other than an emergency precluding written request, must do so in writing. Such request must be approved by the department head and the personnel director. Failure to submit a request for leave in a timely fashion may be cause for denial of the leave. 
    In cases of emergency, telephone notification to the personnel director, department head, or immediate supervisor shall be deemed sufficient notification. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-346. - Compensation for unused leave. 
    Upon separation from employment, employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement shall receive the same compensation for unused leave as the employees in their department who are covered by a collective bargaining agreement, less all regular and lawful withholdings. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-347. - Personal leave. 
(a)  Full-time employees will be awarded two personal days on July of each year. Personal days will not accumulate beyond the year in which they are earned. Employees working less than a full year will be compensated one personal day for each six month worked. 
(b)  An employee who seeks to use a personal day must give at least three days notice to his or her department head or the town manager. This notice requirement may be waived if the department head (in cases involving his/her subordinate) or the town manager believe the circumstances warrant waiver and grant permission to take a personal day without such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-348. - Other benefits. 
(a)  Insurance benefits for non-union employees. The town shall provide insurance benefits for the full-time, non-union employees just as it provides those benefits for the unionized employees covered by the applicable labor agreement. Non-union employees will contribute five percent of the health insurance cost to the town, as a co-payment for health insurance. Those that are receiving 50 percent cash in lieu of health insurance will have the five percent deducted from the total cost of health insurance, prior to determining the 50 percent split. 
(b)  Tuition reimbursement. The town manager must approve in advance an employee's training or study courses to improve the quality of the employee's service to the town, and upon written approval, the town may reimburse the employee if the employee achieves a grade of B or higher. Employees who receive tuition reimbursement from the town under this provision shall reimburse the town in full in the event the employee leaves employment with the town within six months of receiving such reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-349. - Expenses. 
(a)  Employees who are required to use their vehicles for town business shall receive mileage reimbursement to be set from time to time by the town council. 
(b)  Auto insurance: Employees who drive their personal cars in performance of their duties shall maintain at their own expense adequate automobile insurance pursuant to state law. All such employees shall provide verification of adequate automobile insurance on a yearly basis to the personnel director. The town solicitor shall also make periodic inspections of insurance documentation of such employees during the course of the year to ensure compliance with this policy. 
(c)  Lodging: Employees who need lodging in relation to town business shall be reimbursed for the cost of the employee's lodging, provided prior approval has been obtained from the employee's supervisor. A signed voucher with appropriate original receipts must accompany reimbursement requests. Any telephone charges must be related to the town. 
(d)  Food/beverages: On approved town business, an employee shall be reimbursed an amount set by the town manager for food and beverage. Alcohol will not be reimbursed. Supporting original receipts must be turned in on a voucher. 
(e)  Town vehicles: Town vehicles shall be used for approved town business and approved travel to and from the employee's residence to his/her place of employment within the town. The town council shall approve the use of any town vehicle to and from an employee's residence if the employee is not a resident of the town. No other individual other than the approved town employee shall operate a town vehicle. Town vehicles shall be left in the possession of the town or on town property during an extended absence for any reason. For purposes of this provision, extended absence shall mean any absence of three scheduled working days or more. Employees who violate this policy will be disciplined, up to and including termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-350. - Employee evaluations. 
    The job performance of each employee will be evaluated annually. This evaluation will be done by the employee's department head or person designated by the town manager. Evaluations of department heads will be tied to each department head's goals and objectives, as established with the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-351. - Controlled substances and alcohol testing of commercial motor vehicle drivers. 
    The town's controlled substances and alcohol testing policy for drivers of commercial motor vehicles, which is set forth separately from these personnel policies and standards, shall be adhered to. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-352. - Obtaining a CDL license. 
    It is the policy of the town to encourage all employees who may be eligible to drive a commercial motor vehicle in the course of employment with the town to obtain a commercial driver's license (CDL). The town will therefore give reasonable assistance, as determined by the town manager, to employees seeking to obtain a CDL which can be used in the course of employment with the town. All requests for assistance should be directed to the employee's department head or the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Secs. 2-353-2-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SEPARATION FROM EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 2-361. - Layoffs. 
    Any employee may be laid off because of a shortage of work or funds, the abolition of a position, change in departmental organization, or any other reason. The duties performed by an employee who is laid off may be reassigned to other employees or eliminated. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-362. - Dismissals. 
(a)  Career employees. Unless otherwise provided, career employees serve at the pleasure of the town manager and may be dismissed by the town manager at any time for any reason, subject to approval of a majority of all members of the town council in those cases were the town council ratified the appointments. 
(b)  Exempt employees. Exempt employees may be dismissed pursuant to the Town Charter and the personnel ordinance. In accordance with the November, 1996 change in the Town Charter, department heads are no longer considered to have vacated their position upon termination of the town manager's employment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-363. - Resignations. 
    Any employee who wishes to resign in good standing from town service must provide notice of the intention to resign to the personnel director at least two weeks prior to the effective date thereof. Upon receipt of such notice, the personnel director shall calculate the amount of sick leave and vacation leave which the employee has accrued. This information shall be forwarded to the finance department in order that the employee may be compensated for accumulated leave, if applicable, no later than the next regular payday following separation from employment. 
    Failure to provide at least two weeks notice is cause for denying future employment by the town and pay for accumulated leave. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-364. - Retirement. 
    The town's pension plan(s) are set forth in the town's Municipal Code. Notice of intention to retire should be sent to the personnel director in the year prior to retirement so that the necessary preparations can be made. 
    Pensions shall be computed based on the preceding 12 months' base salary. Employees shall pay into and receive the same pension benefits as AFSCME employees. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-365. - Career employee grievances. 
    Any career employee who has a grievance shall direct such grievance to his/her department head. If the grievance is not resolved to the employee's satisfaction, the employee may present the grievance to the town manager. The decision of the town manager on any employee grievance shall be final. 
    The town manager may require an employee to submit a signed statement which sets forth with particularity the basis for the grievance and all relevant facts and sections of law, code or policies and standards. The resolution of all employee grievances shall be accomplished in a simple and informal manner. The personnel director and town manager may require any employee to participate in an investigation or hearing and give witness. Refusal to participate may be grounds for disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Secs. 2-366-2-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 2-381. - Code of conduct. 
    The town believes that the best way to deliver its vital services is through a corporate philosophy that is committed to the principles of fiscal responsibility, integrity, responsiveness and excitement, otherwise referred to as the F.I.R.E. philosophy, as adopted as the official corporate philosophy of the town by the town council on January 3, 1995, in Resolution 95-9. 
(1)  Policy statement. It is the policy of the town to foster efficient and effective government services, as well as the protection and fair treatment of all citizens and employees and all persons coming in contact with the town. Every employee is a guardian of public resources entrusted by the public with its funds, safety and welfare. Therefore, each employee is required to work diligently at all times to guard the public's resources and to maximize the value the public receives for the compensation paid. 
(2)  Employee conduct and disciplinary policy. Employees are subject to disciplinary action, including termination of employment, when they fail to meet the standards set forth above. A partial list of infractions that will lead to immediate discipline, up to and including discharge, follows. It is not intended to be all inclusive, but rather is merely a list of examples of serious infractions. 
a.  Unauthorized absence from work. 
b.  Violation of the Town Charter. 
c.  Neglect or failure to satisfactorily perform assigned duties. 
d.  Unauthorized use of town property, vehicles, equipment or facilities (including telephones or duplicating equipment). 
e.  Violation of a safety rule or safety practice. All employees must report injuries sustained on the job to their department head, along with a copy to the town manager, as soon as possible. 
f.  Not being at an assigned work station and ready to work promptly at starting time. 
g.  Insubordination (i.e., a refusal to obey a legitimate directive from a supervisor). 
h.  Sleeping on the job. 
i.  Dishonesty of any kind, including: 
1.  Theft, attempted theft or neglect of property belonging to the town, a patron, visitor or co-employee. Unauthorized possession of town property or the property of an employee or other individual. 
2.  Performance of duties unrelated to town employment while being paid by the town. 
3.  Misrepresentation of medical conditions or other facts in seeking employment. 
4.  Falsification or destruction of the town records. 
5.  Improper use of sick leave or other leave of absence. 
6.  Causing any town record or document to be falsified. 
7.  Misrepresentation by work, writing or action. 
j.  Instigating a fight or fighting. 
k.  Possession of, consumption, use, or working while under the influence of alcohol or illegal controlled substances; testing positive pursuant to the town's drug and alcohol testing policies. 
l.  Unauthorized possession of firearms, fireworks, explosives, or weapons of any kind inside the town facilities or in its vehicles. 
m.  Gambling on town property or while being paid by the town. 
n.  Use of abusive or obscene language. 
o.  Violation of any town policies. 
p.  Interfering with the work of other employees, or conduct disruptive to the work of other employees. 
q.  Violation of any federal or state law while on the town property or while being paid by the town. 
r.  Harassment of co-workers, supervisors, public officials or members of the public, including, but not limited to harassment based on sex, race, age, religion or ethnicity. 
s.  Absence of three working days without properly notifying a supervisor. 
t.  Stopping work or making unauthorized preparations to leave work before employee's lunch break or end of the work day. 
u.  Acceptance of gifts or gratuities from any individual or agency that may be construed as influencing a decision of a town official or employee. 
v.  Conviction of a felony. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-382. - Conflict of interests. 
    No employee will engage in any business or transaction, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his/her official duties in the public interest or which would tend to impair his/her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his/her official duties. Personal as distinguished from financial interest includes an interest arising from blood, marriage or social relationships or close business or political association. The following acts, among others, are prohibited and may result in immediate dismissal: 
(1)  Incompatible employment - holding a position in addition to a public position which interferes, or may interfere, with the proper discharge of his/her public duty, or which creates the appearance of impropriety or which involves actual or potential conflicts in the execution of his/her public duties. 
(2)  Use of confidential information obtained as a result of public position for personal gain or personal purposes. 
(3)  Acceptance of or soliciting of gifts, financial contributions or favors from any member(s) of the public. 
(4)  Any use of official position for personal gain. 
(5)  Holding or making investments which interfere, or tend to interfere, with proper discharge of public duty. 
(6)  Representation of private interests of others before town agencies, courts, or legislative bodies, or participation in the profits derived from decisions of a town agency which the employee works with or for. 
(7)  Participation in transactions as a public representative with a business entity in which the public official or employee has a direct or indirect financial or other personal interest. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-283. - Emergency personnel policies and standards. 
    The personnel director may adopt emergency personnel policies and standards to address any situation not provided for by these policies and standards, the personnel ordinance or the Town Charter. Such emergency personnel rule(s) shall be temporary and shall be automatically repealed 45 days after adoption unless the town council has adopted such rule(s) in accordance with the town charter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-384. - Employee personnel files. 
    The contents of employee personnel files are deemed to be confidential. Only the head of the employee's department, the personnel director and the town manager shall have unrestricted access to an employee's personnel file. 
    An employee who wishes to inspect his/her personnel file must contact the personnel director and request an appointment to do so. The personnel director or his/her designee must be present at all times when the employee inspects the file. The employee may not remove or alter any information contained in the file but may ask for copies of documents in the file, at the employee's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-385. - Smoking. 
    Smoking is prohibited in all town buildings and vehicles in accordance with Rhode Island General Laws. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-386. - Standard of dress. 
    The observance of a dress code is vital to the preservation of our professional image in the eyes of the public and patrons. When reporting to work, employees must always present a neat and clean appearance appropriate to their positions. 
    Clothing is to be kept cleaned and pressed presenting a neat, clean, professional image. Shirts must have all buttons securely attached and are not to be ripped or torn. Shoes should be periodically polished and present a well maintained appearance (i.e., must not be excessively scuffed). 
    The following items are not considered appropriate office attire: sweatshirts, sweatpants, T-shirts, athletic shoes, sneakers, sandals, jeans or shorts of any type. Faces shall be clean shaven, except that a mustache and/or beard may be worn, provided it is neat, clean and trimmed and does not interfere with safety or any other aspect of the employee's job. Hair shall be kept neat and well-groomed. Hair shall be worn in such a manner that the vision of the employee is in no way obstructed either from the front or sides. 
    Employees' attire must be both safe and appropriate to their position. An employee for whom the town provides or pays for a uniform must wear the uniform prescribed when on duty, unless he/she is expressly authorized by his/her supervisor to be out of uniform. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-387. - Media contact. 
    The town manager shall be responsible for contacting the media and setting forth the official statements and/or policies on behalf of the town administration. Employees should refrain from providing information to the media without the consent of the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-388. - Longevity pay. 
(a)  The town shall pay annually in a separate check on the first pay period of November, longevity payments to all employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement in recognition of continuous dedicated service to the town in accordance with the following schedule: 
Years of Service 4 completed years to less than 8 years 5% 8 to less than 12 6.5% 12 to less than 16 7.5% 16 to less than 20 and over 9.5% 20 and over 11.5%  
(b)  Longevity pay shall be based on base salary only. 
(c)  Employees who have been separated from town employment and are rehired at a later date will have their longevity based on date of re-hire. 
(d)  Longevity payment shall be calculated to the nearest full cent. 
(e)  Longevity pay will be prorated in the event that an employee is on workers' compensation or otherwise absent without pay during a part of a year. It is not payable if the employee is on workers' compensation or otherwise absent without pay for the entire year. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-389. - Use of documents, materials and/or records outside of town hall. 
(a)  All employees and all members of any boards, committees or other town sponsored groups requiring access to personnel documents, materials and/or records which are not deemed public, not withstanding the format in which the information is contained, must insure that said records remain within the town hall, or other offices containing said records, at all times. This includes all records, which are not deemed public, relating to the performance of the specific duties as employees, or in their appointed capacity as members of said boards, committees or other town sponsored groups. 
(b)  The town manager may provide for exceptions to this policy upon a written request of the department head or through a majority vote of any boards, committees or other town sponsored groups. The town manager's approval for the exception will be in writing and outline the parameters for outside use of the materials. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Secs. 2-390-2-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - POLICY ON HARASSMENT 

Sec. 2-401. - Statement of policy. 
    It is the policy of the town that every employee be entitled to a working environment free from any kind of unlawful harassment, including sexual, sexual orientation, racial, religious, age, color, disability or national origin harassment or offensive conduct based on any of these factors regardless of its form or manner. Harassment is unlawful and hurts other employees. Harassment can be destructive to employee morale as well as to the town's reputation, and can be extremely costly in terms of lost productivity, lost employees, and out-of-pocket expense. Any incident of harassment contributes to a general atmosphere in which all persons who share the victim's sex or other protected status suffer the consequences. Harassment therefore has no legitimate purpose related to the business of the town. Thus, any act or pattern of harassment by any employee of the town is beyond the scope of his or her authority as an employee, officer or agent of the town and will subject the employee to discipline up to and including the termination of employment. 
    This policy focuses primarily on sexual harassment, but prohibits harassment of all kinds. Harassment based on race, disability or any other protected class status is unlawful and will be dealt with under this policy in the same manner as sexual harassment. 
    The town will administer all provisions of this policy without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, age, national origin, handicap, Vietnam-era veteran status, or disabled veteran status. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-402. - Scope. 
    This policy applies to all employees of the town. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-403. - Dissemination of policy. 
    This policy constitutes a portion of the town's personnel policies and standards. The personnel director is responsible for circulating this policy to all employees of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-404. - Statement of prohibited conduct and definitions. 
    All employees of the town are absolutely prohibited from engaging in harassment of any town employee, or any other person with whom they have contact in the course of their duties. All employees must avoid any act or conduct which could be viewed as harassment by another individual. 
(1)  Harassment generally. The town considers any physical or verbal behavior which disregards the dignity and self-esteem of others to be harassment within the meaning of this policy. This includes unwelcome physical advances, unwarranted written or verbal remarks, improper derogatory statements or discriminatory comments of any kind which occur between any individuals or groups of individuals. 
(2)  Sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when: 
a.  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or a condition of an individual's employment; 
b.  An employment decision is based on an individual's acceptance or rejection of such conduct; or 
c.  Such conduct unreasonably interferes with an individual's work performance or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
(3)  Retaliation. It is unlawful to retaliate or take reprisal in any way against anyone who has articulated any concern about harassment or discrimination. This policy protects individuals alleging that they have been harassed as well as any other individual who expresses concerns about harassment, provides information about instances of harassment, investigates or cooperates with an investigation of harassment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-405. - Examples of prohibited conduct. 
    The town considers the following identified conduct to represent some of the types of acts which constitute harassment under this policy. These examples are provided to illustrate the kind of conduct prohibited by this policy; this list is neither exhaustive nor all-inclusive. The omission of any specific conduct from the following list shall not prevent the town from concluding that such conduct nevertheless constitutes harassment. 
(1)  Physical assaults of a sexual nature, such as: 
a.  Assault, rape, sexual battery, molestation or attempts to commit these acts; or 
b.  Unwelcome intentional physical conduct which is sexual in nature, such as touching, pinching, patting, grabbing, brushing against another person's body, or poking another person's body. 
(2)  Unwanted sexual advances, propositions or other sexual comments, such as: 
a.  Sexually-oriented gestures, noises, remarks, jokes or comments about a person's sexuality or sexual experience; 
b.  Preferential treatment or promises of preferential treatment to an employee for submitting to sexual conduct, including soliciting or attempting to solicit any employee to engage in sexual activity for compensation or reward; or 
c.  Subjecting, or threats of subjecting, an employee to unwelcome sexual attention or intentionally making performance of an employee's job more difficult because of that employee's sex. 
(3)  Sexual or discriminating displays or publications anywhere in workplace by employees, such as: 
a.  Displaying pictures, posters, calendars, graffiti, objects, reading materials, or other materials that are sexually suggestive, sexually demeaning, or pornographic, or bringing onto or possessing in the town's work environment any such material; 
b.  Reading or otherwise publicizing in the work environment materials that are in any way sexually revealing, sexually suggestive, demeaning or pornographic; or 
c.  Displaying signs or other materials purporting to segregate an employee by sex in any area of the workplace (other than restrooms and similar semi-private lockers/changing rooms). 
(4)  Retaliation or failure to cooperate with investigation of harassment complaints, such as: 
a.  Disciplining, changing work assignments of, providing inaccurate work information to, or refusing to cooperate or discuss work-related matters with any employee because that employee has complained about or resisted harassment, discrimination or retaliation or cooperated in any investigation of harassment; or 
b.  Intentionally pressuring, falsely denying, lying about or otherwise covering up or attempting to cover up conduct such as that described in any item above. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-406. - Schedule of penalties for misconduct. 
    The following schedule of penalties applies to all violations of the town's harassment policy: 
(1)  Harassment. 
a.  An employee may be disciplined, up to and including suspension or discharge, for any act of harassment which is proven or otherwise demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town. 
b.  In determining the ultimate penalty in cases of harassment, the town will consider the nature and severity of the alleged misconduct, along with any other relevant factors. 
(2)  Retaliation. An employee may be disciplined, up to and including suspension or discharge, for any act of retaliation against a harassment complainant or any other individual who has investigated or cooperated in an investigation of harassment. The severity of the discipline will be based on the nature and extent of the harassment or retaliation and any other relevant factors brought to the attention of the town. The ultimate determination of the appropriate penalty for retaliation will be within the discretion of the town. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 2-407. - Procedure for making, investigating and resolving harassment and retaliation complaints. 
(a)  Complaints. The town provides its employees with a convenient, confidential and reliable mechanism for reporting incidents of harassment and/or retaliation. The town designates the town manager/town personnel director to serve as its investigative officer for all harassment issues. If you have a complaint of harassment or retaliation, you should contact town manager at 822-9219. In the event of any harassment complaint involving alleged misconduct by the town manager, complaints should be reported to the finance director, at 822-9216. The investigative officer may appoint a designee to assist in handling harassment complaints. 
Complaints of harassment or retaliation will be accepted in writing or orally, and all complaints will be taken seriously and investigated. Anyone who has witnessed an act of harassment or retaliation, even if that person was not the target of harassment or retaliation, is required by this policy to bring the matter to the attention of the investigative officer. 
The investigative officer shall thoroughly investigate all reports of harassment or retaliation as promptly as possible, keeping the matter as confidential as is practicable. All parties contacted in the course of an investigation will be advised that all parties involved in the charge are entitled to respect and that any retaliation or reprisal against an individual who is an alleged target of harassment or retaliation, who has made a complaint or who has provided evidence in connection with a complaint will constitute an actionable offense for which penalties may be implemented under this policy. 
The investigative officer will produce a written report, which, together with the investigation file, will be discussed with the complainant within a reasonable period of time. The investigative officer is empowered to recommend remedial measures based upon the results of the investigation and the town will promptly consider and act upon such recommendations. The investigative officer will have the duty to immediately bring all harassment or retaliation complaints to the confidential attention of the personnel director, or to the finance director if the complaint should be against the personnel director. If, after investigation, the investigative officer is unable to establish that any act of harassment has occurred, he will meet with the complaining employee(s) and with the complained-against employee(s) individually to explain both the results of the investigation and the town's policy on harassment. 
(b)  Cooperation. An effective harassment policy requires the support of all the town's personnel; it is therefore the duty of every employee to cooperate fully with any investigation under this policy. Anyone who engages in harassment or retaliation or who fails to cooperate with any town-sponsored investigation of harassment or retaliation may be severely sanctioned, up to and including suspension or dismissal from employment. Any employee who refuses to implement remedial measures, obstructs the remedial efforts of other town employees or who retaliates against harassment complainants or witnesses may be subject to immediate disciplinary measures under this policy. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, 11-1-06) 
Chapter 2.5 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Public intoxication,  12-4; consumption and possession of alcohol in public,  12-4.1; consumption and possession of alcohol in unlicensed victualling establishments,  12-4.2; alcoholic beverages prohibited in or around McCarthy Field,  12.5-35. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2.5-1-2.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 11, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of arts. I-X of said ordinance as art. II,  2.5-21-2.5-30, was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2.5-21. - Authority. 
(a)  Authorization for issuance. Any and all alcoholic beverage licenses, so-called "liquor licenses," authorized by the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, as amended and granted by the Town of West Warwick, a body corporate and existing under such General Laws, shall be issued, governed, controlled and regulated by the town council of the Town of West Warwick, as its licensing board (hereinafter referred to as the "board"), in accordance with the following rules, regulations, policies and procedures. 
    These rules, regulations, policies and procedures are deemed to be in conjunction with and in addition to Rhode Island General Laws and the rules and regulations promulgated by the liquor control administration. 
(b)  Issuance and revocation. The board shall have the authority to approve, issue, renew, transfer, suspend or revoke any and all alcoholic beverage licenses under its control within the town and may also from time to time reduce or increase the number of class of licenses in each category as shall be authorized and empowered by state law. 
(c)  Meetings, hearings, rules and records. The board shall meet as part of the regularly scheduled meeting of the Town of West Warwick Town Council in a section of the agenda specifically designated for such meeting or at such time and in such place as determined by the board and duly noticed according to the Rhode Island Open Meetings Law. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Rhode Island Open Meeting Law, all meetings of the board shall be open to the public and news media at all times. Except as provided herein, the conduct of the meetings of the board shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. The board shall keep proper and accurate records which shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Rhode Island Public Records Act. 
(Ord. of 1-11-94, art. I) 
Sec. 2.5-22. - Effective date. 
    These rules, regulations, policies and procedures of the Town of West Warwick Licensing Board shall become effective immediately upon passage by the town council and shall be the official rules and regulations pertaining to the issuance of liquor licenses within the town. It is specifically intended that these rules, regulations, policies and procedures shall be adopted by the town council as an ordinance of the town and included within the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 1-11-94, art. II) 
Sec. 2.5-23. - Licenses, class, number and fee. 
    The fee to be paid to the town for the issuance of liquor licenses shall from time to time be set by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. of 1-11-94, art. III; Res. No. 99-149, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 2.5-24. - License applications. 
(a)  Application. An application form must be obtained from the town clerk, who shall serve as the clerk of the licensing board (hereinafter referred to as "clerk"). Such application shall be fully completed and returned to the clerk together with all application processing documentation and required fee. 
(b)  Completed application. 
(1)  General requirements. An application for liquor licenses must contain an exact description of the premises to be licensed, sufficient to identify the specific location within the building and/or property grounds where liquor is to be served and shall include within the application a site plan of the location to be licensed and a landscaping plan of the grounds and property surrounding the licensed premises. The area to be licensed shall be clearly delineated as well as the seating area, serving areas, exits and associated parking. 
The building inspector and the fire chief shall inspect the premises and issue findings to the town council on the status of the premises. Applicants shall, before being issued a license or a renewal, correct any violations of the building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes which may exist locally or statewide. 
The chief of police of the town shall review the completed application and make his report and/or recommendations to the board prior to hearing on the application. 
Applications for liquor licenses, when appropriate, must contain a letter "from the building inspector attesting to the conformity of the proposed location with applicable zoning regulations as well as conformity with the requirements of application Rhode Island General Laws. All applications shall also include current copies of certifications from a state-approved alcohol server training program for all persons who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, anyone serving in a supervisory capacity over those who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages and valet parking staff. 
(2)  Class A and B licenses. In addition, the following must be attached to applications for a class A or B license: 
a.  Certified copy of articles of incorporation if a corporation and certificate of good standing issued by the secretary of state; and if a partnership, copy of the partnership agreement and/or any documents pertinent thereto; 
b.  Tax certificate issued by the Rhode Island Division of Taxation; 
c.  Tax certificate issued by the treasurer/tax collector for the town; 
d.  State of Rhode Island Health Department Certificate; 
e.  A copy of the menu to be utilized by the licensee at the premises. 
(3)  Class D licenses. In addition, the following must be attached to applications for a class D license: 
Charter of the club applying for said license, whether it is a social, political or other private club of any nature, which charter sets forth, among other things, its notices of meetings and the manner of distribution of its funds. 
(4)  Class F licenses. Proof of the organization's status as a Rhode Island nonbusiness corporation, religious organization or political organization. 
(c)  Incomplete application. Applications not containing all necessary and pertinent information as required within the application and these rules and regulations shall be returned by the clerk to the applicant until the necessary, required and appropriate information and documentation has been received in full. 
(d)  Notice of application. Notice of application must be given in accordance with Rhode Island General Laws to all owners of property within 200 feet of the place of business seeking the application by regular mail. The names and addresses of the abutters are to be submitted by the applicant to the town clerk with the application. The notice is to be given by the clerk on behalf of the board and the cost thereof shall be paid by the applicant. The notice must state that remonstrants have a right to be heard and state the time and place of the hearing on the application. Written notice need not be given for temporary licenses. 
(e)  Advertising. The board must advertise the hearing time, date and place in a newspaper of general circulation serving the town once a week for two weeks. This requirement does not apply to temporary licenses. The initial advertisement must appear at least 14 days before the date of the scheduled hearing. 
(f)  Basis for denial. 
(1)  All available licenses authorized under the limits established by these rules and regulations have been issued and no license is currently available. 
(2)  Objection is made by owners of the greater part of the area within 200 feet of the premises where a class BV or BVL is to be issued (Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  3-7-19). If the owner or owners of the majority of this area object, then the board is without authority to issue the license. The area within 200 feet of the premises means the area within a line 200 feet in distance from every side of the proposed premises. 
(3)  Objection is made by owners of less than the greater part of the area within 200 feet of the premises where the license is to be issued. The board has discretionary authority to either issue or deny the license. 
(4)  Premises are located within 200 feet of a school or place of public worship (Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  3-7-19). The 200-foot measurement shall be made from that point of the proposed licensed place closest to the nearest improved point of the school or place of public worship. 
(5)  The board has general discretionary authority to deny a license based upon criteria which it has established and fairly applies as well as a violation of any of the rules and regulations as herein promulgated. The following criteria have been established by the board: 
a.  Compliance with all town ordinances and board rules, regulations, policies and procedures. 
b.  Citizen reaction to the application. 
c.  Proximity of location to residential area, commercial district, schools, churches and other establishments licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
d.  Impact on traffic and parking. 
e.  Impact on existing municipal services and requirements, if any, for new municipal services. 
f.  Impact on public safety, health and welfare. 
g.  Whether a license will be a major component of the business or an auxiliary use to an eating establishment. 
h.  The history of operations at the premises for which a license is requested. 
i.  Proportion of unsupervised patrons under 21 years of age. 
j.  Effect on neighborhood real estate values. 
k.  The performance of a criminal background investigation check of each applicant by the police department. 
l.  Qualification of the applicant to hold and operate the license. 
m.  Such other health and safety factors as individual applications may present. 
(6)  Failure of an applicant to comply with the requirements of Rhode Island General Laws, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Applicant must be a citizen and resident of Rhode Island, except that licenses may be issued to corporations in other states of the United States if they are authorized to transact business in Rhode Island (Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  3-5-10). 
b.  Corporate applicants with 25 stockholders or less must provide a list of the names and addresses of all stockholders. Officers and members of the board of directors and each person listed must be a suitable person to hold a license within the discretion of the board (Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  3-5-10). 
c.  Failure of a corporation to report the acquisition of a ten percent interest and any change of officers or directors within 30 days (Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  3-5-10). 
d.  Applicant has a criminal record or repeat violations of the alcoholic beverage laws (Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  3-5-10). 
(g)  Notice of suspension or revocation. Prior to the revocation or suspension of a license, the board shall send notice by mail to the licensee and given the licensee the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. The notice shall provide: 
(1)  The factual basis for the revocation or suspension. 
(2)  The date on which the show cause hearing is to be held. 
(Ord. of 1-11-94, art. IV; Ord. No. 2009-11, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 2.5-25. - License renewal application. 
(a)  All licenses, except class F and F-1 licenses, shall be renewed on or before December 1 of each year in accordance with these rules and regulations and state law. 
(b)  License renewal applications shall be submitted on the same application form as an original application except that the application shall indicate that it is a renewal application. The license renewal application should be submitted by October 1 to allow time for processing and advertising. Failure to submit a timely license renewal application shall be grounds for denying renewal of the license. 
(c)  A $25.00 nonrefundable processing fee shall be submitted with each application for renewal or a new license (Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  3-7-6). The full license fee will be due and payable upon approval and delivery of the license. 
(d)  Failure of the board to act on a license renewal application, timely submitted and fully completed and executed, shall cause the existing license to be extended until such time as the board acts on the application (Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  42-35-14). 
(e)  The holder of a license is entitled to have the license renewed, provided: 
(1)  The license renewal application is completed and timely submitted by October 1. 
(2)  The applicant meets all the criteria for issuance of the initial license. 
(3)  The board may refuse to renew the license for cause. Cause shall include, but is not limited to: 
a.  One or more incidents of disorderly conduct within the licensed premises or without the licensed premises if the conduct can be shown to have its genesis within the premises; 
b.  Failure to comply with state and local health and safety laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations; 
c.  Failure to comply with state and local alcoholic beverage laws, codes, rules and regulations; 
d.  Delinquency of applicant in payment of municipal taxes and user fees due the town or any of its enterprise entities; 
e.  Failure to furnish a tax certificate from the Rhode Island Division of Taxation. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  The licensing board, upon its own motion or upon the petition of a license holder or transferee who has filed an application for transfer of the license, if it is satisfied that the grounds which caused the imposition of the condition no longer exist, may in its sole discretion order their removal or modification. 
(f)  Notice. It shall not be necessary to provide notice by mail for abutting landowners for license renewals. 
(g)  Advertisement. The license renewal application shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. The advertisement shall provide the date and time of the meeting at which the renewal application shall be considered. 
(Ord. of 1-11-94, art. V) 
Sec. 2.5-26. - Relocation or transfer of BV or BVL licenses. 
(a)  Relocation means the moving of the license to a new location; transfer means conveyance of the BV and BVL licenses to another person (Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  3-5-19). Class D, F and F-1 licenses are not transferable. 
(b)  Notice of application of relocation must be treated simply as a new application in a new location. 
(c)  No transfer to another person shall be permitted unless indebtedness of the licensee incurred in the operation of the licensed premises shall be paid to or released by an objecting creditor. If the debt is disputed, the transfer may be permitted upon the sworn statement of the licensee that the debt is disputed and the dispute is not being raised to facilitate the transfer (Rhode Island G.L. 1956,  3-5-19). Creditors cannot object to a transfer resulting from a proceeding in bankruptcy, receivership, probate or other judicial process. 
(d)  No transfer to another business shall be permitted unless a certificate of good standing is issued by the State of Rhode Island Division of Taxation indicating all state taxes have been paid. 
(e)  The board has not adopted a policy of prohibiting all relocations or transfers, but has general discretionary authority to deny relocations or transfers of a license based upon the same criteria which it has established for issuance of an original license, balancing these criteria with due consideration for the existing license holder's financial interest in the license. 
(1)  Criteria for relocation applications. 
a.  Compliance with all town ordinances and rules and regulations of this board; 
b.  Citizen reaction to the application; 
c.  Proximity of location to residential area, commercial districts, schools, churches and other establishments licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
d.  Impact on traffic and parking; 
e.  Impact on existing, municipal services and requirements, if any, for new municipal services; 
f.  Whether a license will be a major component of the business at the new location or an auxiliary use to an eating establishment; 
g.  Impact on public safety, welfare and health; 
h.  The history of the operation at both the old premises and the new premises for which a license is requested; 
i.  The anticipated portion of unsupervised patrons under 21 years of age at the new location; 
j.  Effect on neighborhood real estate values. 
(2)  Criteria for transfer application. 
a.  Qualifications of transferee to hold and operate the license; 
b.  Compliance with all town ordinances, rules and regulations; 
c.  Such other public health and safety factors as each individual application may present. 
(Ord. of 1-11-94, art. VI) 
Sec. 2.5-27. - License restrictions. 
(a)  The board shall have the authority to impose reasonable restrictions upon a license, whether newly issued, renewed, transferred or relocated, provided the restrictions are designed to promote the reasonable control of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  After a hearing, the licensing board may impose such other or further conditions upon a license holder or transferee which may be necessary to promote the reasonable control of alcoholic beverages within the town or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the community. 
(c)  General rules. The licensing board for the town, in order to promote the reasonable control of alcoholic beverages within the community, hereby enacts the following conditions governing liquor licenses heretofore and hereafter issued, transferred or renewed within the town. These conditions shall supplement all other applicable local and state laws, regulations, rules and requirements governing liquor licenses: 
(1)  A license must be posted in plain view and shown to any authorized person on demand. In addition, the licensee shall post the name of the manager or person in charge of the licensed premises in plain view with the license at all times. 
(2)  The holder of a class B license shall post in a conspicuous and visible area a copy of the current menu utilized by the holder of the class B license, which menu shall be visible to patrons prior to entering the premises. 
(3)  The licensee shall designate the name and home address of two individuals, as representatives of the licensee, who shall be contacted by the police department or other safety office within the town, in the event of a complaint or other emergency. 
(4)  A telephone and a sufficient number of restroom facilities, accessible to patrons and in good working order, must be maintained by all holders of class BV, BVL, D and F licenses on the main floor within each licensed establishment. 
(5)  The licensee shall not allow the admittance of any person which would constitute overcrowding within the premises, based upon the seating capacity restrictions for the licensed premises. 
(6)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or dispensed after the legal closing hour. Pursuant to Rhode Island G. L. 1956,  7-7-7, the board establishes the following times for the dispensing of Class B alcoholic beverages: 
6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. 
The hours for dispensing and serving alcoholic beverages by holders of Class F licenses shall be governed by Rhode Island G. L. 1956,  3-7-14 and 3-7-14.1. 
(7)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages is allowed only on the licensed premises and is prohibited from the parking area of a class B, D or F license holder. 
(8)  No patron shall be admitted on the premises after the legal closing hour. 
(9)  All patrons shall leave the licensed premises within one-half hour after the legal closing hour. 
(10)  All employees shall leave the licensed premises within two hours after the required closing time. However, the owner and/or general manager or bond fide employee of any establishment may remain on the premises for a period of no longer than two hours after the legal closing hour for the purpose of cleanup and maintenance. The owner and/or general manager or bona fide employee may enter or be in an establishment at any time for a legitimate business purposes; provided, however, that the owner or general manager must first inform the police of his, her or their entering the licensed premises. Management and bona fide employees may not consume, dispense or open alcoholic beverages or beverage containers after the legal closing hour. No employee shall be allowed on the premises for maintenance purposes earlier than two hours before the legal opening, and during this period there shall be no consumption or dispensing of alcoholic beverages. 
(11)  In the event of extenuating circumstances, the licensee may request an extension of time from the commanding officer on duty at the West Warwick Police Department. Such an extension, if granted, shall be for a specified time period. 
(12)  Notwithstanding the above, routine, periodic services such as duct cleaning and carpet shampooing, the performance of which are outside the above hour restrictions, shall require the permission of the chief of police or his designee at least 48 hours in advance of the services. Such request shall be submitted in writing. Any emergency services shall be permitted with the permission of the police department, however, a written explanation of the incident shall be submitted to the chief of police within 24 hours after the incident. Abuse of this privilege shall not be tolerated. 
(13)  In all events, no person, other than an owner, manager, authorized employee, police and enforcement personnel shall be admitted to the premises after the required closing time. 
(14)  Each license holder shall have available for production upon request of an authorized public safety official a list of all management and employees authorized to be within the establishment after the legal closing hours during cleaning hours. Such list shall be conveniently available to all full-time and part-time management personnel for production upon request. Such listing shall be maintained and updated every 90 days or immediately upon a change in employees, whichever shall first occur. 
(15)  At all times while the premises are occupied, police and other enforcement officials must be admitted and granted access to the entire licensed premises, including the parking lot and other areas surrounding the building. No entrance prevention device such as bolts or other methods shall be allowed during business hours for the purpose of preventing other patrons or law enforcement officials from freely entering and exiting the premises. 
(16)  No licensee or any agent, servant, employee or representative thereof shall in any way interfere with the official duties or activities of any such police or other enforcement official. 
(17)  The licensed premises, associated parking and outside areas and the conduct of patrons thereon and therein shall be efficiently and affirmatively supervised by the licensee so as to preclude the annoyance or disturbance of the public and persons residing in the surrounding area and to insure that no patron, agent or employee is engaged in any unlawful activity. 
(18)  Parking for the licensed premises must comply with the ordinances of the town. The owner of the premises must provide for sufficient parking. These parking requirements may be satisfied by off-street parking if valet parking is provided by the licensee. 
(19)  With respect to all events and fund raisers sponsored by holders of a class F license, the licensee will be required to have on-duty police officers for the purpose of monitoring parking and pedestrian traffic to and from the event, should such monitoring be necessary in the discretion of the chief of police. 
(20)  Patrons shall not be allowed to congregate or remain in the associated parking or outside areas longer than is reasonably necessary for them to go to the licensed premises from their vehicles or to their vehicles from the licensed premises. 
(21)  Patrons shall not be allowed to consume any alcoholic beverage in the associated parking areas or in any areas on the property other than the licensed premises as delineated in accordance with these rules and regulations. In no event shall alcoholic beverages, or a container for alcoholic beverages as offered by the license holder to its patrons, be permitted to be removed from the interior of the premises of the license holder. 
(22)  All fights, disturbances of any nature, violence or any other violation of the law in the licensed premises or adjacent areas under the control of the licensee shall immediately be reported to the West Warwick Police Department by management or employees. Copies of police reports on serious repeat offenders shall be delivered to the licensing board. Such reporting by the management or employees shall be viewed positively when considering violations against the licensee. 
(23)  No licensee or any agent, servant, employee or representative thereof shall in any way interfere with the official duties or activities of any police or other enforcement official. All licensees, their agents, servants, employees or representatives shall promptly identify themselves to any police or other enforcement official when requested to do so. 
(24)  No licensee or any agent, servant, employee or representative thereof shall harass, either verbally or physically, any police or other enforcement official while performing his or her official duties on or within the licensed premises or adjacent parking lot or other areas surrounding the premises. 
(25)  Live or recorded entertainment shall not be permitted on any licensed premises unless the licensee has first obtained an entertainment license in compliance with all applicable ordinances, including zoning ordinances and the zoning map. 
(26)  No license holder shall permit any ordinance of the town to be violated on or within its premises by any agent, servant, employee or representative thereof. 
(27)  No loud noises, music, amplified or not, or other nuisance shall be permitted to annoy and disturb nearby residents or persons on adjoining streets or sidewalks. Such noise shall include, but shall not be limited to the disposal of trash. 
(28)  Should a license be issued for a premises located within or adjacent to a residential neighborhood, then in such event the licensee may be required to provide sound-screening to the premises in order to avoid noise disturbances within the residential neighborhood. In addition, the landscaping in the area of the licensed premises shall be maintained in conformity with the surrounding landscaping of the residential neighborhood. 
(29)  Upon repeated complaints by neighbors, license holders shall be required to keep all doors and windows closed year-round, and shall provide appropriate ventilation and air-controlling devices necessary to maintain such closed doors and windows. 
(30)  Parking areas and other outside areas associated with and used by the patrons and/or workers of the licensed premises shall be kept clean and free of litter and debris. 
(31)  The licensed premises shall comply with all zoning ordinances, including but not limited to all ordinances of the town pertaining to signs. In particular, the exterior of the licensed premises shall not contain neon signs of any type or kind; window signs shall be limited and shall take up a space of no more than a total of ten percent of the total window area and shall first be approved by the licensing board; there shall be no signs placed above the cornice or roofline, nor shall any inflatable symbols or structures, permanent or temporary, in connection with outdoor promotional advertising, be permitted upon the licensed premises. 
(32)  The licensing board may, if it deems reasonable and necessary for public health and safety, require a license holder at its own expense, to provide security personnel and/or off-duty police officers at the licensed premises during certain specified times. 
(33)  Holders of licenses issued by the licensing board of the town must notify the board through the town clerk within 60 days of any of the following changes occurring in the business of the licensee: 
a.  If a partnership: 
Any change in the partnership agreement, oral or written, whereby any interest, financial or otherwise, in the business is given to any person, firm or corporation not mentioned in the license application. 
b.  If a corporation having less than 25 stockholders: 
1.  Any pledge, transfer or contract to pledge or transfer stock of the licensed corporation to a person, firm or corporation not mentioned in the application for a license. 
2.  All newly elected officers or directors must be reported to the town council within 30 days. 
3.  Any acquisition by any person of more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock must be reported within 30 days. 
4.  Notice of any transfer of 50 percent or more of any class of corporate stock (whether such transfer takes place at one time or over the course of a year) shall be made to the licensing board of the town only by written application to the board subject to the procedures for a transfer of license. 
(34)  All management of the licensee and all persons who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, anyone serving in a supervisory capacity over those who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages and valet parking staff shall be required to attend a alcohol server training program approved by the Department of Business Regulation prior to commencement of serving alcoholic beverages and every 36 months thereafter. The licensee shall be required to produce certification of attendance for all said persons to the chief of police within 60 days of hire. Copies of said certification shall be kept on the premises and be available for inspection at any time by the chief of police or his/her designees. 
(35)  In addition to the provisions as set forth in section 2.5-28, the license holder shall not allow minors to loiter in or around the premises. The license holder shall not permit the serving of alcoholic beverages to minors nor shall they permit the serving of alcoholic beverages to persons who are intoxicated and in the licensee's judgment cannot reasonably be expected to be responsible for their own safety and the safety of others. 
(36)  The licensee shall not allow minors to be seated or dine in the area of the licensed premises designated as the "bar" area. 
(37)  Any attempt to utilize false identification must be immediately reported to the police. 
(38)  All license holders must strictly comply with the conditions pertaining to minors. In addition to penalties as mandated by state law and as set forth in section 2.5-28, violations shall be considered cause for immediate suspension or revocation of the license. 
(39)  The licensee shall review the rules and regulations set forth in these conditions with all employees, agents, servants and representatives thereof. 
(40)  Such restrictions and regulations shall be acknowledged by the license holder upon issuance of the license or any renewal thereof and shall be binding upon all persons to whom the license is transferred. Such licensee shall be bound and responsible for adherence hereto by all his/her employees, agents or assignees. 
(Ord. of 1-11-94, art. VII; Res. No. 210, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 2009-12, 10-6-09) 
Sec. 2.5-28. - Penalty for serving minors. 
(a)  Pursuant to G.L. 1956,  3-8-10, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold to any person under the age of 21 at the time of the purchase. All owners of alcoholic beverage establishments must utilize a so-called "minor's book" to register any individual purchasing or consuming alcoholic beverages whose appearance shall, to a prudent person, seem to raise doubt as to the veracity of a claim of being 21 years of age. Any attempt to utilize a false identification must be reported immediately to the police department. Minors shall not be permitted to loiter on or around the premises. 
    In addition to those penalties as established by G.L. 1956,  3-8-10 and 3-8-11.2, the following are minimum penalties for serving and/or selling to a minor (under age 21): 
(1)  Minor book(s) produced as evidence which shows regular, continuous and diligent use; licensee and/or employee have earned the server training certificate: 
a.  First offense of serving a minor-Warning on record; 
b.  Second offense (within two years of serving a minor)-Three days' license suspension. 
(2)  No evidence of continuous, regular or diligent use of minor book(s): 
a.  First offense of serving a minor-Three days' license suspension; 
b.  Second offense (within three years of serving a minor)-Six days' license suspension. 
(Ord. of 1-11-94, art. VIII) 
Sec. 2.5-29. - Penalties, general. 
    Notwithstanding any penalties as established by Rhode Island General Laws and in addition to the suspension or revocation of the liquor license, as set forth herein, any applicant who violates the provisions of the within rules and regulations and the conditions/restrictions as contained herein may be assessed a penalty in a sum not to exceed $500.00 for a first offense and a sum not to exceed $1,000.00 for any subsequent offense. Pursuant to G.L. 1956,  3-5-21, any offense committed by a licensee three years after a previous offense shall be considered a first offense. 
(Ord. of 1-11-94, art. IX) 
Sec. 2.5-30. - Amendment. 
    These rules, regulations, policies and procedures of the Town of West Warwick Licensing Board may be amended at any time and from time to time by the board, by a majority vote, provided that any amendments thereto shall not be acted upon any sooner than the meeting immediately following the meeting at which such amendment(s) was introduced. Amendments may be submitted by a single member, or by petition of any citizen of the town or license holder under the jurisdiction of the board. 
Date of Proposal: _____ 
/s/   
      Board Member   Dated Adopted: _____ 
Acknowledgement of License Holder: 
    The undersigned, holder of a class _______ license issued by the licensing board of the Town of West Warwick acknowledges the rules, regulations, policies and procedures as set forth within. The undersigned, as licensee, further acknowledges that said rules, regulations, policies and procedures as set forth herein are binding upon the licensee and the licensee is herewith responsible for adherence of these rules and regulations, policies and procedures by all its employees, agents and assignees. 
Licensee: 
_____
_____
_____
Dated: _____ 
(Ord. of 1-11-94, art. X) 
Chapter 3 - AMUSEMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - License authorized for liquor establishments permitting dancing. 
    All class B liquor establishments where dancing is permitted are hereby authorized to obtain a license from the town clerk in accordance with G.L. 1956,  3-7-7, as amended, and G.L. 1956,  5-22-3, as amended. 
(Res. of 11-20-69) 
Secs. 3-2-3-11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - THEATRICAL PERFORMANCES, SHOWS, EXHIBITIONS AND DANCE/LIVE BANDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-6, adopted April 15, 2008, amended the Code by renaming art. II. Formerly, art. II was entitled "Theatrical Performances, Show and Exhibitions." 

Sec. 3-12. - License required. 
    No person shall publicly or for pay or for any profit or advantage to himself, exhibit or promote any theatrical performance, rope, wire, belly or other form of dancing, or other show, carnival, circus, festival, performance or exhibition, or conduct, engage in or promote any wrestling, boxing or sparring match or exhibition, nor shall any person, for any pecuniary profit or advantage to himself, promote any public roller skating rinks or halls, or give any public dance or ball without first obtaining a license therefor from the town council. 
(Ord. of 11-6-69,  1; Res. of 9-7-82) 
Sec. 3-13. - Fees and requirements. 
    All application for licenses included in the provisions of section 3-12 shall be filed with the town clerk, accompanied by license fees to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council and the following requirements: 
(1)  All initial applications require that the applicant provide a certified list of all abutting property owners, with full mailing addresses, within 200 feet of the establishment property. The town clerk shall provide written notification by first class mail, of the date and time of the town council meeting where the application shall be heard. Successive renewals shall not require written notification. 
(2)  All initial applications require that the applicant provide a certified list of all abutting property owners, with full mailing addresses, within 200 feet of the establishment property. The town clerk shall provide written notification by first class mail, of the date and time of the town council meeting where the application shall be heard. Successive renewals shall not require written notification. 
(Ord. of 11-6-69,  4; Res. of 9-7-82; Ord. No. 2008-6, 4-15-08; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 3-14. - Health, safety of premises. 
    No license required by this article shall be granted to conduct a show, exhibition or theatrical performance in any place that presents a danger to public health and safety. 
(Ord. of 11-6-69,  2) 
Secs. 3-15-3-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Resolution of October 19, 1982, provided that  3-15, relative to publication of notice of application as derived from a resolution adopted September 7, 1982, be deleted. 
ARTICLE III. - BINGO 

Sec. 3-25. - Authority. 
    In accordance with G.L. 1956,  11-19-30 in chapter 11-19, entitled "Gambling and Lotteries," authorizing the licensing and conducting of the game commonly called "bingo" or any other similar game, the regulations contained in this article are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-26. - License required. 
    Any religious, charitable, fraternal, civic, educational and veterans' organization desiring to carry on or conduct by its own members, serving without any compensation, the game commonly called "bingo" or "beano" or substantially the same game under any other name, in connection with which prizes are offered or awarded, shall first obtain a license therefor to be issued by the town clerk. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-27. - Contents of license application. 
    The application for a license under this article shall set forth the name of the organization, the names and residence addresses of the principal officers and persons conducting such game, and such other terms and conditions as the town council may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-28. - Frequency; fee; date to be specified. 
    Any game commonly called "bingo" or "beano" or substantially the same game under any other name, required to be licensed under this article shall be conducted not more than once in any period of one calendar week under a license hereby authorized to be granted for a fee to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council for a specific date by the town council. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 3-29. - Limitations on individual prizes. 
    No cash prize in excess of $100.00 and no merchandise prize of a greater retail value than $100.00 shall be offered or awarded. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-30. - Sum of prizes; limit on total prizes. 
    Prizes may be offered or awarded in the form of cash and merchandise, provided that the combined amount of retail value of such merchandise so offered or awarded as prizes shall not exceed the sum of $900.00 in any one night. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-31. - Limitations waived for fairs, carnivals, etc. 
    In case of a fair, carnival, bazaar or similar activity on successive days, the limitations as to one game during each calendar week, and the limit on the value of prizes which may be awarded in one day shall not apply. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-32. - Use of proceeds. 
    The entire proceeds of the charges for admission to and participation in a bingo game, after deducting expenses for rent, heat, light, prizes and equipment and other reasonable expenses, are applied solely to the purposes of such organization. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-33. - Premises; age of participants. 
    A game licensed hereunder shall be conducted only on the premises where such organization conducts its regular meetings. No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted to participate in such game. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-34. - Report required after game. 
    Each organization conducting a game hereunder shall, within five days after the holding of such game, render to the town clerk a full and complete report of its gross receipts and expenditures resulting from the holding of such game, and showing the net proceeds resulting therefrom for use by such organization. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-35. - Annual report of clerk. 
    The town clerk shall annually, in the month of January, report to the town council on the reports received by him during the preceding year. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-36. - Financial records. 
    The organization conducting a game hereunder shall maintain financial records of the conduct of such games, which records shall be open for inspection and audit at reasonable times by the town council and its duly authorized employees and agents. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Sec. 3-37. - Denial, revocation of license. 
    Failure to comply strictly with the provisions of this article and of the terms and conditions of the town council shall be deemed sufficient cause for denial or revocation of a license issued hereunder, and upon denial or revocation of such license, such organization shall be ineligible to be licensed for a period of 90 days from such denial or revocation. 
(Ord. of 8-1-65,  1) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals on sidewalks,  16-12. 

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- A Res. of July 17, 1984, repealed former  4-4-4-6, pertaining generally to animals and fowl. The former provisions were derived from Comp. Ords. ch. 6,  2; Comp. Ords. ch. 35,  1, 3; Comp. Ords. ch. 37,  1; and a Res. of July 7, 1980. 

Secs. 4-1-4-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- A Res. of July 17, 1984, repealed former  4-11-4-15 and 4-26-4-32, pertaining to dog control and restraint, and added  4-11-4-27 and 4-40-4-47, pertaining to animal control and animal impoundment. The repealed sections derived from Res. of May 7, 1980; Ord. of September 1, 1976,  3-7; Ord. of October 2, 1978; Ord. of November 23, 1971,  1-5. Subsequently, the Res. of July 17, 1984, has been superseded by a Res. of October 2, 1984, which has enacted new  4-11-4-27 and 4-40-4-47. 

Sec. 4-11. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
    Ambient temperature. The temperature surrounding the animal. 
    Barnyard animals. Cows, horses, swine, ducks, chickens, geese, sheep, etc. 
    Dog officer. The person or persons employed by the town as its enforcement officer and shall include any police officer, and special constable of the town. 
    Dog pound. Any premises by action of the town council for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large or in violation of this chapter. 
    Exposed to rabies. An animal has been exposed to rabies within the meaning of this chapter if it has been bitten by, or been exposed to an animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
    Kennel. A place or establishment other than a pound or shelter, where animals not owned by the proprietor are sheltered, fed and watered in return for a fee or the operation of a commercial business of breeding, buying and selling dogs and/or cats to the public. 
    Owner. Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or dogs, cat or cats. 
    Spayed female. Any bitch or queen which has been operated upon to prevent conception. 
    Under restraint. A dog is under restraint within the meaning of this chapter when it is: 
(a)  Leashed; 
(b)  Tied on its owner's property with a rope or chain; 
(c)  Within its owner's home; 
(d)  Within a motor vehicle; 
(e)  Within an enclosure suitable enough to prevent its escape. 
(Res. of 10-2-84; Res. No. 96-122, 6-4-96; Res. No. 99-266,  11, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2017-8 , 3-21-17; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17) 
Sec. 4-12. - Exemptions from chapter. 
    Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except where expressly stated. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-13. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the dog officer of the town and any police officer of the town. Said officers may also bring a complaint under G.L. 1956,  4-13-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-14. - Filing complaints. 
    In the event the dog officer, as defined in section 4-11, witnesses the violation of any provisions of this chapter, then in such event, he may file a complaint on behalf of the town under the provisions of this chapter. All other complaints for violations of the provisions of this chapter, as made any other person, shall be made to the dog officer. Said complaint may be made orally, provided, however, that prior to the initiation of any court action, said complaint shall be reduced to writing, signed by the complainant, on forms as provided by the dog officer for the town. 
(Res. of 10-2-84; Res. No. 97-87, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 4-15. - Authority to enter premises, take up animals. 
    In the discharge of the duties imposed by this chapter, the dog officer or any police officer or special constable of this town shall have the authority at all reasonable times to enter upon any premises (but such authority should not include the right to enter any residence on such premises) to examine a dog or other animal which is allegedly in violation of a provision of this chapter. Such officer shall have the further authority to take possession of any such dog or other animal and remove it from such premises. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-16. - Interference with, attempting to remove animal from, dog officer, police officer. 
    No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the dog officer or any police officer of this town in the performance of his duties, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the dog officer or any police officer, except as herein provided. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-17. - Records to be kept. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the dog officer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into his custody. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the dog officer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to him and his investigation of the same. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the dog officer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all monies belonging to the town, which records shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by such persons responsible for similar records of the town and which shall be audited by the town annually in the same manner as other town records are audited. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-18. - Restraint of dogs required at all times. 
    The owner shall keep his dog under restraint at all times. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-19. - Dogs prohibited on school property; exception. 
    No dogs are allowed in school yards or on school property or on any town owned recreational facility property except so-called service and/or therapy dogs. 
(Res. of 10-2-84; Ord. No. 2017-8 , 3-21-17) 
Sec. 4-20. - Dogs prohibited in stores, eating places; exception. 
    No dogs are allowed in any stores or eating places within the town, except so called service and/or therapy dogs. 
(Res. of 10-2-84; Ord. No. 2017-8 , 3-21-17) 
Sec. 4-21. - Maximum number of dogs and cats permitted per residence; exception; penalty. 
(a)  No owner, lessee or occupant of a residence shall keep or permit to be kept more than a total of three dogs or cats or a combination thereof, except in the following instances: 
(1)  Kittens under the age of six months. 
(2)  Puppies under six months of age. 
(3)  Persons operating a kennel licensed by the town council and otherwise lawfully conducted. 
(b)  Upon being apprised of a violation of subsection (a), the dog officer shall send written notice of the violation by registered mail to the owner, lessee or occupant informing them of the right to apply to the town council for kennel license. If more than 14 days have passed after the notice has been sent and no application of a license has been received by the town and the owner, lessee or occupant continues to own, lease or occupy property in violation of subsection (a), then prosecution for violation of this section may be commenced. 
(c)  Any person found in violation of subsection (a) shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00. Any person who having obtained a permit in accordance with subsection (b), violates the terms of that permit shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00. 
(Res. of 10-2-84; Res. No. 96-122, 6-4-96; Res. No. 97-87, 4-1-97) 
Sec. 4-21.1 - Intact cats. 
(a)  Pursuant to G.L.  4-24-3 no person shall own or harbor any cat over the age of six months which has not been spayed or neutered, unless such person has adopted a cat from a licensed releasing agency as defined by G.L.  4-19-2 and is subject to the spaying and neutering requirements of G.L.  4-19-16 or holds either a license to keep an un-altered cat, or a license and permit for breeding cats issued by the town clerk, or unless the caretaker states that, due to age, health or illness it would be inappropriate to spay or neuter the cat and having in their possession a letter from a licensed veterinarian stating such, which shall be provided to the town clerk and dog officer. 
(b)  An "intact" permit shall be issued for an unaltered cat if the owner signs a written statement that such animal will not be allowed to breed unless the owner has first obtained a breeding permit. An "intact" permit shall be issued by the town clerk to an individual who refuses to spay or neuter their cat. The fee for such permit shall be set by resolution of the town council. All funds from "intact" permit shall be deposited in the town's spay/neuter account. 
(c)  Any person providing care and sustenance for an uninterrupted period of 60 days or longer shall be deemed the owner of such animal and shall adhere to the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall have no more than thirty days to comply with the provisions of this section. The animal control officer shall inform persons subject to the availability of reduced cost or free spay/neuter programs available for low income persons and any programs sponsored by local humane organizations offering low cost spaying or neutering. If the animal is not spayed or neutered within 30 days of the notice, the owner shall be subject to a fine of $75.00 for each 30 days the animal is not spayed or neutered. Funds generated pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the spay/neuter account of the town to be used to fund low-cost spay/neuter programs in accordance with R.I.G.L.  4-24-13. The West Warwick Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction for the enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17; Ord. No. 2017-20 , 8-1-17) 
Sec. 4-22. - Confinement of certain dogs and other animals; impoundment; reclamation. 
(a)  The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure every fierce, dangerous, or vicious dog and not take such dog out of such building or secure enclosure unless such dog is securely muzzled. 
(b)  Every female dog/cat or other animal in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel in such a manner that such female dog/cat or other animal cannot come in contact with another dog/cat or animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(c)  Any animal found in violation of the foregoing subsection of this section may be impounded by the dog officer and may not be reclaimed by owners unless such reclamation be authorized by any court having jurisdiction. 
(d)  Any dog or other animal may, the first time it is impounded for being a public nuisance, be reclaimed as provided in this chapter but may not be reclaimed when so impounded on second or subsequent occasions unless such reclamation is authorized by a court having jurisdiction in the matter. 
(e)  When, in the judgment of the dog officer or any police officer in this town, an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be reclaimed. 
(Res. of 10-2-84; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17) 
Sec. 4-23. - Wild animals within city limits; destruction of escaped wild animal authorized. 
    No wild animal may be kept within the town limits except under such conditions as shall be fixed by the town council; provided, however, that wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses, zoos and educational institutions. Any wild animal which escapes and is found at large may be destroyed by the dog officer or any police officer in the town. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-24. - Abatement of nuisance animals and conditions. 
(a)  The keeping or harboring of any dog, other animal or fowl, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise beyond the confines of an enclosed shelter or residence disturbs or annoys any person or neighborhood is unlawful and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  In addition to those animals prohibited by the state general law, the keeping of specific creatures is designated as a public nuisance: fowl, poultry except hens as hereinafter provided for in section 4-24.1, rabbits, pigeons, poisonous snakes, pigs, minks and any similar species which carry or may carry and spread diseases or otherwise may be considered unsanitary or present a nuisance or hazard to the general public, except for the following: 
(1)  Pet stores that are in compliance with all applicable local ordinances and state laws; 
(2)  Agricultural enterprises that are in compliance with all applicable local ordinance and state laws; 
(3)  Research facilities that are in compliance with all applicable local ordinance and state laws; 
(4)  Creatures kept by special permit approved by the town council, with conditions as established by the town council; 
(5)  Rabbits and pigeons for personal enjoyment and/or use. 
(c)  Trespass by any animal on private or public property so as to damage or destroy property of value is prohibited. 
(d)  Animals otherwise lawfully permitted on private property and their associated shelters, pens, exterior and interior areas shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. Animals deemed by the dog officer to be at risk as to their health, safety or welfare may be impounded; further, return of said animals to their owner may be denied if neglect or cruelty charges are pending, or, if it is determined by the dog officer that the return of such animals will cause a danger to said animal in any manner. 
(e)  Violations of this section are enforceable by the issuance of a civil infraction ticket by the dog officer, to the owner of the property on which the infraction occurs and/or the owner of the animal(s). 
    Pursuant to G.L.  4-13-1, any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished by the payment of a fine, not exceeding $15.00 for the first offense and not exceeding $50.00 for the second offense within a year and not exceeding $100.00 for the third and any subsequent offense within a year. In addition to the fines as established herein, any animal designated as a nuisance may be impounded by the dog officer as otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
(f)  Impounded animals that are designated as public nuisances, other than dogs or cats, may not be reclaimed unless such reclamation is authorized by the court of competent jurisdiction. In cases where reclamation is not authorized, the dog officer shall provide the owner of the animal, if known, with a written seven days notice. The owner shall have seven days from the issuance of such notice to file for injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction, after which the absence of such relief shall authorize the dog officer to dispose of the animal in a manner which is both humane and lawful. The dog officer shall keep written records of such disposal, including the type of animal, date, method and location of same. 
Any dogs and cats impounded for violation of this section shall be reclaimed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and section 4-22 thereof. 
(Res. of 10-2-84; Res. No. 97-87, 4-1-97; Res. No. 99-266,  1, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2012-6, 7-17-12; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17) 
Sec. 4-24.1. - Keeping of hens. 
(a)  The keeping of hens shall be subject to the following restrictions and regulations: 
(1)  The keeping of hens shall be permitted in residential districts only and shall be on a lot containing a dwelling in which dwelling the owner of the hens must be a resident. 
(2)  There shall be no more than 12 hens per lot. 
(3)  The keeping of any roosters is strictly prohibited. This provision of this section shall be strictly enforced. 
(4)  All hens must be provided with both a hen house and a fenced outdoor enclosure subject to the following conditions, restrictions and regulations: 
a.  The hen house must be covered, predator resistant and well ventilated. 
b.  The hen house must provide a minimum of two square feet per hen. 
c.  The hen house must be kept clean, dry and sanitary at all times. 
d.  The hen house must be located on a permeable surface that prevents waste run-off. 
e.  The hen house must provide the hens with adequate protection from the elements and inclement weather and provide for the hens good health and prevent any unnecessary or unjustified suffering. 
f.  The enclosure fence must adequately contain the hens and provide security from intrusion by any predators or animals, wild or domesticated. 
g.  The fenced enclosure must be kept clean and sanitary at all times. 
h.  All manure must be composted in enclosed bins. 
i.  No food shall be placed in the open for the feeding of the hens except in such containers as will prevent the scattering of such food upon the ground. 
(b)  All hens shall be subject to the nuisance provisions of section 4-24 and must be confined in the hen house between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2012-6, 7-17-12; Ord. No. 2017-8 , 3-21-17) 
Sec. 4-25. - Dead animals, burial. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bury or cause to be buried the body of any horse, ox, mule, cow, bull, sheep, dog or other large animal within the town limits, unless every part and portion of such body shall be at least three feet below the natural surface of the ground where the same is buried, and such burial is done in conformity with the requirements of the state health department. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-25.1 - (R.I.G.L.  4-13-15) title transfer or disposal of dogs and cats. 
    The animal control officer shall charge a fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the town council in and amount as proscribed by the general laws of the state, to be paid by the owner of any dog or cat taken to the animal shelter for the purpose of transferring title or for the disposal of said animal according to law. 
(Res. No. 99-266,  10, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-46, adopted October 1, 2013, amended  4-25.1 to read as set out herein. Previously  4-25.1 was titled title transfer or disposal of dogs and cats. 
Sec. 4-26. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter may be punished by the payment of a fine not exceeding $15.00 for the first offense within a calendar year, not exceeding $50.00 for the second offense within a calendar year, and not exceeding $100.00 for the third and each subsequent offense within a calendar year, to be recovered for the use of the town. 
(Res. of 10-2-84; Res. No. 99-266,  2, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17) 
Sec. 4-27. - Authority of police to accept fines, etc.; failure of offender to dispose of charge. 
(a)  There is hereby created a division of animal rescue to implement and administer this chapter. The dog officer shall be the executive agent in charge of this article and shall be directly responsible to the chief of police and the town council. 
(b)  The police department is hereby authorized to receive the fine directly from any person charged with a violation of section 4-5 of the Code of Ordinances of the town, and such money so received and collected shall be turned over by the police to the operational account of the division of animal rescue. All such charges, records, payments and dispositions shall be entered forthwith in the books of the division of animal rescue. In the event such offender refuses or neglects to dispose of such charge within seven days of notification thereof, then he shall be brought before the third division district court for trial and for such disposition of such case as such court may decide to be meet and proper; in which case, the provisions of the General Laws of 1956, as amended, relating to fines and the disposition thereof, shall prevail. 
(c)  All persons charged with three violations of the provisions of this chapter within a one-year period shall not be entitled to pay the fine imposed herein directly to the police department and shall be summoned to appear before a justice of the third division district court. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-28. - Vicious dogs. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Registration of vicious dogs (vicious dogs as defined in R.I.G.L.  4-13.1 et. seq. in which a dog is ruled vicious after a hearing [ 4-13.1-3]). No vicious dog shall be licensed for any licensing period commencing after October 3, 1999, unless the owner or keeper of such vicious dog shall meet the following requirements pursuant to R.I.G.L.  4-13.1-3: 
(1)  The owner or keeper shall present to the town clerk proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00, covering any damage or injury which may be caused by the vicious dog during the 12-month period for which licensing is sought, which policy contains a provision requiring the town to be named as additional insured for the sole purpose of the town clerk to be notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance. 
(2)  The owner or keeper shall have the licensing number assigned to such vicious dog, or such other identification number as the town clerk shall determine, tattooed upon such vicious dog by a licensed veterinarian or tattooist on the upper inner lip or upper left rear thigh of the vicious dog. The dog officer may, in his or her discretion, designate the particular location of the tattoo. Said number shall be noted on the town licensing files for such vicious dog if it is different from the license number of such vicious dog. For the purposes of this section, "tattoo" shall be defined as any permanent numbering of a vicious dog by means of indelible or permanent ink with the number designated by the licensing authority or any other permanent, acceptable method of tattooing. The town clerk shall affix a two-letter prefix to the identification number in order to identify the town in which the dog was initially licensed. 
(3)  The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his or her premises warning that there is a vicious dog on the premises. Said sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public highway. 
(4)  The owner or keeper shall sign a statement attesting that: 
a.  The owner or keeper shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance required by this section during the 12-month period for which licensing is sought, unless the owner or keeper shall cease to own or keep the vicious dog prior to expiration of such license; 
b.  The owner or keeper shall, on or prior to the effective date of such license for which application is being made, have a fenced enclosure for the vicious dog on the property where the vicious dog will be kept or maintained; and 
c.  The owner or keeper shall notify the licensing authority within 24 hours if a vicious dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a human or has died or has been sold or given away. If the vicious dog has been sold or given away, the owner or keeper shall also provide the licensing authority the name, address and telephone number of the new owner or keeper. 
(5)  The dog officer may make whatever inquiry he or she deems necessary to ensure compliance with this section and he or she is empowered to seize and impound an vicious dog whose owner or keeper fails to comply with this section. 
(6)  In the event that the owner or keeper of the dog refuses to surrender the animal to the dog officer, the dog officer may request a police officer to obtain a search warrant from a justice of the district court and to seize the dog upon execution of the warrant. 
(c)  Rhode Island General Laws incorporated. In addition to those provisions of Rhode Island General Law as adopted in this amended ordinance, the town does hereby accept the provisions of R.I.G.L. Title 4, Chapter 13.1, as amended, and does hereby incorporate them within this Code. 
(Res. of 9-13-88; Res. No. 99-236, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 2013-53, 12-17-13) 
Sec. 4-29. - License and registration required. 
    All dogs kept, harbored or maintained by their owners in the town shall be licensed and registered if over six months of age, provided however, that thoroughbred dogs kept in accordance with the provisions of R.I.G.L.  4-13-10 shall not be required to be licensed. Dog licenses shall be issued by the town clerk upon payment of a license fee to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council as proscribed by the general laws of the state for each neutered male or spayed female and for each unneutered male and unspayed female. There shall be a surcharge for each dog license, in an amount to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council, in an amount as required by the Rhode Island General Laws, to be deposited in a spay/neuter account to fund low-cost spay/neuter programs. The owner shall state, at the time the application is made for such license and upon forms provided for such purposes, his name and address, and the name, color, breed and sex of each and every dog owned or kept by him. The provisions of this section shall not be intended to apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the town, nor to dogs brought into the town for the purpose of participating in any dog show. No fee will be charged for service and therapy dogs. K-9 and/or other dogs owned by any police department or law enforcement officer and used in the performance of police work shall be exempt from this provision. 
(Res. of 9-13-88; Res. No. 99-266,  3, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2010-11, 12-21-10; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 2017-8 , 3-21-17; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17; Ord. No. 2018-9 , 4-24-18) 
Sec. 4-30. - R.I.G.L.  4-13-15, tag and collar. 
    Upon payment of the license fee, the clerk shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. The shape of the dog tag shall be changed every year and shall have stamped thereon the year for which it was issued and the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed and shall see that the tag and collar are constantly worn. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issue by the clerk upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of the license fee for the current year and the payment of a fee to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council as proscribed by the general laws of the state for such duplicate or for a replacement tag. Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another, and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee because of the death of the dog or the owner's leaving town before the expiration of the license period. 
(Res. of 9-13-88; Res. No. 99-266,  4, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 4-31. - Rabies; notice. 
    If a dog or cat is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by a dog or other animal suspected of having rabies, such dog or cat shall be confined by a leash, chain or other means on the owner's premises and shall be placed under the observation of a veterinarian at the expense of the owner for a period of two weeks. The owner shall notify the dog officer of the fact that his dog or cat has been exposed to rabies; and, at his/her discretion, the dog officer is empowered to have a dog or cat removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary hospital and there placed under observation for a period of two weeks at the expense of the owner. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog or cat has rabies to allow such dog or cat to be taken off his premises or beyond the limits of the town without the written permission of the dog officer. Every owner, or other person, upon ascertaining that a dog or cat is rabid, shall immediately notify the dog officer or a policeman who shall either remove the dog or cat to the pound or summarily destroy it. 
(Res. of 9-13-88; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17) 
Sec. 4-31.1. - R.I.G.L.  4-13-31, vaccination. 
    The owner or keeper of a dog or cat shall have the animal vaccinated not earlier than three months of age nor later than four months of age and at regular intervals thereafter as prescribed by the regulations of the rabies control board, but at no time to exceed recommendations made by the most current compendium of animals rabies control. No dog or cat shall be licensed unless such dog or cat shall have been vaccinated or immunized in the manner set forth in this section. 
(Res. No. 99-266,  6, 10-5-99) 
Sec. 4-31.2. - Use of approved vaccine; certification. 
    The vaccination or immunization referred to in this article shall be by a vaccine approved by the state department of health or the rabies control board and shall be certified to by a licensed veterinarian. Said certificate shall meet the minimum standards approved by the rabies control board, which shall include: the veterinarian's name, the veterinarian's practice name, address, and telephone number; the pet owner's name and address; the pet's name, species, age, coloration, and sex; the rabies vaccine manufacturer's name; the date of inoculation and the signature of the doctor who administered or directed the administration of the rabies vaccine. For dogs and cats, there shall be a record kept which lists the number of the rabies tag issued in conjunction with the rabies vaccination certificate, together with such other information as may reasonably be required by the animal control officer or the veterinarian administering the same. 
(Res. No. 99-266,  7, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17) 
Sec. 4-31.3. - Owning, etc., unvaccinated dog or cat. 
    No license shall be issued for any dog required to be licensed in the town unless the person making application therefore shall first present to the town clerk a current certificate of vaccination or inoculation, as provided in this article for the dog for which such license is requested. Such certificate shall certify that the dog for which the license is to be issued has been properly vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Res. No. 99-266,  8, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17) 
Sec. 4-31.4. - R.I.G.L.  4-13-15, impounding unvaccinated dogs or cats. 
    Any dog or cat over four months old found within the limits of the town without evidence that such dog or cat has been vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be impounded by the animal control officer or other authorized person for a period not exceeding five days, during which time such dog or cat may be returned to its owner upon proof of ownership, vaccination of the dog or cat, and payment by such owner of the $5.00 per day fees. At the expiration of the 15-day period above mentioned, any dog not so claimed by its owner shall be disposed of in accordance with section 4-47. 
(Res. No. 99-266,  9, 10-5-99) 
Sec. 4-32. - Penalties. 
    Any owner found violating any provision of sections 4-28 through 4-31 shall be punished by a fine of $200.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense or be imprisoned for not less than ten days nor more than 30 and/or be subject to confiscation of the animal which is the basis of the violation. 
(Res. of 9-13-88; Res. No. 99-266,  5, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17) 
Sec. 4-33. - Domestic animal waste; removal. 
(a)  Duties to dispose. It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a domestic animal to remove and dispose of any feces left by his or her domestic animal on any sidewalk, street, park or other public area, or any other property owned by the town and property owned privately by any person or persons other than property of the owner of the domestic animal. 
(b)  Trespassing. No person who owns, possesses or controls a domestic animal shall allow said animal to go upon property privately owned by any person or persons other than the property of the owner of the domestic animal. In the event a domestic animal does go upon privately owned property, the provisions of this ordinance relating to "duties to dispose" shall apply. In the event that the person who owns, possesses or controls the domestic animal fails to comply with the provisions of this ordinance then in such event, the private property owner may, if he or she so desires, file a complaint with the dog officer for the town, and the owner of the domestic animal shall be fined in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(c)  Duty to possess means of removal. No person who owns, possesses or controls such domestic animal shall appear with such domestic animal on any sidewalk, street, park or other public area, or any other property owned by the town without the means of removal of any feces left by such domestic animal. 
(d)  Method of removal and disposal. For the purpose of this section, the means of removal shall be any tool, implement or other device carried for the purpose of picking up and containing such feces, unexposed to said person or the public. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting such feces to a place suitable and regularly reserved for the disposal of human feces. 
(e)  Fines for violation. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $10.00 for the first offense; not exceeding $15.00 for the second offense within a year; not exceeding $25.00 for the third and any subsequent offenses within a year, which fine shall be recovered for the use by the town. 
(f)  Exemption. This section shall not apply to a licensed dog accompanying any handicapped person who, by reason of his or her handicap, is physically unable to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Res. No. 97-65, 3-4-97) 
Sec. 4-34. - Kennel license. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate a kennel as defined herein, without first obtaining a license to operate said establishment by the state director of environmental management, as provided in G.L. 1956,  4-19-6; and obtaining a license to operate said establishment as issues by the town council. 
(b)  Kennel permitted. No license shall be issued by the town council, to operate a kennel on premises other than those designated by the zoning ordinances. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who shall operate a kennel without a current valid license as issued by the town director of environmental management and the town, shall upon conviction of the first offense be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.00 and for the second offense by a fine not to exceed $100.00, pursuant to  4-19-9 of Rhode Island General Laws. 
(d)  A kennel license approved by the town council shall be issued by the town clerk upon payment of a fee to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(e)  (G.L.  4-13-10) A kennel license for thoroughbred dogs approved by the town council shall be issued by the town clerk upon payment of the fee to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council as proscribed by the general laws of the state. Every kennel license is for a period not exceeding one year and expires on the 1 st day of April. Any person without a kennel license who establishes or keeps a kennel shall be fined not exceeding $5.00 for each day the kennel is kept. 
(f)  Pursuant to G.L.  4-24-4 a permit shall be issued for the breeding of cats upon payment of a fee to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council as prescribed by the general laws of the state. The breeding of cats pursuant to such permit shall be in accordance with the provisions of G.L.  4-24-4. 
(Res. No. 96-122, 6-4-96; Ord. No. 2012-6, 7-17-12; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17) 
Sec. 4-35. - Animal sheltering and confinement. 
(a)  No owner or person shall allow a dog to be kept outside tethered, penned, caged or otherwise confined for more than 30 minutes when the ambient temperature is beyond the industry standard for weather safety scale as set forth in the most recently adopted version of Tufts Animal Care and Conditions Scale (TACC). 
(b)  Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  4-1-3.2, animal confinement in motor vehicles prohibited: 
(1)  No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner that places it in a life or health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or other protection from such heat or cold. In order to protect the health and safety of an animal, the dog officer or police officer who has probable cause to believe that this section is being violated shall have authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the circumstances after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or the person responsible. 
(2)  The dog officer or police officer may take all steps that are reasonable and necessary to remove an animal from a motor vehicle if the animal's safety, health or well-being appears to be in immediate danger from heat, cold or lack of adequate ventilation and the conditions could reasonably be expected to cause extreme suffering or death. 
(3)  A dog officer or police officer who removes an animal in accordance with this section shall, in a secure and conspicuous location on or within the motor vehicle, leave written notice bearing the dog officer or police officer's name, office and the address of the location where the animal may be claimed. The owner may claim the animal only after payment of all fines and charges that have accrued for the maintenance, care, medical treatment and impoundment of the animal. 
(4)  A dog officer or police officer who removes an animal from a motor vehicle pursuant to this section is immune that otherwise might result from the removal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-8 , 3-21-17) 
Secs. 4-36-4-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note- See the editor's note at art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 4-40. - Disposition of animals other than dogs found not under restraint. 
    Any animal, other than a dog, found not under restraint within the town limits may be impounded or disposed of according to law when such action is required either to protect the animal or to protect the residents of the town. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-41. - Impoundment of dogs not under restraint. 
    Any dog found not under restraint shall be taken up by the dog officer and impounded in the shelter designated as the town dog pound. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-42. - Citation in lieu of impoundment. 
    When dogs are found not under restraint, and their ownership is known to the dog officer, such dogs need not be impounded; but such officer may cite the owners of such dogs to appear in court to answer to charges of violation of this article. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-43. - Notice of impoundment. 
    Immediately upon impounding any dog, the dog officer shall make every possible reasonable effort to notify the owner of such dog so impounded and inform such owner of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such dog. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-44. - Impoundment period. 
    Dogs impounded pursuant to this article in the animal pound may be confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than five days. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-45. - Redemption; generally. 
    The owner of any impounded dog or animal shall be entitled to regain possession of such beast, except as otherwise provided, upon the payment of an impoundment fee as established by the town council; said fee shall be in addition to any pecuniary penalty for violation of this chapter and/or state law. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-46. - Impoundment fees. 
    Any animal impounded hereunder may be reclaimed as herein provided upon payment by the owner to the dog officer of the sum of $10.00 and an additional sum of $5.00 for each day the animal is kept. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Sec. 4-47. - Disposition of unclaimed animals; compliance with state law. 
    Any dog or other animal impounded under the provisions of this article and not reclaimed by its owner within five days may be humanely disposed of or destroyed by the dog officer, have its title transferred to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals after the legal detention period has run and if such dog has not been claimed by the owner, or may be placed in the custody of some person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter and such other regulations as shall be fixed by the town. However, if the animal is one as to which the respective rights of the owner and the person in possession or custody are determined by state law, such law shall be complied with. 
(Res. of 10-2-84) 
Secs. 4-48, 4-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 4-50. - Declaration of purpose. 
(a)  It is hereby declared that vicious dogs have become a serious and widespread threat to the safety and welfare of citizens of this town, in that vicious dogs have in recent years assaulted without provocation and seriously injured numerous individuals, particularly children, and have killed numerous dogs. Many of these attacks have occurred in public places. 
(b)  The number and severity of these attacks are also attributable to the failure of owners to register, confine and properly control vicious dogs. 
(c)  It is further declared that the necessity for the regulation and control of vicious dogs is a town-wide problem, requiring town-wide regulation, and that existing laws are inadequate to deal with the threat to public health and safety posed by vicious dogs. 
(d)  It is further declared that the owning, keeping or harboring of vicious dogs is a nuisance. 
(e)  It is further declared that, because of the danger posed to the public health, safety and welfare by vicious dogs, this article constitutes an emergency measure providing for the immediate preservation of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(f)  This article is enacted in accordance with G.L. 1956,  4-13.1-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
Sec. 4-51. - Definitions. 
    As used in sections 4-50 through 4-59, inclusive, of this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context shall indicate another or different meaning or intent: 
    Dog officer means any person defined by the provisions of G.L. 1956, tit. 4, ch. 19, entitled "Animal Care." 
    Enclosure means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. 
    Impounded means taken into the custody of the public pound in the city or town where the vicious dog is found. 
    Person means a natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, firm, partnership or trust. 
    Vicious dog means: 
(1)  Any dog that, when unprovoked, inflicts bites or attacks a human being or other animals either on public or private property or, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places; or 
(2)  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or 
(3)  Any dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation; or 
(4)  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dogfighting or any dog trained for dogfighting; or 
(5)  Any dog not licensed according to state, city or town law. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
Sec. 4-52. - Requirements for registration. 
(a)  No vicious dog shall be licensed for any licensing period commencing after April 1, 1986, unless the owner or keeper of such vicious dog shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The owner or keeper shall present to the town clerk or other licensing authority proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00, covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such vicious dog during the 12-month period for which licensing is sought, which policy shall contain a provision requiring the town to be named as the additional insured for the sole purpose of the town clerk or other licensing authority to be notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy. 
(2)  The owner or keeper shall have the licensing number assigned to such vicious dog, or such other identification number as the town clerk or other licensing authority shall determine, tattooed upon such vicious dog by a licensed veterinarian or other state, city or town agency on the upper inner lip of the vicious dog. Said number shall be noted on the town licensing files for such vicious dog if it is different from the license number of such vicious dog. For the purposes of this section, "tattoo" shall be defined as any permanent numbering of a vicious dog by means of indelible or permanent ink with the number designated by the licensing authority, or any other permanent, acceptable method of tattooing. 
(3)  The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his or her premises warning that there is a vicious dog on the premises. Said sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public highway. 
(4)  The owner or keeper shall sign a statement attesting that: 
a.  The owner or keeper shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance required by this section during the 12-month period for which licensing is sought, unless the owner or keeper shall cease to own or keep the vicious dog prior to the expiration of such license. 
b.  The owner or keeper shall, on or prior to the effective date of such license for which application is being made, have a fenced enclosure for the vicious dog on the property where the vicious dog will be kept or maintained. 
c.  The owner or keeper shall notify the licensing authority within 24 hours if a vicious dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a human, or has died or has been sold or given away. If the vicious dog has been sold or given away, the owner or keeper shall also provide the licensing authority with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the vicious dog. 
(b)  A dog officer is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, and any such dog officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any vicious dog whose owner or keeper fails to comply with the provisions hereof. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
Sec. 4-53. - Control of vicious dogs. 
    All vicious dogs shall be confined in an enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to maintain a vicious dog upon any premises which does not have a locked enclosure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to allow any vicious dog to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or keeper or outside of the enclosure, unless it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care for the vicious dog, or to sell or give away the vicious dog, or to comply with commands or directions of the dog officer with respect to the vicious dog, or to comply with the provisions of subsections 4-52(a)(1) or (2) of this article. In such event, the vicious dog shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the vicious dog. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
Sec. 4-54. - Purpose or intent; harboring. 
    No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of dogfighting or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging said dog to unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals. No person shall possess with the intent to sell or offer for sale, breed or buy or attempt to buy within the state any vicious dog. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
Sec. 4-55. - Probable cause; seizure. 
    In the event that a dog officer or law enforcement agent has probable cause to believe that a vicious dog is being harbored and cared for in violation of G.L. 1956,  4-13.1-5, the dog officer or law enforcement agent may order the seizure and impoundment of the vicious dog pending trial. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
Sec. 4-56. - Action for damages; destruction of offending vicious dog. 
    If any vicious dog shall kill or wound, or assist in killing or wounding, any sheep, lamb, cattle, horse, hog, swine, fowl or other domestic animal belonging to or in the possession of any person or shall attack, assault, bite or otherwise injure any person, or assist in attacking, assaulting, biting or otherwise injuring any person, while out of or within the enclosure of the owner or keeper of such vicious dog, or while otherwise on or off the property of the owner or keeper, whether or not such vicious dog was on a leash and securely muzzled, or whether the vicious dog escaped without the fault of the owner or keeper, the owner or keeper of such dog shall be liable to the person aggrieved as aforesaid for all damages sustained to be recovered in a civil action with the cost of the suit. It is rebuttably presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping or harboring of a vicious dog in violation of this article is a nuisance. It shall not be necessary, in order to sustain any such action, to prove that the owner or keeper of such vicious dog knew that such vicious dog possessed the propensity to cause such damage or that the vicious dog had a vicious nature. Upon such attack or assault, the dog officer in the city or town where the attack or assault occurred is hereby empowered to confiscate and destroy such vicious dog if the conduct of such vicious dog or its owner or keeper constituted a violation of the provisions of this article, punishable by the confiscation and destruction of the animal. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
Sec. 4-57. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Sections 4-52 through 4-56, inclusive, of this article shall not apply to kennels licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article or G.L. 1956, tit. 4, ch. 19. 
(b)  If a dog is ruled to be vicious for a violation of subsection 4-58(a)(5) solely, said vicious dog ruling shall be repealed upon compliance with the penalty clause contained in that section dealing with fines for unlicensed dogs and the tattooing requirement of subsection 4-52(a)(2); all other provisions of this article dealing with vicious dogs shall not apply to said animal. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
Sec. 4-58. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any vicious dog, except those ruled vicious for violation of subsection 4-58(a)(5) herein solely: 
(1)  Which does not have a valid license in accordance with the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  Whose owner or keeper does not secure the liability insurance coverage required in accordance with subsection 4-52(1) of this article; or 
(3)  Which is not maintained on property with an enclosure; or 
(4)  Which shall be outside of the dwelling of the owner or keeper or outside of an enclosure except as provided in section 4-53; or 
(5)  Which is not tattooed; 
shall be confiscated by a dog officer and promptly destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. In addition, the owner or keeper shall pay a $250.00 fine. 
(b)  If any vicious dog shall kill, wound or worry or assist in killing or wounding any animal described in section 4-56 of this article, the owner or keeper of said dog shall pay a $250.00 fine; and the dog officer is empowered to confiscate, and the owner or keeper shall destroy said vicious dog; and for each subsequent violation, the owner or keeper of said dog shall pay a fine of $500.00. 
(c)  If any vicious dog shall attack, assault, wound, bite or otherwise injure or kill a person, the owner or keeper shall pay a $500.00 fine and, for each subsequent violation, pay a fine of $1,000.00. 
(d)  Additional fees and penalties: 
(1)  In addition to any fee for the licensing of dogs that the town clerk may collect in accordance with any other provision of the law, the town clerk is hereby directed to charge an additional $2.00 for each said license, said $2.00 fee to be used exclusively for the enforcement of laws pertaining to animals. 
(2)  Every owner or keeper of any dog found to be in violation of any town ordinance governing the licensing of dogs shall, for the first offense, be fined $25.00 and shall be required to have said dog tattooed in a manner prescribed by the provisions of this article (subsection 4-52(a)(2)) at a fee not greater than $10.00 and, for a second violation of any said article, shall be fined $200.00 and shall be required to have said dog tattooed in a manner prescribed by the provisions of this article and, for a third or subsequent offense, shall be fined $500.00 and shall be required to have said dog tattooed in a manner prescribed by the provision of this article. 
In addition, any owner or keeper convicted of a third or subsequent violation shall present to the town clerk or other licensing authority proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00, covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such vicious dog, which policy shall contain a provision requiring the town to be named as the additional insured for the sole purpose of the town clerk or other licensing authority to be notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy; and the owner or keeper shall comply with the provisions of section 4-52(a). 
    No fine and/or tattooing required by this article shall be suspended by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  One-half of all fines paid pursuant to this section shall be paid to the town for the purpose of defraying the cost of the implementation of the provisions of this article. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
Sec. 4-59. - Legal registration drives. 
    It shall be the duty of the dog officers to conduct a licensing drive on or before 60 days after the passage of this article in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this law. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
Sec. 4-60. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of this article and the application of such provisions to the other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Res. of 8-6-85) 
ARTICLE V. - PET SHOPS 

Sec. 4-61. - Definitions. 
    Commercial establishment. Any enterprise, including a sole proprietorship, engaged in the retail or wholesale commerce of the buying or selling of dogs and cats. 
    Nonprofit rescue organization. Any Rhode Island non-profit corporation that is exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code, Section 501(c)(3) whose mission and practice is, in whole and significant part, the rescue and placement of dogs or cats, or any nonprofit organization that is not exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code, 501(c)(3) but is currently an active rescue partner with the Town of West Warwick shelter or humane society, whose mission is, in whole or significant part, the rescue and placement of dogs or cats. 
    Pet shops. Any for-profit business or enterprise engaged in retail or wholesale commerce related to dogs and cats, including grooming parlors, canine day care and boarding facilities or any temporary or permanent establishment where animals are bought, sold, exchanged or offered for sale or exchange to the general public at retail, provided however, that licensed cat breeders as provided for in section 4-21.1 hereof and holders of kennel licenses as provided for in section 4-34 are exempted from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4 , 2-27-18) 
Sec. 4-62. - Sale of dogs and cats. 
    It is unlawful for any pet shop or commercial establishment to display, offer for sale, deliver, barter, auction, giveaway, transfer or sell any live dog or cat in any pet store or commercial establishment located in the Town of West Warwick. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4 , 2-27-18) 
Sec. 4-63. - Adopt a pet. 
    Nothing in this section shall prevent a pet store or commercial establishment located in the Town of West Warwick from providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by a municipal animal shelter or animal control agency, Humane Society or nonprofit rescue organization and maintain those animals in the pet store or commercial establishment for purpose of public adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4 , 2-27-18) 
Sec. 4-64. - Existing pet shops. 
    Any pet shop or commercial establishment licensed to operate in the Town of West Warwick at the time of the adoption of this article V are exempt from the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4 , 2-27-18) 
Sec. 4-65. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person or entity who violates, fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each separate offense. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense any person or entity allowing a permitting the continuation of the violation may be subject to penalties as provided herein for each separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4 , 2-27-18) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire protection and prevention generally, ch. 7; housing, ch. 9; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 15; subdivisions, ch. 17; zoning generally, app. A. 
State Law reference- State building code, G.L. 1956,  23-27.3-100.0 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Building inspector's escrow fund. 
    There is hereby created an escrow fund for the purpose of repairing damage to town streets, curbings and sidewalks. Said escrow fund is to be administered by the town's building inspector, as follows: 
(a)  A separate account will be created and entitled "Town of West Warwick, Building Inspector's Escrow Fund." 
(b)  Every application for a building permit which requires the installation of a foundation will be accompanied by a fee of not more than $500.00, said fee to be in addition to all other fees required by law. Any fee so collected in accordance with this act shall be placed in the building inspector's escrow fund. 
(c)  Before a certificate of occupancy may be issued on the above-mentioned permit, the building inspector and the commissioner of highways will inspect the roadway, curbing and sidewalk bounding the property covered by the permit, to determine if the recent construction has caused any damage to town owned property. 
(d)  Should the building inspector and commissioner of highways determine that damage has been caused to town owned property, they shall forthwith issue a statement to the applicant, itemizing all damages claimed, including costs to repair said damages. 
(e)  With the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the building inspector shall return to the applicant the fee deposited into the escrow fund, less any charges for repairs as outlined in paragraph (d). 
(f)  Any monies not returned to the applicant shall be transferred forthwith to the town's general fund, and credited to the highway department's account for repairs to roads, curbs and sidewalks. 
(g)  Upon notification of said transfer, the commissioner of highways shall complete repairs to the damaged town owned property. 
(Res. of 7-7-81) 
Sec. 5-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- A Res. of January 10, 1978, specifically amended the Code by repealing  5-2, which pertained to the adoption of a building code. Said section had been derived from an Ord. of January 9, 1968,  1, 2, and an Ord. of July 11, 1972. 
Sec. 5-3. - Fees; sewers, septic tanks, etc. 
    Fees for construction, alterations and air conditioning specified as Table I Permit Fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
    Valuation schedule. To determine the cost of construction to accompany a fee schedule to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council shall be used in issuing building permits: 
    The following fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council: 
(1)  Gasoline and oil or other petroleum products. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Electric, mechanical and plumbing permit fees. 
(5)  Annual permit fees. All plants, factories, mills, machine shops and other commercial or industrial establishments having in their employ electricians shall obtain an annual maintenance permit. 
(6)  Temporary permits. All persons, firms or corporations applying for temporary permits for the installation of electrical systems shall obtain a temporary permit. 
(7)  Re-inspection fees. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the town council shall be charged (in advance) for a first additional inspection required when code violations exist or occur beyond the regularly scheduled inspection, or when the work to be done is not ready for inspection or is not accessible to the inspector. 
(8)  Swimming pool permit fees. Use Table I Permit Fees. 
(9)  Structure moving permit fee. Requires public works director's and building official's review and approval. 
(10)  Demolition permit fee. Use Table I Permit Fees and certificate of liability insurance not less than $10,000.00 in the discretion of the building official. 
(11)  Zoning certificate. 
MUNICIPAL SEWERS 
    The town will not be responsible for: 
(1)  Any connection below grade without a backwater valve. 
(2)  Any damage caused by backflow of sewage in the basement. 
(3)  Any connection already in existence without a backwater valve. 
(4)  A backwater valve must be installed when fixtures are to be installed in basements below the first floor or at the direction of the building inspector. 
    Individual sewerage disposal systems: Location and installation of the sewage disposal system and each part thereof shall be such that, with reasonable maintenance, it will function in a sanitary manner and will not create a nuisance nor endanger the safety of any domestic water supply. 
    In determining a suitable location for the system, consideration shall be given to the size and shape of the lot, slope of natural and finished grade, depth of groundwater, proximity to existing or future water supplies, and possible expansion of the system. The sewage disposal system shall consist of a house sewer (from a point of three feet outside the foundation wall) and a septic tank system. 
    Where unusual conditions exist, other systems of disposal may be employed, provided they are acceptable to the department of plumbing, drainage, and inspection. 
    The septic tank system shall consist of a septic tank with effluent discharging into a subsurface disposal field, or seepage pits, or a combination of the two. 
    House sewers: Pipe used for the construction of the house sewer shall be of adequate size and of cast iron, vitrified clay, concrete, cement-asbestos or plastic (only under Code USDC CS 228-61). Construction of the line shall be such as to secure watertight joints, and it shall be on a grade of not less than one-eighth inch per foot, and the ten feet immediately preceding the septic tank shall be not more than one-fourth inch per foot; in addition, no 90-degree ells shall be permitted and all 45-degree ells shall have accessible cleanouts. 
    Septic tanks: Location of tanks shall be such as to provide not less than the stated distances from the following: 
(1)  Property lines adjoining private property, five feet. 
(2)  From dwelling with basement, eight feet. 
(3)  From concrete slab or below basement, three feet. 
    Liquid capacity shall be based upon the number of bedrooms contemplated in the dwelling served and shall conform to the following table: 
Number of 
Bedrooms Capacity 
in Gallons 2 or less   900 3 1,000 4 1,100 5 1,300  
    Design shall be such as to provide access for cleaning and adequate volume for settling and for sludge and scum storage. Location of the disposal field shall be in an unobstructed and unshaded area, and the distances given shall be the minimum which the disposal field can be located from the following: 
(1)  From well water supply ..... 125' 
(2)  Streams ..... 20' 
(3)  Dwellings ..... 10' 
(4)  Property line ..... 5' 
    All trenches in a disposal field shall be the same width and length and the following standards shall be required: 
(1)  Minimum number of lines per field ..... 2 
(2)  Maximum length of individual lines ..... 100' 
(3)  Minimum bottom width of trench ..... 18" 
(4)  Minimum cover over distribution lines ..... 12" 
    In no event shall the total effective leaching area be less than 170 square feet in the case of disposal trenches or 250 square feet in the case of disposal beds. 
    Cesspools: Use of cesspools for raw sewage is acceptable only in areas where cesspools are acceptable by the plumbing and drainage department. Location of the cesspool shall be such as to secure at least the distance stated from the following: 
(1)  Well water supply ..... 150' 
(2)  Property lines ..... 20' 
(3)  Dwellings ..... 20' 
    Minimum capacity of the cesspool shall be 1,000 gallons, and the inside finish diameter shall be at least six feet with a trench of at least 18 inches in width and at least 40 feet in length of subsurface disposal field. 
(Res. of 1-10-78; Res. of 10-29-79; Res. of 4-2-85; Res. of 10-7-86; Ord. of 6-6-89; Ord. of 4-10-90; Ord. of 11-5-91; Res. No. 99-125, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 2018-8 , 3-20-18) 
Sec. 5-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- A Res. of January 10, 1978, specifically amended the Code by repealing  5-4, which pertained to fire limits. Said section had been derived from an Ord. of January 9, 1968,  3 and an Ord. of July 11, 1972. 
Sec. 5-5. - Bond prerequisite to moving permit. 
    Prior to the granting of any building moving permit, the applicant shall post a bond in favor of the Town of West Warwick and conditioned upon the payment by the applicant of all damages suffered by the town and any other person, arising out of or through the moving or transporting of such building onto, over or through any street or streets, alley or public way or thoroughfare of the town, which bond shall be either a cash bond or a bond issued by a surety company duly authorized to do business in the State of Rhode Island. In the event that any applicant desires so to do, he may post a general bond issued by any surety company, duly authorized to do business in Rhode Island, which bond shall provide for not less than $10,000.00 and in a greater amount to be set by the building inspector, as shown by exhibits attached hereto and made hereof. 
(Ord. of 7-11-72; Res. of 1-10-78; Ord. No. 2018-8 , 3-20-18) 
Sec. 5-6. - Review of building permit applications with regard to minimizing flood damage and making recommendations for construction in flood hazard locations. 
(a)  The building inspector for the Town of West Warwick, when reviewing applications for building permits, including the plans and specifications for the proposed construction, will review all building permit applications to determine if the proposed construction is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  The building inspector shall review all building permit applications to determine if the site of the proposed construction is reasonably safe from flooding and to make recommendations for construction in all locations which have flood hazards. 
(c)  The town engineer and highway commissioner in reviewing all applications for construction in flood hazard locations within the Town of West Warwick shall require that any proposed construction must: 
(1)  Be designed and anchored to prevent the flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure or portions of the structure due to flooding. 
(2)  Use of construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  Use of construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Provide adequate drainage in order to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 9-12-72,  1-3) 
Editor's note- A Res. of September 12, 1972, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of  1-3 as  5-6 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 5-7. - Penalty for working without a building permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in any type of construction for which a building permit is required without having obtained a building permit, and it shall be unlawful for any person or entity that has obtained a building permit to engage in any construction in excess of the terms or limitations of said building permit. 
    Any person in violation of this section shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 92-7, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 5-8. - Vacant buildings. 
(a)  Purpose. It has been determined that various vacant buildings located within the town present a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the town. These vacant buildings have been the site of numerous fires and present a danger to children and adults within the town and generally present a risk to public safety. 
In view of the unsafe conditions and the hazards posed of these vacant buildings, the town has made every effort, at its own expense, to board all openings, including doors and windows from cellar to second floor and all windows, and other openings above the second floor, leading to fire escapes, porches or other structural appurtenances to said buildings. Despite the town's efforts to board public access to these buildings, said buildings have posed an attractive nuisance and has resulted in unauthorized entries by various individuals. In an attempt to eliminate these unauthorized entries, the town council wishes to adopt an ordinance which would establish fines and penalties for these actions of unauthorized entries. 
(b)  Unauthorized entry/attempt to gain access. 
(1)  No person shall willfully and maliciously or mischievously injure, destroy or otherwise remove boards placed upon said property by the town or otherwise interfere with the town's effort to secure said vacant buildings; or otherwise destroy or deface said vacant property in any manner so as to gain access to the property. 
(2)  No person shall enter upon vacant property within the town, thereby causing a public nuisance and unsafe conditions within the town. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a criminal offense and shall be subject to prosecution by the police department of the town. An individual who violates the provisions of this section may be sentenced to serve no more than 30 days in jail and fined nor more than $300.00 or both. 
(Res. No. 97-66,  1-3, 3-4-97) 
Sec. 5-9. - Real estate non-utilization tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abutter means a neighbor whose property touches the property in question. 
    Actively marketed means good faith efforts by the owner of the property to obtain one or more occupants for the property. These good faith efforts may include, without limitation, one or more of the following: 
(1)  Making substantial financial expenditures in comparison with the value of the property; or 
(2)  Listing the property for sale or lease, or both, with one or more real estate broker, for a price and on terms, or for a rental that is realistic considering the fair market or fair market rental value of the property; or 
(3)  Advertising, using one or more signs on the property and at least one other medium, the availability of the property for sale or rental for a price and on terms, or at a rental that is realistic considering the fair market value or fair rental value of the property. Sporadic attempts to sell or lease the property during the privilege year may be viewed as not constituting a good faith marketing effort. 
    Continuously unoccupied means any property which is listed during the entire privilege year as vacant in the records of the town's minimum housing office. 
    Development plan means a plan to rehabilitate a vacant and abandoned property within a set time frame for a use in conformance with the town's comprehensive plan. 
    Nonprofit housing organization means any organization exempt from taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code whose exempt purposes include the provision of affordable housing to low and moderate income households. 
    Privilege year means the 12-month period corresponding to the calendar year. 
    Reviewing entity means the municipal entity designated by the town pursuant to G.L. 1956  44-5.1-3. 
    Vacant and abandoned property means any property which has: 
(1)  Remained continuously unoccupied during the privilege; 
(2)  In the case of property containing one or more buildings, been used in whole or in part for one or more dwelling units immediately prior to the time of the property's continuous designation as vacant by the West Warwick Minimum Housing Office during the privilege year; or 
(3)  In the case of property containing one or more buildings none of which were used in whole or in part for one or more dwelling units immediately prior to the time the property became vacant, been under continuous citation by an agency of a city or town for violation of minimum housing code provisions relating to the health or safety of citizens during the privilege year. 
(b)  Imposition of tax. 
(1)  The Town of West Warwick hereby imposes a tax of $10.00 per $1,000.00 of assessed value upon the privilege of utilizing vacant and abandoned property within the town during any privilege year commencing with the privilege year beginning January 1, 2003 and every privilege year thereafter. The tax shall be in addition to any other taxes authorized by the general or public laws. 
(2)  The minimum housing office within the building official's office is designated as the town entity responsible for determining which properties are vacant and abandoned. 
(3)  The minimum housing official will survey all vacant properties and abandoned properties once per year, prior to October 31st of each year. The minimum housing official will notify the property owner of record at the office of the West Warwick Assessor. The property owner of record may notify the town's minimum housing office if a change to the property occurs. At any time after the property presents the appearance of being used and cared for, the town's minimum housing office may notify the assessor to remove the property from the list of properties on the real estate non-utilization tax list. 
(4)  The West Warwick Town Manager or other designated official is hereby designated as the reviewing officer to review and approve a development plan submitted by a nonprofit housing organization or an abutter. 
(5)  The West Warwick Tax Assessor is hereby empowered to abate the real estate non-utilization tax if it is imposed in error or if a nonprofit housing organization or an abutter acquires the property for rehabilitation and submits a development plan that complies with the provisions of G.L. 1956  44-5.1-3(i)(2). 
(c)  Exemptions. The non-utilization tax authorized by this section shall not be imposed on property owned by an abutter or a nonprofit housing organization if: 
(1)  The abutter or nonprofit housing organization submits a proposed development plan which has been approved by the Rhode Island Housing Resources Commission or Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation to the reviewing entity; 
(2)  The proposed development plan contains a reasonable timetable for the development or reuse of the property; and 
(3)  The town manager or other designated official determines that the proposed development plan is in accordance with the approved comprehensive plan of the Town of West Warwick and approves it. 
(4)  The town manager or other designated official shall deliver a copy of the approved development plan to the tax assessor who shall certify the property as exempt from the non-utilization tax. 
(5)  Failure of the nonprofit housing organization or abutter, without good cause, to carry out the development or reuse of the property in accordance with the timetable set forth in the approved development plan shall result in the property being subject to the non-utilization tax as of the first date of assessment following the expiration of the timetable in the approved development plan. 
(6)  The decision of the town manager or other designated official denying approval of a development plan may be appealed to the West Warwick Tax Review Board. 
(d)  Appeals. In any appeal from the imposition of the tax set forth in this section, the tax review board shall find in favor of an appellant who shows that the property assessed: 
(1)  Was actively marketed during the privilege year; or 
(2)  Was occupied for substantial portions of the privilege year, notwithstanding its designation by the department of minimum housing. 
(3)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to enlarge or diminish any other right of appeal that an appellant may possess pursuant to the general or public laws, or city or town ordinances. 
(e)  Severability. The provisions of this section are severable and if any provision, sentence, clause, section, or part of the section shall be held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any person, circumstance, or time period, that illegality, invalidity, unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts of the section or its application. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this section would have been adopted had those provisions not been included or that person, circumstance, or time period been expressly excluded from its coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2002-2, 5-7-02) 
Secs. 5-10-5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FENCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 97-07,  1-1-1-12, adopted Jan. 7, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as a new art. II,  5-51-5-62, was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 5-51. - Purpose. 
    The town council has determined the necessity to establish minimum regulations governing the erection of fences within the town. 
(Res. No. 97-07,  1-1, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 5-52. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Fence shall mean a physical barrier erected upon or near the dividing line between adjoining properties or properties and public easements, alleys, sidewalks, service drives, freeways, streets or similar public land for the purpose of separating, screening and/or protecting property or chattel. 
    Major repairs shall mean replacement of more than one-fourth of an existing fence, a change in height or relocation on the property. 
(Res. No. 97-07,  1-2, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 5-53. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-7 , adopted July 19, 2016, repealed  5-53, which pertained to permit required and derived from Res. No. 97-07,  1-3, adopted Jan. 7, 1997; and Ord. No. 2013-46, adopted Oct. 1, 2013. 
Sec. 5-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-7 , adopted July 19, 2016, repealed  5-54, which pertained to requirements for the issuance of a fence permit and derived from Res. No. 97-07,  1-4, adopted Jan. 7, 1997. 
Sec. 5-55. - Standards. 
    The following standard shall apply to the construction and maintenance of fences: 
(1)  All fences shall be maintained in a workmanlike condition having no breaks, jagged or sharp edges, holes or other defects. Fences shall be properly surface coated to protect against the elements and maintained straight and plumb. 
(2)  Fences shall be free standing and shall not be attached to another fence or unstable means of support. Fences shall be erected on a series of fence posts spaced so as to provide proper support to the fencing material. In no case shall the distance between fence posts exceed ten feet. Fence posts shall be embedded below grade to a depth and manner which in the opinion of the building official, provide proper means of support for the type of fence constructed. Local soil and subsurface conditions, including but not limited to the existence of ledge, shall be taken into consideration by the building official when determining proper depth. 
(3)  No fence shall be erected in the required front yard space, except for the following: 
a.  Residential properties designed as corner lots may erect a fence in the front yard space in the corner side yard, to a point ending at the street right-of-way line. Such fences may not exceed a height of three and one-half feet within 15 feet of a corner. Fences erected under this subsection must not impede traffic sight lines; 
b.  Residential properties not designated as a corner lot may erect a fence parallel to the front yard line in the front yard space. Such fencing shall not obstruct traffic sight lines. 
(4)  Fence posts shall be installed on the applicant's interior side of the lot, with the finished portion of any fence facing outward. 
(5)  Any fence lawfully erected prior to the enactment of this article shall be deemed lawfully non-conforming and allowed to remain until such time as it is damaged beyond reasonable repair, destroyed or removed. 
(6)  No fence shall be electrically charged or contain barbed wire, unless otherwise permitted by the zoning ordinance. 
(7)  Fences shall not eliminate or interfere with parking, or otherwise, interfere with traffic or become a hazard or nuisance in any manner. 
(8)  Fences shall not exceed six feet in height; 
(9)  Fences utilized as an animal enclosure, such as a kennel, shall be at least ten feet from all adjoining property lines 
(Res. No. 97-07,  1-5, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2007-18, 10-16-07; Ord. No. 2018-11 , 4-24-18) 
Sec. 5-56. - Fences/public property. 
    No fence shall be erected on any easement, alley, roadway, sidewalk or other public property without the consent of the town council. 
(Res. No. 97-07,  1-6, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 5-57. - Nuisances per se. 
    Fences that are dilapidated, dangerous, blighting or otherwise create a nuisance or danger to the public are declared to be a "nuisance per se" and, as such, may be removed by the town upon notification to the property owners on all sides of the fence by the building official. Notification shall provide a minimum two weeks notice, unless the fence presents an immediate danger or hazard. If a fence is declared a nuisance and is not removed by the owner of the fence within two weeks of notification, then the town shall remove the fence and the expenses of removal shall be liened against the property and property owner involved. 
(Res. No. 97-07,  1-7, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 5-58. - Maintenance responsibility. 
    Maintenance of fences in conjunction with this article shall be the responsibility of the property owner who caused the fence to be erected or upon whose land the fence is situated. In the event there is no clear determination of ownership for fences situated on or immediately adjacent to a property line responsibility shall be equally attached to all property owners on said boundary lines. 
(Res. No. 97-07,  1-8, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 5-59. - Appeal. 
    Appeals from the enforcement of this article and the decision of the building official shall be made to the town engineer or his designee, whose decision shall be final and binding. 
(Res. No. 97-07,  1-9, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 5-60. - Temporary fencing. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit the erection of temporary fencing on private property to protect demolition and construction sites, public property or nuisance areas; provided, said fencing meets with the approval of the building official or town engineer. 
(Res. No. 97-07,  1-10, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 5-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-7 , adopted July 19, 2016, repealed  5-61, which pertained to inspection required and derived from Res. No. 97-07,  1-11, adopted Jan. 7, 1997. 
Sec. 5-62. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of this article shall be filed by the building official or an authorized agent thereof in municipal court with all powers as provided by Rhode Island General Laws and shall carry a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 per violation, as shall be determined appropriate by said court. 
(Res. No. 97-07,  1-12, 1-7-97) 
Secs. 5-63-5-69. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-70. - Public nuisance task force. 
(a)  Establishments. A West Warwick public nuisance task force is hereby established. The purpose and primary goal of the task force is to work with property owners to establish a nuisance abatement plan to eliminate identified nuisances in a timely manner. The task force will work through a collaborative with the property owner(s). In addition, where there is ineffective cooperation from a property owner, the task force may review appropriate legal remedies to abate the nuisance. 
(b)  Members. The members of the West Warwick public nuisance task force shall be the building official, minimum housing inspector, the police chief or designee, the fire chief or designee, the town planner. Where appropriate, The department of attorney general may designate an attorney to assist the task force with continuing, chronic nuisances. 
(c)  Mission. The task force shall investigate problem properties through reviewing police reports, arrest and dispatch calls, building, housing and zoning code violations, fire code violations and incidents where there are indications of hazardous conditions, with a focus on properties which present chronic problems. 
(d)  Procedures. Members of the task force shall identify properties that present chronic issues for the town and, after adequate review and investigation a notice shall be sent to the property owner to abate the identified nuisance within ten days through compliance with all relevant codes and ordinances. The property owner will also be requested to meet with the task force to discuss the nuisance on the subject property and to assist in the development of an abatement plan. The task force shall instruct the property owner as to the law regarding his or her responsibility to abate the nuisance. The task force may look at the possibility of a legal proceeding if the nuisance is not abated according to the agreed upon nuisance abatement plan. 
(e)  Chair of meeting. The West Warwick building official shall serve as the chairperson of the task force. The task force will meet as necessary and, as a minimum, within ten days of a referral being forwarded to the task force to review the referral(s) and to meet with property owners. 
(f)  Bi-annual report to town council. The chairperson of the task force, on a bi-annual basis, shall report to the town council the activities of the task force for the preceding year. The report will be given at a meeting of the town council in January and June of each year. Further, when appropriate, this body shall recommend the implementation of town ordinances to the town council to address problem concerns. 
(g)  Open meeting laws. This body shall function in accordance with the Rhode Island open meeting laws. 
(Ord. No. 2004-7, 5-12-04) 
Chapter 6 - CEMETERIES AND BURIALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate cemeteries, G.L. 1956,  23-18-10. 

Sec. 6-1. - Burial to be in designated grounds; exceptions. 
    No person shall bury or cause to be buried the body of any deceased person in the town except in such grounds as are designated as burying grounds and authorized to be used as such, provided that this section shall not apply to family burial lots located upon private land in sparsely settled sections of the town, nor to the burial of the dead in cemeteries already established. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 3,  1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Permission required to establish cemeteries. 
    No cemetery shall hereafter be located within the town except upon permission granted by the town council. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 3,  2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Burials prohibited in certain grounds. 
    Bodies shall no longer be interred in that certain private burying ground or burying plot located on the easterly side of Lockwood Street a short distance north of the northeast corner of Lockwood Street and Cowesett Avenue. 
(Res. of 16-10-58,  1) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit burials in specified grounds, Acts 1958, ch. 127. 
Sec. 6-4. - Regulations for excavating around cemeteries. 
(a)  The town shall not permit construction, excavation or other ground disturbing activity within 25 feet of a recorded historic cemetery except in compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  A written application must be filed with the town engineer with a payment of a review fee to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council and the proposed construction or excavation has been reviewed and approved by the town engineer. 
(2)  The applicant must insure the boundaries of the cemetery are adequately documented and provide written analysis there is no reason to believe additional graves exist outside the recorded cemetery. In addition a written statement by a licensed engineer must document that the proposed construction or excavation activity will not damage or destructively alter the historic cemetery through erosion, flooding, filling, or encroachment; or 
(3)  Whenever an unmarked cemetery or human skeletal material is inadvertently located during any construction, excavation, or other ground disturbing activity, including archaeological excavation, the building official of the town shall be immediately notified. The building official shall, in turn, notify the state medical examiner and the state historic preservation commission if the grave, cemetery, or skeletal material appears to be historic. Prior to the continuation of any further construction, excavation, or other ground disturbing activity, and unless the provisions of G.L.  23-18-7 shall apply, the property owner shall undertake an archaeological investigation to determine the boundaries of the unmarked cemetery and shall so inform the building official. In the event that the cemetery meets the criteria for a historic cemetery, the building official shall so advise the recorder of deeds of the town who shall record and register the cemetery in accordance with the provisions of G.L.  23-18-10.1. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 6-5. - Historical cemetery commission. 
(a)  Purpose. The commission shall establish an inventory of all known historical cemetery locations within the town; develop plans and programs to restore, rehabilitate, and maintain historical cemeteries; recommend to the town council such actions as may be necessary to implement such plans and programs; and investigate public and private resources to accomplish its plans and programs. 
(b)  Membership. The membership of the historical cemetery commission shall consist of no more than five members, who must be residents of the town. The members shall be appointed by the town council and represent each of the five wards in the town. 
(c)  Terms of office of members. Upon passage, the town council shall appoint the five members to hold office on the following staggered terms: 
Two to hold office for a one-year term. 
Two to hold office for a two-year term. 
One to hold office for a three-year term. 
Thereafter, as the initial terms expire, the town council will appoint, or re-appoint, the expired seats for three-year terms. The existing expiring members will continue to hold their seat until the new appointments are made. 
(d)  Non attendance of members. In the event that any member of the historical cemetery commission shall be absent for four consecutive commission meetings, they may be replaced by the town council at the request of the existing members. Such new replacement member will serve out the remaining term of the absent member. 
(e)  Acceptance of support or money. The historical cemetery commission shall have the authority to accept public support and funding from individuals and others for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this section. All funding shall be deposited in a special account established by town finance director, and shall be deposited and disbursed under the rules and procedures established by the finance director. The commission shall provide the finance director with a quarterly report on all financial activities involving the commission. 
(f)  Appropriations by town council. The town council may, at its discretion, appropriate funds to the commission to carry out the purposes outlined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-7, 5-6-08) 
Chapter 7 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Fire lanes on private property devoted to public use-Generally. 
(a)  Designation; definition. The marking of fire lanes on private property devoted to public use shall be designated by the fire chief with approval of town council. Fire lanes shall mean any area appurtenant to entrances or exits of a building which the fire chief and town council have established. [Fire lanes] should remain free and clear of parked vehicles for access to such buildings in case of fire or other emergency which said area may include sidewalks, driveways, portions of parking lots, and other areas adjacent to or near said building entrances or exits, or any fire hydrant. 
(b)  Owner's responsibility. The owner of such property shall continue to be responsible for the maintenance of such area. 
(c)  Notice to owner; signs. Upon the designation of a fire lane pursuant to this article, the fire chief shall give notice of such designation to the owner of such area and shall cause signs to be posted at the designated locations lettered as follows: 
"Fire Lane 
No Parking Anytime" 
Signs shall be of a standard size and color, of standard lettering and mounting conforming to specifications established by the fire chief. 
(d)  Records. The official record of the designation and location of fire lanes shall be filed with the town clerk and a certified copy with the fire chief. 
(e)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the police department of this town to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-8-76) 
Sec. 7-2. - Same-Obstructing prohibited. 
    Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be prohibited at all times. 
(Ord. of 6-8-76) 
Sec. 7-3. - Same-Penalty for violation. 
    Whenever a person shall be charged with obstructing a fire lane such person shall be notified in writing by a police officer to appear on a day and hour stated in such notice to answer such charge before the district court having jurisdiction thereof. Such notice shall specify the location of the fire lane in which such violation occurred and the date and time of such violation. Failure to comply with fire lane provisions shall be punished as provided in section 11-76 entitled "Penalty" of the ordinances of the Town of West Warwick; providing, however, that the fire chief may, when he deems conditions warrant immediate action, cause said vehicle to be removed by commercial towing at the expense of the owner thereof in addition to the said district court action. 
(Ord. of 6-8-76) 
Sec. 7-3.1. - Fire rescue service fees. 
    Each individual or medical insurer of such individual receiving emergency medical service in the town shall be billed for such services at an amount equal to 150 percent of the annually adjusted Medicare rate. Such emergency medical services shall include, but not be limited to, the following services: 
Basic life support-Emergency and non-emergency; 
Advanced life support-Emergency and non-emergency; 
Advanced life support 2; 
SCT; 
Oxygen; 
Airways; 
MAST; 
IV therapy/IV drugs; 
Cardiac monitoring; 
Defibrillation; and 
Mileage. 
(Res. No. 99-112, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2009-1, 2-17-09) 
Secs. 7-4-7-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings generally, ch. 5; removal of fire hazards from dumping grounds,  8-5. 

Sec. 7-16. - State code adopted. 
    The town hereby adopts as the fire prevention code of the town the Rhode Island Fire Safety Code, being G.L. 1956 Chapter 23-28.1, as it shall from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Res. No. 96-66, 4-2-96; Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3-21-17) 
Sec. 7-17. - Outdoor burning prohibited. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted the town under Rhode Island General Law, Section 23-23-18, it is hereby established that no owner, lessee, occupant or person in general charge of any dumping place or ground, shall burn or suffer to be burned thereon, and no person shall ignite or burn thereon, any dead leaves, grass, weeds, empty boxes, crates, barrels, branches, limbs of trees, clothing refuse, rubbish or waste materials or substances of any kind whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2-1965,  2, 5-11-65; Ord. of 4-2-96; Res. No. 96-66, 4-2-96) 
Sec. 7-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former  17-18, which prohibited burning of any substances in the streets, was deleted pursuant to provisions of a resolution adopted September 7, 1982. Such section derived from Ord. No. 2-1965,  2, adopted May 11, 1965. 
Sec. 7-19. - Open fires regulated. 
    Generally. The burning of any material on public or private property is hereby prohibited and no person shall kindle or maintain open fires within the town. 
    Exceptions: 
(1)  Cooking of foods on barbecues, fireplaces or grills, open pits or other type of cooking apparatus or any other means of outdoor cooking, provided such cooking is not in violation of section 7-19.1 below; 
(2)  Burning of wood or charcoal for recreational purpose in commercial fireplaces or grills, open pits or other type of combustion apparatus provided such use is not in violation of section 17-19.2 below. Commercial fireplaces or grills, open pits or other type of combustion apparatus must be covered with proper fitting screens so as to provide spark control. 
(3)  Variances allowed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956,  23-23-15. 
    Special permit. 
(1)  Upon application to the town council and after hearing the town council may suspend in whole or in part the provisions of this article, where it can be shown that the enforcement thereof would constitute undue hardship without a corresponding benefit or advantage obtained thereby in accordance with G.L. 1956,  23-23, and the town council shall set the term and conditions. Upon such suspension and payment of a fee to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council the town clerk shall issue a permit stating said terms and conditions. 
(Ord. of 8-10-71,  1-3; Res. of 9-7-82; Ord. of 4-2-96; Res. No. 96-66, 4-2-96; Ord. No. 2008-18, 10-21-08; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Editor's note- An Ord. of August 10, 1971, effective September 1, 1971, was enacted as being in addition to and amendment of ch. 7. Codification of  1-3 of said ordinance as  7-19 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 7-19.1. - Annoyance and nuisance smoke and open fires. 
    Generally. Pursuant to  23-23-18(b) and (c) of the Rhode Island General Laws, the town may regulate and prohibit open fires for the health, safety and protection of its residents. 
(1)  In the event that an open fire or smoke emanating from any open fire, including but not limited to those exempt herein, is determined to cause an annoyance and nuisance to owners, lessees, occupants or persons in general, by way of fumes, soot, ashes, dust, smoke, odors, sparks and the like, then in such event, said fire shall be extinguished immediately upon notification by the fire chief or his designee. 
(2)  If a determination is made that an open fire is causing an annoyance and nuisance and the open fire is not extinguished immediately, the fire chief or his designee may enter upon the property and extinguish said fire. 
    Penalties. 
(1)  For each violation there shall be a fine of not more than $20.00 or by imprisonment of not more than ten days. 
(2)  The fire department of said town shall enter and extinguish illegal fires upon private land and shall report the same to the police department for prosecution. 
(Ord. of 4-2-96; Res. No. 96-66, 4-2-96; Ord. No. 2008-18, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 7-20. - Self-service motor fuel dispensing stations. 
    "Self-service stations" are defined as that portion of property where flammable and combustible liquids used as motor fuels are stored, and subsequently dispensed from fixed equipment in the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than service station attendants, and shall include facilities available for sale of other retail products, and the operation of such stations shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Self-service dispensers. A remote controlled dispensing device approved by the authority having jurisdiction. The coin and/or the card operated type are not acceptable in the town. 
(2)  Attendant required. All self-service stations shall have at least one qualified attendant on duty while the station is open to the public. During all times that Class I liquids are actually being dispensed, the attendant's primary function shall be to supervise, observe and control the dispensing of said liquids. It shall be the responsibility of the attendant to prevent the dispensing of Class I liquids into portable containers unless the container is constructed of metal or approved plastic, or is approved by the authority having jurisdiction, has a tight closure with screwed or spring cover, and is fitted with a spout or so designed that the contents can be poured without spilling. It shall also be the responsibility of the attendant to control sources of ignition, and to immediately handle accidental spills and fire extinguishers if needed. The attendant or supervisor on duty shall be capable of performing the functions and assuming the responsibilities covered in this section. 
(3)  Attendant's control and supervision. At self-service stations, the attendant shall be required to remain within arm's length distance of the remote controlled console, at all times while Class I liquids are being dispensed. A "post-payment operation" is advocated to insure the attendant's compliance with the foregoing provision. 
(4)  Emergency controls. 
a.  A main power shut-off switch or switches shall be installed at a location not more than 15 feet from the attendant's principal control location, and not more than 100 feet from the dispensers. 
b.  A fixed fire extinguisher system suitable for the extinguishment of Class B (flammable liquid) fires acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction, and covering the entire gasoline dispensing area, shall be installed at each self-service station. Said system shall be capable of being activated, either manually or automatically; however, if it is to be activated manually, the triggering device shall not be more than 15 feet from the attendant's principle control location and not more than 100 feet from the dispensers. Activation of the fixed fire protection system shall automatically shut off the power supply to the dispensing devices on the island involved. "The entire gasoline dispensing area" referred to above is construed to mean that area encompassing the self-service island. If, however, an adjacent attended island (normally serviced by a regular attendant dispensing motor fuel) is in too close proximity to the self-service island in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction, then a fixed fire protection system may be required there also. 
(5)  Operation instructions. Instructions for the operation of the dispensers shall be conspicuously posted on either the dispenser or the dispenser island. 
(6)  Emergency procedures. A list of emergency procedures and instructions shall be conspicuously posted at the immediate vicinity of the attendant's principal control location. 
(7)  Clear observation. The dispensing operation shall at all times be in clear view of the attendant, and the placing or allowing of any obstacle to come between the dispensing operation and the attendant, so as to obstruct the attendant's view is prohibited. 
(8)  Delivery nozzles. Hose nozzle valves used at self-service islands shall be an approved automatic closing type without a latch-open device. 
(9)  Voice communication control. A voice communication system, such as, but not limited to, an intercom system, so as to allow direct voice communication at all times between the person dispensing the fuel and the attendant, shall be required. 
(10)  Warning sign. On each and every dispenser island shall be conspicuously posted, the following words of warning: 
a.  WARNING ..... IT IS UNLAWFUL TO DISPENSE GASOLINE INTO ANY PORTABLE CONTAINER UNLESS THE CONTAINER IS CONSTRUCTED OF METAL OR IS APPROVED BY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT. 
b.  NO SMOKING. 
c.  SHUT OFF MOTOR WHILE MOTOR FUEL IS BEING DISPENSED. 
d.  NO PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 16 YEARS OF AGE SHALL OPERATE A GASOLINE DISPENSING DEVICE AT A SELF-SERVICE STATION. 
(Ord. of 8-8-72; Ord. of 4-2-96) 
Editor's note- An Ord. of August 8, 1972, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as  7-20 at the discretion of the editors. 
Cross reference- Filling stations,  10-90 et seq. 
Sec. 7-21. - Fire prevention plan, fire alarm system and sprinkler system review and inspection fee. 
(a)  To offset the cost of plan reviews by the town fire department, the following fees will be assessed upon filing for a building permit at the building inspection office. The plan review will include all fire protection and life safety requirements. All drawings to be submitted for review shall be correct and in compliance with the applicable codes and standards. 
(b)  The fees for fire prevention plan, fire alarm system and sprinkler system review and first and final inspections shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-9,  1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-46, adopted October 1, 2013, amended  7-21 to read as set out herein. Previously  7-21 was titled fire prevention plan review fee. 
Chapter 8 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Maintaining clean and sanitary conditions in multiple dwellings,  9-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Throwing, depositing on vacant land generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to (1) throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited any decomposable organic matter which might create a nuisance or act as a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes or vermin or as food for rats, (2) to maintain any discarded receptacles capable of holding water, or any combustible material which might serve to increase danger of fire upon any vacant land in the town unless such land shall have previously been designated by the director of public works as a proper and suitable place for such use. No garbage and/or rubbish originating outside the legal boundaries of the town may be deposited at any of these areas designated by the director. 
    No fill shall be deposited on any land without first being approved by the building official as not containing organic matter and as being deemed suitable for building in accordance with the Rhode Island State Building Code and the Rhode Island State One and Two Family Dwelling Code. 
(Ord. of 6-6-49,  1; Ord. of 3-13-73,  1; Ord. No. 2013-48, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2018-8 , 3-20-18) 
Sec. 8-2. - Depositing on public or private property; penalty; enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall dump, deposit or discard any refuse, rubbish, waste, glass, broken ware, tin cans, so-called garbage, filth or trash of any kind upon public or private property, including depositing into any container, trash bin or depositor owned by another, within the confines of the town except at such places as are properly designated for such purpose by the town council. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person found violating this section shall be fined as the penalty for said violation an amount up to $100.00 or imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. Said fines are to be recovered to the use of the town. 
(c)  Enforcement. The enforcement of this section shall be by the West Warwick Police Department and prosecuted by the same. 
(Ord. of 6-6-49,  2; Res. of 3-3-87) 
Sec. 8-3. - Depositing upon streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any waste material or debris upon any public highway or platted street or in such a place or in such manner that it may be blown or scattered upon any public highway or platted street. This includes the placement of garbage and trash at the curb prior to 3:00 p.m. of the preceding day to the day of scheduled pick-up. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place any garbage, trash, waste material or debris upon any public highway, platted street or sidewalk for rubbish collection more than 12 hours prior to the time said rubbish is to be collected. 
(c)  The director and assistant director of public services, and all sworn police officers for the town shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of this section, including the issuance of citations for violations of this section. 
(d)  Any property owner found violating this section shall be fined the amount of $10.00 for the first offense, $25.00 for the second offense, and $50.00 for each subsequent offense. Said fines are to be recovered for the use of the town, except that any property owner may elect to appear before the clerk of the town municipal court to answer such violation charge, or may mail same in lieu of a personal appearance before the municipal court. 
(e)  In the event the foregoing stated fine is not paid or a plea of not guilty to the citation is not entered prior to the 14th day after the date of violation, said original fine shall be doubled; and in the event the foregoing stated fine is not paid or a plea of not guilty to the violation is not entered subsequent to the 14th day and prior to the 28th day after the date of violation, said original fine shall be tripled. At the discretion of the court, the collection of court costs may be added to the cost of the fine. 
(Ord. of 4-22-41,  1; Ord. of 6-6-49,  3; Res. of 10-1-85; Res. No. 99-305,  1, 12-7-99; Ord. No. 2001-1, 2-6-01) 
Sec. 8-4. - License to remove or transport. 
(a)  Required. No person except the owner thereof, unless licensed by the superintendent of collection of garbage and rubbish, shall remove, carry or transport any rubbish or waste material from any premises over, upon or through any street or highway in the town. 
(b)  Location and time. Each such license when issued shall bear upon the reverse side thereof the location and time designated by the superintendent of collection of garbage and rubbish at which the holder thereof may dump rubbish and waste material. 
(c)  Term. Each license when issued shall be for a term not exceeding one year from the date of issuance but shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the superintendent of collection of garbage and rubbish in his discretion for any violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Fees. Residential and nonresidential collectors (any individual or company hauling rubbish for compensation or as a business) hauling rubbish in the town shall pay a fee to the town, to be collected by the town clerk, or such other town official as the town council may designate, in order to use the areas designated by the public works director. The public works director or such other town official as the town council may designate will issue a license and collector's permit upon presentation of a payment receipt for the above mentioned fee. A collector's license fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. of 6-6-49,  4; Ord. of 3-13-73,  2-4; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 8-4.1. - Resident and business stickers. 
    Each resident of the Town of West Warwick and each businessman in the Town of West Warwick, not carrying on the business of a collector shall nevertheless secure either a resident sticker or a business sticker from the proper official at no cost. All such stickers shall be affixed to the lower lefthand corner of the vehicle to be used. 
(Ord. of 3-13-73,  4) 
Editor's note- An Ord. of March 13, 1973, amended ch. 8 by adding the provisions designated by the editors as  8-4.1. 
Sec. 8-5. - Examination for and removal of fire hazards. 
    The chief of the fire department may cause to be examined all dumping places or grounds within the limits of the town where dead leaves, grass, weeds, branches or limbs of trees, old clothing, refuse, rubbish or waste materials of any kind have been or may hereafter be placed or deposited, and when the chief of the fire department deems that said articles, rubbish or waste materials are so placed or deposited as to cause appreciable danger of fire to surrounding property, he shall order the owner, lessee, occupant or person having general charge of said premises to remove said articles, rubbish or waste materials, and if said owner neglects or refuses to remove said articles, rubbish or waste materials within three days after receipt of such order, the chief of the fire department may cause the same to be removed at the expense of said owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of said premises. 
(Ord. of 6-6-49,  5) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention generally,  7-16. 
Secs. 8-6, 8-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-5, adopted July 7, 2009, amended the Code by repealing former  8-6 and 8-7. Former  8-6 pertained to the use and town collection of garbage receptacles, and derived from an ordinance of June 6, 1949; and an Ord. No. 2007-1, adopted January 16, 2007. Former  8-7 pertained to disturbing contents of containers, and derived from an ordinance of June 6, 1949. 
Sec. 8-8. - Covering of vehicles. 
    All vehicles for removal of garbage and refuse in or from the town shall be covered by a canvas while driven through the streets of the town. 
(Ord. of 6-6-49,  9) 
Sec. 8-9. - Deposits in street openings, sewers. 
    No person shall place or deposit in any street opening to any sewer or in any catch basin any animal or vegetable matter, solid or liquid, nor any filthy substance. 
(Ord. of 6-6-49,  11) 
Sec. 8-10. - Disposal of matter taken from catch basins. 
    No person shall dump or deposit anywhere within the town any matter taken from a catch basin, without completely covering the same with earth or clean ashes immediately upon dumping or depositing the same. 
(Ord. of 6-6-49,  12) 
Sec. 8-11. - Removal of swill and house offal. 
    All swill and house offal shall be removed in and from the town, in watertight, closely covered vehicles, or in watertight tubs or casks with covers securely fastened so as to make the tubs or casks airtight; and all such vehicles, tubs or casks so used shall be kept clean and well painted on the outside, and the covers of all vehicles, tubs and casks containing swill or house offal shall be kept tightly closed when they are driven through the streets. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 23,  1) 
Sec. 8-12. - Refuse pickup hours. 
    No person shall pick up or remove, nor shall any person cause or allow to be picked up or removed, any refuse, rubbish or trash from any residential complex, or from any commercial or industrial establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. if such establishment is located within 200 feet of a dwelling. 
(Res. of 8-20-85; Ord. No. 2017-2 , 2-28-17) 
Secs. 8-13-8-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-5, adopted July 7, 2009, amended the Code by repealing former  8-13 and 8-14. Former  8-13 pertained to pickup of leaves, grass and other yard waste, and derived from an ordinance of October 5, 1993; and Ord. No. 2007-13, adopted August 7, 2007. Former  8-14 pertained to fees for the disposal of white goods, and derived from Ord. No. 2000-11, adopted March 6, 2001. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS FOR REFUSE DISPOSAL FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An Ord. of March 9, 1971,  1-3, amended ch. 8 of this Code, but did not specify the manner of amendment, hence inclusion herein as Art. II,  8-22-8-24, was at the discretion of the editors. Catchlines and catch phrases were added by the editors to facilitate indexing and reference. 

Sec. 8-22. - Permitted methods of refuse disposal; definitions. 
    Disposal or refuse shall be permitted only by sanitary landfills or incinerators or other means approved by the director of health of the State of Rhode Island. 
(1)  Sanitary landfill is defined as a method of disposing of refuse on land without creating nuisances or hazards to public health or safety, by reducing it to the smallest practical volume, and by covering it with a layer of earth at the conclusion of each day's operation or at such more frequent intervals as may be necessary. 
(2)  Incinerator is defined as an arrangement of chambers and equipment designed for burning solid, semisolid or gaseous combustible waste to an inoffensive gas and a residue containing little or no combustible material. 
(3)  Refuse is defined as putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except body waste, and including garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings and solid market and industrial wastes. 
(Ord. of 3-9-71,  1) 
Sec. 8-23. - Standards for sanitary landfill. 
    Any person who maintains or operates a sanitary landfill as a public refuse disposal facility or permits the use of his land or land under his control for such a facility shall maintain such facility in conformance with the following standards: 
(1)  Refuse to be compacted and covered. Refuse shall be compacted and covered daily with a layer of cover material at least six inches deep after compaction. A layer of at least two feet of cover material, after compaction, shall be placed on the compacted refuse within one week after the final deposit of refuse has been made at any portion of the facility. The cover material used shall be of such a character that it can be compacted to provide a tight seal, does not crack excessively when dry, and is relatively fee of putrescible materials. 
(2)  Pollution control. Refuse shall not be deposited in such manner that the refuse or leachings from it shall cause or contribute to pollution or any source of public water supply, or any of the waters of the state. 
(3)  Depositing to be confined. The depositing of refuse shall be confined to an area which can be effectively maintained and operated in accordance with these standards and which shall be controlled by supervision, fencing, signs or equally effective means. 
(4)  Control of flies, rodents, etc. Effective means shall be employed to control flies, rodents or other vermin. 
(5)  Confinement of papers, etc. Fencing or other suitable means shall be used to confine papers and other refuse to the disposal area. 
(6)  Salvaging. The salvaging of refuse, if permitted, shall be conducted in such a manner so as not to create a nuisance. 
(7)  Open burning. Open burning of any type at a disposal area shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-9-71,  2) 
Sec. 8-24. - Standards for incinerators. 
(a)  Any person who maintains or operates an incinerator as a public refuse disposal facility shall maintain such facility in conformance with the following standards: 
(1)  Operating temperatures, at the combustion chamber exit, shall be maintained between 1,400 degrees Fahrenheit and 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit, or according to the limits established by the design engineer, but the furnace shall not be consistently operated at temperatures lower than 1,400 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Water used to quench the incinerator residue or scrub the flue gas shall be disposed of in a manner that will not pollute any source of public water supply or any of the waters of the state. 
(3)  Unless the residue from the incinerator shall contain less than ten percent volatile solids, it shall be disposed of in accordance with the requirements applying to sanitary landfills, which are a part of these rules and regulations. 
(4)  Gaseous and particulate emissions from the incinerator shall conform with air pollution control regulations of the department of health. 
(b)  After the adoption of these rules and regulations, any person who constructs or causes to be constructed any incinerator which is to be used as a public refuse disposal facility shall construct such facility according to the following standards: 
(1)  All refuse incinerators shall be of the multiple chamber, continuous feed type. Each incinerator shall have a rated capacity sufficient to handle all of the combustible wastes it is estimated will be produced in the area served for a future 20-year period. The rated capacity must be based upon the measured per capita wastes generated in the area served, but in no case shall the per capita value used be less than 41/2 pounds per day. A 20-year projected population of the area served must be used. 
(2)  The incinerator shall be so designed that the failure of one furnace or a component part will not result in a complete shutdown of the incinerator. 
(3)  The capacity of the storage pit shall be equivalent to at least the rated capacity of the incinerator for 11/2 days' operation. In addition, the storage pit shall have a means of entry at its base. It shall have a pitched floor and drain, truck stops at the tipping edge, and an adequate water-spray system at an upper level. 
(4)  Charging hoppers receiving refuse from crane buckets should be sized to take the contents of the bucket without spillage on the charging floor. Minimum dimensions of charging openings should be four feet by four feet. 
(5)  The maximum grate loading that will be approved for all types of furnaces is 65 pounds of refuse per square foot of total grate area, per hour. 
(6)  The primary and secondary combustion chambers must have a volume of at least 15 cubic feet per ton of rated capacity per 24 hours. 
(7)  Primary and secondary air in the amount of at least 150 percent of that theoretically required must be provided. 
(Ord. of 3-9-71,  3) 
Sec. 8-25. - Sanitary landfill and incinerator permits. 
    Any person subject to the provisions of sections 8-23 and 8-24 shall prior to commencing construction or operation of any sanitary landfill or incinerator shall first obtain a permit allowing such construction or operation from the building official. Such person shall submit to the building official an application containing such information as the building official shall from time to time request to insure that the construction or operation shall comply with the provisions of sections 8-23 and 8-24. The fee for such permit shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Secs. 8-26-8-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PAWTUXET RIVER PROTECTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 15; subdivisions, ch. 17; zoning, app. A. 

Sec. 8-30. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Pawtuxet River Protection Ordinance." 
(Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 8-31. - Council findings and policy. 
    The town council does hereby find that the disposal of waste, garbage, trash and abandoned manmade objects along the banks of the Pawtuxet River constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Town of West Warwick. In recognition of the ever-increasing environmental problems resulting from the demands made upon the land and the renewable resources of the town, and in recognition of the need to preserve and protect one of the town's most valuable natural resources, the Pawtuxet River, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town of West Warwick to provide for the preservation of the Pawtuxet River, the improvement of its water quality, in order to prevent the impairment of dams and reservoirs by sediment or any waste material and to protect wildlife and preserve the natural beauty of the river and its banks for the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the town. Nothing herein shall be inconsistent with laws or rules and regulations adopted by or for the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management. 
(Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 8-32. - Declaration of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this act to: 
(1)  Protect the environment, especially the Pawtuxet River and its environs, from the effects of improper or illegal disposal of waste; 
(2)  Establish a program of regulation and enforcement to control and eliminate the improper or illegal disposal of wastes; and 
(3)  Protect and promote public health and safety. 
(Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 8-33. - Definitions used in this article. 
    [As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed, unless the context otherwise requires:] 
    Dispose shall mean the discharge, deposit, dumping, spilling, leaking, abandoning or placing of waste upon land protected by this article. 
    Occupier of land shall be construed to include any person, firm or corporation who shall hold title to, or shall be in possession of, any lands lying within 200 feet of the Pawtuxet River, whether as owner, renter, lessee, tenant, municipality or otherwise. 
    Pawtuxet River shall be construed to include the physical boundaries of the Pawtuxet River, as well as the ponds, brooks, streams and tributaries that empty into the Pawtuxet River, as the same are located in the Town of West Warwick. 
    Person shall be construed to extend to and include copartnerships, bodies corporate and politic, associations, firms and institutions. 
    Waste shall be construed to include the following: 
(1)  Bulky waste: Any large items, including, but not limited to, appliances, furniture, automobile parts, shopping carts, tree stumps, tires and abandoned automobiles. 
(2)  Construction waste: Any building materials and refuse resulting from construction, remodeling and repair operations on any type of structure. It shall also include any pavement or concrete disposed of as a result of construction or otherwise. 
(3)  Demolition waste: Any material generated from the destruction or razing of any building or structure. 
(4)  Solid waste: Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials generated by any sources whatsoever, other than materials that result from sewage by a person holding a valid Rhode Island pollutant discharge elimination system (RIPDES) permit from the department of environmental management. 
(Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 8-34. - Disposal of waste prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any occupier of land to dispose of or deposit, or allow to be disposed of or deposited, any waste on any property located in the Town of West Warwick which is within 200 feet of the Pawtuxet River. Any person found in violation of this section, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any person in the violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00. Each day of noncompliance will be a separate violation of this section. 
(Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 8-35. - Disposal of waste on lands of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not an occupier of land to dispose [of] or deposit any waste upon the property of another located in the Town of West Warwick which is within 200 feet of the Pawtuxet River. Any person found in violation of this section, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any person in the violation of this section, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00. Each day of noncompliance will be a separate violation of this section. 
(Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 8-36. - Presumption of ownership. 
    In any prosecution or proceeding hereunder, the land evidence records of the Town of West Warwick shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of the property was the person who disposed of or deposited waste material upon the property where such violation occurred. 
(Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 8-37. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Once a complaint has been brought to or by the police under section 8-34, a notice of violation shall be sent to the person involved. Said notice may be hand delivered by a police officer or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested. Refusal to accept the certified mailing shall be deemed to constitute prima facie evidence of its receipt. 
(b)  Upon receipt of said notice, the person involved shall remove the violating waste from the property within 30 days of receipt of the notice. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the notice of violation within 30 days will result in prosecution for violation of this section. 
(d)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the immediate arrest and prosecution of any person found in violation of section 8-35 of this article, whether or not a notice of violation was issued. 
(e)  The notice of violation, once served upon the person involved, shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the Town of West Warwick in the same manner as a notice of violation for minimum housing standards. If the person notified is not the property owner, the property owner shall be served with a copy of the notice of violation, which shall be plainly identified as a copy. 
(Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 8-38. - Saving clause. 
    If any provision, paragraph, sentence, work or section of this article shall be invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, paragraphs, sentences, words or sections shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 8-39. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect immediately upon its passage by the town council of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Res. of 6-2-87) 
Secs. 8-40-8-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-12 , adopted Oct. 4, 2016, repealed Art. IV,  8-50-8-68, which pertained to mandatory recycling program and derived from Res. of 11-3-87, adopted Nov. 3, 1987; Res. No. 97-153, adopted June 3, 1997; Res. No. 99-289,  1, Nov. 2, 1999. 

Secs. 8-50-8-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GARBAGE AND REFUSE DUMPSTERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- A Res. of March 15, 1988 (No. 88-169), added Art. III,  8-30-8-40. Inasmuch as said article had been previously designated, the editor has redesignated the provisions of said resolution as Art. V,  8-70-8-81. Catchlines have been added to certain sections to conform to Code format and to facilitate indexing. 
Cross reference- Housing, ch. 9. 

Sec. 8-70. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
    Ashes shall mean the residue from the burning of combustible materials (and the noncombustible portion of refuse loaded into an incinerator). 
    Dumpster shall mean any receptacle for garbage, refuse and/or rubbish, whose size is such that it requires mechanical means to place or empty it. 
    Dwelling shall mean any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling units shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single, habitable unit with facilities which are unused [in use] or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Enforcing officer shall mean the building official and/or the minimum housing inspector, or their authorized representative. 
    Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving and nonconsumption of food. 
    Infestation shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling or other structure, of large numbers of insects, rodents or other pests. 
    Meaning of certain words. Wherever the words dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, premises and structure are used in this article they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words or any part thereof. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular; the masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 
    Multiple dwelling shall mean any dwelling containing four or more dwelling units. 
    Occupant shall mean any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or actually having possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit and/or structure; except that, in dwelling units, a guest will not be considered an occupant. 
    Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or structure with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or structure as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner; any such person, thus representing the actual owner, shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership. 
    Potential hazardous material shall mean any material, including material containing lead and/or other toxic heavy metal compound, in concentrations dangerous to the public health as deemed by the department of health of this state. 
    Premises shall mean a platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land, or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon. 
    Proper receptacle shall mean any dumpster or container, with a cover, designed to receive and hold garbage, refuse or rubbish. 
    Refuse shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals. 
    Rubbish shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of both: 
(1)  Combustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard clippings and wood; and 
(2)  Noncombustible wastes, such as tin cans, glass and crockery. 
    Structure shall mean all structures used or intended to be used for commercial, business or industrial use or occupancy. 
(Res. of 3-15-88; Ord. No. 2018-8 , 3-20-18) 
Sec. 8-71. - Permit-Required; renewal upon location change. 
    No person or property owner shall place a dumpster or proper receptacle upon property located within the town without first obtaining a permit for the building official. Said permit need not be renewed unless the property owner, occupant or operator desires to change the location of the dumpster or proper receptacle and its size. There shall be payment of a fee for the issuance of a permit and for the issuance of a renewal permit in an amount as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Res. of 3-15-88; Ord. No. 2001-14, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 8-72. - Same-Qualification procedure. 
    In order to qualify for the above-mentioned permit, the personal property owner must comply with the following procedure: 
(1)  A drawing or plan of the property shall be submitted to the minimum housing inspector, showing the property bounds, the location of any buildings on the property, the location of any buildings on all abutting properties, the distances from the property line to the building, the proposed location of the dumpster or proper receptacle, the size of the dumpster or proper receptacle, and any proposed screening, fencing or enclosure that the dumpster is to be placed in. 
(2)  As an alternative to the above procedure, application may be made to have the minimum housing inspector personally inspect the site. If, in the opinion of the minimum housing inspector, the location of the dumpster or proper receptacle is in accordance with the standards set forth below, the minimum housing inspector shall issue said permit and shall file with his records of said permit the location and other information contained in subsection (1) above. 
(Res. of 3-15-88; Ord. No. 2001-14, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 8-73. - Dumpster or proper receptacle-Position and size. 
    In determining the position of a dumpster or proper receptacle, the minimum housing officer shall take into consideration the proximity of said dumpster or proper receptacle to neighboring buildings, the size of the dumpster or proper receptacle in relation to the structure to be served by said dumpster or proper receptacle and whether or not said dumpster or proper receptacle will be enclosed or screened by fencing, shrubbery, etc. The minimum size of the dumpster or proper receptacle required for a particular property shall be such that it shall not be loaded beyond its volume capacity during any seven-day period. 
(Res. of 3-15-88; Ord. No. 2001-14, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 8-74. - Same-Covers required. 
    All dumpsters or proper receptacles located within the town shall be provided with covers. Said covers shall be in place at all times except when depositing garbage or removing contents from the dumpster or proper receptacles. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, occupant or operator of a property to leave said dumpster or proper receptacle uncovered. 
(Res. of 3-15-88; Ord. No. 2001-14, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 8-75. - Unlawful acts-Depositing on other property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner, occupant or operator to deposit garbage, refuse or rubbish upon a property other than in the proper receptacle or dumpster. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 8-76. - Same-Overfilling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner, occupant or operator to fill a dumpster or proper receptacle, or allow a dumpster or proper receptacle to be filled beyond its capacity so that the cover cannot be closed properly. 
(Res. of 3-15-88; Ord. No. 2001-14, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 8-77. - Same-Preventing deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner, occupant or operator to allow a dumpster or proper receptacle to remain full to capacity; thereby preventing the depositing of any garbage, refuse or rubbish therein. 
(Res. of 3-15-88; Ord. No. 2001-14, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 8-78. - Same-Littering. 
    No person shall cause any garbage, refuse or rubbish to be placed upon any property located in the town, unless such garbage, refuse or rubbish is placed in a proper receptacle. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 8-79. - Presumption of ownership. 
    For the purposes of prosecuting actions under this article, the recorded property owner, as appears in the land evidence records of the town clerk, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the property owner therein was the person who permitted the violation to occur. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 8-80. - Penalties. 
    Any person or corporation violating any section of this article or failing to comply with the requirements hereof, or who shall place or permit to be placed any dumpster upon any property located within the town without the required permit, shall be guilty of a violation and shall be liable of a fine of not more than $100.00; and each and every day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 8-81. - Inspections, powers and duties of the enforcing officer. 
(a)  The enforcing officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections in response to a complaint that an alleged violation of the provisions of this act or of applicable rules or regulations pursuant thereto may exist; or when the enforcing officer has valid reason to believe that a violation of this article, or any rules and regulations [promulgated] pursuant thereto, has been or is being committed. 
(b)  The enforcing officer is hereby authorized to enter and inspect between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. as a matter of right and at any other time by prior notification to the occupant or owner by the enforcing officer; and such notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  The enforcing officer is hereby authorized to inspect the premises subject to this article for the purpose of determining whether there is compliance with its provisions. 
(d)  The enforcing officer and the owner, occupant or other person in charge of a property subject to this article may agree to an inspection by appointment at a time other than the hours provided in this section. 
(e)  If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of the property fails or refuses to permit free access and entry to the premises under his control, or any part thereof, with respect to which an inspection authorized by this article is sought to be made, the enforcing officer may, upon a showing that probable cause exists for the inspection and for the issuance of an order directing compliance with the inspection requirements of this section with respect to such property, petition and obtain such order from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(f)  Any person who refuses to comply with an order issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to such penalties as may be authorized by law for violation of a court order. 
(g)  The enforcing officer shall have the right to prosecute for any violation of this article. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Secs. 8-82-8-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-90. - Poison ivy and Jimson weed. 
    The owner or occupant of any land upon which there is any poison ivy, or any Jamestown or Jimson weed, within 50 feet of any highway or street, shall cause such ivy or weed to be removed within five days after receiving notice to do so from the director of public works or building official. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 8-91. - Storage of rubbish, trash, debris and litter. 
    Purpose and intent. The council and the administration of the town finds and declares that: 
A.  The town has a history and reputation for well-kept properties, and that the property values and the general welfare of this community are founded, in part, upon the appearance and maintenance of properties. 
B.  There now appears the need for further emphasis on the maintenance of public and private property in a clean, litter-free and debris-free condition because locations throughout the town have been found to have been the site of littering, illegal dumping and accumulated garbage, refuse and rubbish. 
C.  That the existence of such conditions is injurious and inimical to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of this town and contributes substantially and increasingly to the problems of the necessity for expenditure for protection against hazards and diminution of property values, and the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare and that such problems are becoming increasingly direct and substantial in significance; and that the uses and abuses of property as described herein reasonable relate to the proper exercise of the inspection power in the protection of health, safety and welfare of the public. 
D.  That unless corrective measures are taken to alleviate such existing conditions and particularly to avoid future problems in this regard, the public health, safety and general welfare and specifically the property values and social and economic standards of this community will be depreciated; that the elimination of such conditions will enhance the appearance and value of such properties rather than be a burden on the owners thereof; and that elimination of such conditions will also appreciate the values and appearance of neighboring properties and benefit the use and enjoyment of properties in the general area and will improve the general welfare and image of the town. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 8-92. - Maintenance of areas around business premises. 
    The owner or person in control of any public place, including but not limited to, restaurants, shopping centers, fast food outlets, stores, motels, industrial establishments, office buildings, apartment buildings, multi-unit developments, and gas stations, shall at all times keep the premises clean of all litter, refuse, rubbish and trash, and shall take measures to prevent the same from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises. It shall be a violation of this section to abandon, neglect or disregard the condition or appearance of such premises so as to permit it to accumulate litter, refuse, rubbish and/or trash. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 8-93. - Refuse and trash facilities. 
    There shall be a sufficient number of trash receptacles installed on-site for customer use. Any so-called dumpster or trash receptacle, including but not limited to, restaurants, shopping centers, fast food outlets, stores, motels, industrial establishments, office buildings, apartment buildings, multi-unit developments, and gas stations, shall be designed and constructed to be enclosed from public view and permit safe and easy removal of trash by truck or hand. Each dumpster or trash receptacle shall either be four sided or if three sided the open side shall be gated in a manner to prevent public view. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 2018-3 , 2-27-18) 
Sec. 8-94. - Refuse container maintenance. 
    It shall be unlawful to maintain open refuse containers or receptacles or containers, which are inadequate for the volume of refuse generated at the premises which the containers serve. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and/or tenant, and/or person in responsible charge of the premises, to assure that containers are adequate and covered, and that the area surrounding the containers is kept free and clear of garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash and litter. It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or operator and/or tenant to allow such garbage or refuse containers or receptacles to be overloaded or the contents thereof to remain in unsecured containers. In the event the contents of such containers shall become blown or scattered upon any public street or way, or upon or over nearby premises, the owner and/or operator and/or tenant of the premises served by such container or receptacle shall be responsible for gathering up any such blown or scattered material. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 8-95. - Accumulations of garbage, refuse or litter declared public nuisance. 
    The accumulation of garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish, trash and other deleterious substances on the premises of private residences, commercial institutions, and in the streets and alleys can cause contagious and epidemic diseases, causes diminution in value of other property in the town, developed or undeveloped, the owner shall maintain said property free from garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish and trash as the same are hereinabove defined. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 8-96. - Junked vehicles and watercraft. 
    No owner, operator or occupant of any building, structure, dwelling or dwelling premises, and no operator or owner of any motor vehicle or watercraft herein described, shall keep, park, store, leave inoperative wrecked, junked, dismantled, being restored or rehulled, motor vehicle or watercraft of any kind or parts thereof on any premises with the town, except in connection with a legally operated enterprise. For the purpose of this section, the terms "inoperative, wrecked, junked, dismantled, being restored or rehulled" shall mean any motor vehicle or watercraft that is unregistered, has no valid inspection sticker or is not validly registered with the state. "Watercraft" shall include any boat, ship, vessel or personal watercraft (i. e. jet ski) of any size propelled by motor or wind power. Kayaks, canoes and dinghy's if less than 13 feet in length are exempt. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 2013-48, 11-19-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-48, adopted November 19, 2013, amended  8-96 to read as set out herein. Previously  8-96 was titled junked vehicles. 
Sec. 8-97. - Inspections. 
A.  The department of building inspection and/or department of public works shall make, or cause to be made, inspection trips at regular intervals to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event a violation of these provisions are discovered, said The department of building inspection and/or department of public works shall immediately take action to cite the owner and/or operator by personal service or by mail at the home or business address of such owner and/or operator. 
B.  For the purpose of this section, an offense shall be considered to have occurred on the first day for which a violation is cited, and the offender shall be subject to the penalty provisions hereinafter set forth in sections 10.04.080, 15.12.290 and 8.28.100 for that day and for each succeeding day on which the violation continues unabated. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05) 
_____
Sec. 8-98. - Penalties for environmental violations. 
A.  The general penalties provided for by this sections shall apply to violations of this section or any regulations made thereunder, except that any person electing to appear before the clerk of court, or mailing the same in lieu of personal appearance before the town municipal court, and admitting the violation charged, shall be punished by a fine as hereinafter respectively set forth: 
Offense Fine Improper or early placement trash $25.00 Improper storage of commercial trash 50.00 Trash hauling without a license 100.00 Littering 50.00 Depositing garbage in container of another 50.00 Illegal dumping of over one cubic yard of litter 200.00 Illegal dumping of heavy litter 200.00 Violation of any state recycling regulation or statute 25.00 Scavenging 25.00 Violation of dumpster ordinance 100.00 Accumulation of trash, junk, etc. 25.00 Improper storage of motor vehicles or watercraft 25.00 Other 25.00  
    For any offense hereinabove listed which shall continue without being abated, the above stated fines shall be the fine per day from the date of violation until the date said condition is abated. 
B.  In the event any of the foregoing stated fines are not paid or a plea of not guilty to the citation is not entered prior to the 18th day after date of violation, said fines shall be doubled. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 2006-12, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2013-48, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2016-12 , 10-4-16) 
_____
Sec. 8-98A. - Payment of fines-Generally. 
    A person charged with the violation of any environmental regulation relating to this section and notified to appear to answer such charge before the West Warwick Municipal Court may, in lieu of such appearance elect to appear in person or by one duly authorized by him or her in writing, before the clerk of said court, admit the truth of said charge, and pay to said clerk the designated fine; provided that, such appearance and payment be made at the office of said clerk during regular business hours, within 18 days of such notification and failure to so appear shall be deemed a waiver of the right to dispose of such charge without personal appearance in court. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 8-99. - Same-Payment by mail. 
A.  Any person charged with any violation of an environmental regulation, except as otherwise provided, may elect to mail said violation tag to the clerk of the West Warwick Municipal Court, accompanied by payment of the designated fine, and the name and address of the violator. Such privilege of paying the fine by mail shall be exercised within 18 days from the date of the offense by depositing the designated payment of such fine in a depository maintained by the United States Post Office Department for the collection mails and the postage cancellation shall be prima facie evidence of time of deposit. 
B.  In those cases where mail is used for payment of such fine, the payment may be in cash or by check or by money order, and in those cases where payment is attempted with a check drawn against insufficient funds, an additional payment of $20.00 shall be imposed against the violator to defray administrative costs. 
    In those cases where payment is by cash, it shall be at the risk of the sender and the record of the clerk of the municipal court shall be conclusive as to the receipt and amount of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 2006-12, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 8-100. - Same-Effect of payment. 
    The payment of a fine to the clerk of the municipal court as herein provided, for the violation of an environmental regulation relating to this section, shall operate as a final disposition of the charge and such proceedings shall not be deemed criminal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 8-101. - Same-Notice requirements. 
    Notice of any environmental violation relating to this section shall indicate the offense charged, schedule of fines for such violation, the time within which the privilege of paying such fine by mail may be exercised, the place to which such fine may be mailed, and such other information as will enable the person charged to take advantage of the provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 8-102. - Effect of multiple violations relating to environmental regulations. 
    Notwithstanding anything herein contained, disposition of an environmental violation charge relating to this section without personal appearance in the municipal court may not be exercised by any person who in the consecutive period of 12 months next preceding such charge has been three times in the aggregate adjudged guilty by the municipal court of any violation of any regulation relating to this section or has admitted the truth of charges made against him or her under the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 8-103. - Failure to comply. 
    Any person charged with the violation of any environmental regulation relating to this section who fails to make payment within 18 days as required, may, in the discretion of any justice of the West Warwick Municipal Court, be charged an additional sum of $25.00 to cover administrative costs which shall be payable to the clerk of said court. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 2006-12, 6-6-06) 
ARTICLE VII. - RULES AND REGULATION FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH 

Sec. 8-104. - Definitions and descriptions. 
(a)  Bags. Plastic weatherproof sacks designed to store garbage and rubbish with sufficient overall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. Total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 30 pounds. 
(b)  Bulky waste . Shall include but not be limited to the following items: chairs, couches, sofas, rugs, dressers, tables, bureaus, desks, bookcases, cabinets. Steel and/or metal may be brought to DPW for recycling. 
(c)  Construction/demolition debris. Construction or demolition waste shall include wood, miscellaneous metal, asphalt shingles, concrete, brick, insulation (except asbestos), windows and doors, and other miscellaneous building materials. Demolition waste shall not include machinery and parts or any toxic or hazardous waste. 
(d)  Container/bins . A receptacle, tightly covered, water tight, constructed of plastic. Residents receiving trash pickup are required to use town supplied collection containers. 
(e)  Hazardous waste. Waste in any amount, which is defined, characterized, or designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or The Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM) or pursuant to federal or state law, or waste in any amount which is regulated under federal or state law. For purposes of these rules and regulations, the term hazardous waste shall also include motor oil, gasoline, non-latex paint, pesticides and pesticide containers, cathode-ray tubes (CRT used mostly in televisions and computer display screens), and sewerage wastes. 
(f)  Household refuse. All solid waste materials not otherwise herein defined. 
(g)  Residential garbage. Vegetable matter, household food waste and recyclable wastes from residential kitchens. Vegetable matter or household food wastes shall be drained and wrapped tightly in paper bags, plastic bags, and or other, and placed in containers. 
(h)  Recyclable materials . Material specified by the Rhode Island Resource Recovery Corporation (RIRRC) in accordance with regulations. Such material may include, but is not limited to, aluminum products, clean glass containers, plastic containers, newspapers, magazines. 
(i)  Recycling containers/bins . Receptacles designed for the purpose of curbside collection of materials. Residents receiving recycling pickup are required to use town supplied collection containers. 
(j)  White goods. An appliance employing electricity, oil, or natural gas or liquefied petroleum to preserve or cook food, to wash or dry clothing, cooking or kitchen utensils or related items or to cool or heat air or water. These include refrigerators, freezers, dish washers, clothes dryers, gas or electric ovens and ranges, and hot water heaters. 
(k)  Paper leaf bags. A biodegradable paper sack of up to 30 gallons capacity and meeting specifications set by the DPW. 
(l)  Yard waste. All tree trimmings (less than one and one half inches in diameter, grass cutting weeds, leaves, wood chips and yard shavings, and other wastes associated with residential yard maintenance that is compostable. 
(m)  Contaminated loads . Any truck load that is rejected by the RIRRC for containing materials that are not accepted at the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2009-5, 7-7-09; Ord. No. 2014-9 , 5-27-14; Ord. No. 2015-17 , 3-15-16) 
Sec. 8-104.1. - Curbside pickup. 
    Curbside pickup . Refers to trash containers/bins, or recycling containers/bins, bulky waste, household refuse, residential garbage and recyclable materials, white goods, paper leaf bags and yard waste placed at the curb. Such items shall hereinafter be referred to as "rubbish". In areas where there are no curbs, curb pickup shall refer to items placed no further than five feet away from the edge of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2014-9 , 5-27-14; Ord. No. 2015-17 , 3-15-16) 
Sec. 8-105. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  General provisions . 
(1)  Collection of all rubbish will be made from each occupied single-family residential unit and from residential apartments of not more than four occupied single-family units. No rubbish will be collected from any condominium, nor from any private, commercial, industrial, profit or non-profit enterprise, except for home occupations as provided for in  5.6.17 of the West Warwick Zoning Code. 
(2)  Rubbish must be curbside by 6:00 a.m. and shall not be placed within five feet of any abutter's property or in any way interfere with abutter's access to their property. No rubbish or other debris may be placed out for collection more than one day prior to scheduled pickup and empty containers shall be removed within one day after pickup. 
(3)  Residents receiving trash/recycling pickup are required to place all trash & recycling in the town supplied collection containers/bins, covers must be closed. Trash placed alongside the supplied collection containers/bins will not be collected. In some instances an extra container/bin for year round service may be required and purchased at the DPW in accordance with the fee schedule. 
(4)  All leaves, grass and other organic yard waste shall be placed in paper leaf bags or plastic barrels, clearly marked "yard waste" and must not exceed 35 gallons. Bags shall not be closed with tape. Staples, string and no closure are acceptable. The sweeping or blowing of leaves and other yard waste into streets, onto sidewalks or into town rights-of-way is hereby prohibited. 
(5)  No person other than the owner thereof or a duly authorized agent of the town shall examine, disturb, interfere with or remove the contents of any container or remove white goods placed at curbside for collection. 
(6)  These rules and regulations may be suspended in case of emergency for a period of up to five days by the DPW. 
(b)  Specific regulations . 
(1)  As of May 1, 2016 the General Laws of Rhode Island require all purchases of new mattresses and box springs to pay a fee at the point-of-purchase. In turn mattresses may be brought to the DPW and return without payment of a fee. 
Mattresses and box springs will be collected only by appointment and upon purchase of a sticker prior to pick up upon payment of a fee in accordance with the fee resolution of the Town of West Warwick. One sticker shall be required for the collection of all mattresses or box springs picked at one time. Stickers for may be purchased at the DPW. A premium fee to be set from time to time by the town council shall be charge for pick up. Mattresses and box springs, to a maximum of five times per year, may be brought to DPW free of charge. 
No mattress or box spring will be picked up or accepted at DPW unless properly bagged. Bags may be purchased at the DPW for a fee in an amount to be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
Disposal fees will be charge in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the town council by resolution or as from time to time changed by resolution of the town council. 
(2)  Construction/demolition debris from home projects that do not require a building permit can be cut up and placed into the residential collection container. Oversize debris that doesn't fit in the collection container or debris from a project that requires a building permit shall require the property owner or the hired contractor to supply a dumpster for waste removal. 
(3)  White goods will be collected only by appointment and upon the purchase of a sticker. A sticker for each item may be purchased at the DPW or the tax collector's office. White goods may also be dropped off at the DPW during normal operating hours at no cost, with the exception of refrigerators and air conditioning units. Disposal fees will be charged in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the town council by resolution or as from time to time changed by resolution by the town council. 
(4)  Tires will be collected only by appointment and are preferred without rims attached. Tires with or without rims may also be dropped off at the DPW during normal operating hours at no cost. 
(5)  Waste oil and hazardous waste may not be placed at curbside. All automotive waste oil may be brought to the DPW facility for disposal by town residents only. There will be no commercial drop-off. Hazardous waste must be returned to the place of purchase or contact the Rhode Island Resource Recovery Center (RIRRC) for instructions. 
(6)  No junk automobiles or automobile parts will be collected by the DPW. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Bulk waste will be collected twice per month. Residents that receive town trash and recycling pickup shall receive four free pickups per year and will be required to call the DPW Solid Waste/Recycling Coordinator to schedule a pickup. Bulk items shall not be placed curbside more than 24 hours prior to the collection date. Pickups in excess of four will be charged in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the town council by resolution or as from time to time changed by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-5, 7-7-09; Ord. No. 2014-9 , 5-27-14; Ord. No. 2015-17 , 3-15-16; Ord. No. 2018-8 , 3-20-18) 
Sec. 8-106. - Compliance. 
(a)  Failure to comply with any of the requirements contained herein shall result in the refusal of the DPW or town's contractor to collect the trash or rubbish at the property at which such violation occurred until such time as said violation is corrected. 
(b)  The director of DPW or an authorized official of DPW shall file a complaint in the municipal court for any violation of section 8-105 of this article with all powers as provided by the Rhode Island General Laws and such violations shall carry fines as follows: 
First offense ..... $25.00 
Second offense ..... 50.00 
Third and following offenses ..... 100.00 
    Said complaint shall be filed against the property owner and tenant in all instances of a rental property. Said director shall be further authorized to file said complaint against any person who shall violate the provisions of section 8-105, even though such person may have no legal interest in the property at which said violation occurred. 
(c)  Any item for which the purchase of a "sticker" as herein provided to be picked up by DPW shall not be placed at curbside without said sticker attached. The owner and tenant, of any property at which such an item shall be placed shall be jointly and severally liable for a fine for each day that such item remains at curbside, commencing with the date of notice as sent by the office of the building official to the landlord and tenant as follows: 
First offense ..... $25.00 
Second offense ..... 50.00 
Third and following offenses ..... 100.00. 
    In addition, the owner and tenant shall further be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred by DPW for the removal of such items in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the town council by resolution or as from time to time changed by resolution by the town council. 
(d)  Residents and/or property owners who may cause the rejection of either a trash or recycling truck load by the RIRRC shall receive the following: 
(1)  First offense-Warning 
(2)  Second offense-Fine, the fine shall be equal the cost of the rejected load. 
(3)  Third offense-Suspension of trash and recycling service. 
    All such fines, fees and interest, if any, shall constitute a lien upon the property, which lien shall run with the land and shall not be released until all fines, fees and lien release fees have been paid in full. All such fines and fees shall be satisfied by payment in full within 60 days of the date of notice. An interest rate of 12 percent per annum upon all sums due and payable shall commence on the 60th day subsequent to the date of notice and shall continue to accrue until all fines, fees and interest shall be paid in full. 
(e)  Any mattress or box spring, white goods or bulk waste that shall be placed curbside in violation of the provisions of section 8-105(b)(1), (3) or (8) shall be tagged for removal within 48 hours by the DPW. Failure to remove such item within said 48 hour period shall cause the removal of such item by the DPW. Upon such removal a lien shall be placed against the real estate upon which such items are located in the amount of the cost of pickup and removal, of disposal and of an administrative fee. Such lien shall not be removed until said sums plus a lien removal fee are paid in full. Interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum shall commence on the date of recording of such lien and continue until all sums due are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2009-5, 7-7-09; Ord. No. 2014-9 , 5-27-14; Ord. No. 2015-17 , 3-15-16; Ord. No. 2016-12 , 10-4-16) 
ARTICLE VIII. - LARCENY OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-9 , adopted Aug. 16, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VIII,  8-106-8-108. Inasmuch as there was already a  8-106, these provisions have been included as Art. VIII,  8-116-8-118, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 8-116. - Larceny. 
    Any person, other than the resident who has placed recyclable materials in the recycling bin, who shall steal, take or carry away any recyclable material that has been placed in the recycling bin and delivered to curbside shall be guilty of larceny of the property of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Ord. No. 2016-9 , 8-16-16) 
Sec. 8-117. - Municipal court. 
    The municipal court of the Town of West Warwick shall have jurisdiction over all persons charged with such larceny of the property of the town. 
(Ord. No. 2016-9 , 8-16-16) 
Sec. 8-118. - Penalties. 
    Persons found guilty of larceny of the property of the Town of West Warwick shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00 for the first offense, not to exceed $100.00 for the second offense and not to exceed $500.00 for the third offense and each offense thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-9 , 8-16-16) 
Chapter 9 - HOUSING AND NON-RESIDENTIAL PREMISES AND STRUCTURES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-17 , adopted Sept. 2, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 9,  9-1-9-20, and enacted a new Ch. 9,  9-1-9-35 as set out herein. The former Ch. 9 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 3-9-71; Ord. No. 2007-1, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 2005-6, 4-19-05. 
Cross reference- Buildings generally, ch. 5; subdivisions, ch. 17. 

ARTICLE I. - HOUSING 

Sec. 9-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of all dwellings and dwelling premises or structures, establishing minimum standards governing utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to make dwellings safe, sanitary, and fit for human habitation; fixing certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators, and occupants of dwellings and dwelling premises and structures; and fixing the conditions whereby certain dwellings or structures may be declared unfit for occupancy and condemned for human habitation; and fixing penalties for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  Every portion of a building or its premises used or intended to be used for the purposes of dwelling, living, eating, sleeping or cooking therein or occupancy, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto irrespective of when such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired; and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the dwelling and dwelling premises or structure, for the construction or repair of the dwelling or structure or for the installation or repair of dwelling equipment prior to January 1, 1971. This chapter establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy of all dwellings and structures, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established by the state or Town of West Warwick for the construction, repair or use of a building of the installation of building equipment except as they may be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter as provided by section 9-17. 
(b)  Matters governed by and conforming to the provisions of the State Building Code shall prevail for all structures, dwellings and dwelling units constructed, altered or repaired since July 1, 1977, providing the structure, dwelling or dwelling units conform in their entirety to the prevailing edition of the building code in effect at the time of construction or occupancy, as evidenced by the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-3. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
    Accessory structure shall mean a detached structure which is not used or not intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants and which is located on the same premises with a dwelling. 
    Appropriate authority shall mean the official department, or agency designated by a local community to administer and enforce these regulations pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Approved shall mean approved by the local or state authority having such administrative authority. 
    Ashes shall mean the residue from the burning of combustible materials (and the noncombustible portion of refuse loaded into an incinerator). 
    Basement means a portion of the building partly underground, it having less than its clear height below the average grade if the adjoining ground. 
    Cellar means a portion of the building partly underground, it having less than its clear height below the average grade if the adjoining ground. 
    Central heating system shall mean a single system supplying heat to one or more dwelling unit(s) or more than one rooming unit. 
    Corporate unit. The words "corporate unit" as used in this chapter shall mean the Town of West Warwick. 
    Dormitory shall mean a room or group of rooms in a dwelling used for living and sleeping purposes by four or more persons 
    Dwelling shall mean any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided that temporary housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling units shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are unused or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Enforcing officer shall mean the building official or his authorized representative. 
    Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborages, by removing, or making inaccessible, materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the health officer. 
    Family shall mean one adult person plus one or more persons who are legally related to said person and residing in the same dwelling unit with said person. 
    Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving, and nonconsumption of food. 
    Guest shall mean any person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for not more than 30 days. 
    Habitable room shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and utility rooms of less than 50 square feet, foyers or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and workshops, hobby and recreation areas in unsealed or uninsulated parts of a structure below ground level or in attics. 
    Health officer shall mean the legally designated director of health of the State of Rhode Island, or his authorized representative. 
    Heated water shall mean water heated to a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    Household shall mean a family and/or one or more unrelated persons, including servants and not more than two boarders, who share the same dwelling and use some or all of its cooking and eating facilities. 
    Infestation shall mean the presence within or around a dwelling or other structure in large numbers of insects, rodents, or other pests. 
    Kitchen shall mean any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or area of a room within three feet of such equipment: sink, and/or other device for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food. 
    Lead paint shall mean any pigmented, liquid substances applied to surfaces by brush, roller or spray in which the total nonvolatile ingredients contain more than one percent of lead, by weight, calculated as metallic lead. 
    Lead hazard mitigation means, for dwelling constructed prior to 1978, compliance with the lead hazard mitigation standard in chapter 128.1 of title 42 the Lead Hazard Mitigation Act. 
    Lead based substances means any paint, plaster or other building material which contains lead in excess of acceptable land levels established by department of health regulations 
    Meaning of certain words. Wherever the words dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, premises, and structure are used in this chapter they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words or any part thereof. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, the masculine gender includes the feminine, and the feminine the masculine. 
    Multiple dwelling shall mean any dwelling containing four or more dwelling units. 
    Occupant shall mean any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or actually having possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit, and/or structure except that in dwelling units a guest will not be considered an occupant. 
    Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(a)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or structure with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or 
(b)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or structure as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person, thus representing the actual owner, shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Permissible occupancy shall mean the maximum number of persons permitted as family or household to reside in a dwelling unit or rooming unit based on the square foot per person in habitable rooms. 
    Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association, or partnership. 
    Plumbing shall mean and include all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, waste pipes, garbage disposal units, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, septic tank or gas lines. 
    Potentially hazardous material shall mean any material, including material containing lead and/or other toxic heavy-metal compound in concentrations dangerous to the public health as deemed by the department of health of this state. 
    Premises shall mean a platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land, or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon. 
    Privacy shall mean the ability of a person or persons to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or interference, either by sight or sound, by unwanted persons. 
    Refuse shall mean all putrescible and non-putrescible solids (except body wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals. 
    Rooming house shall mean any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing three or more rooming units in which space is occupied by three or more persons who are not members of a single family. 
    Rooming unit shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish shall mean non-putrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of both: 
(a)  Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard clippings, and wood; and 
(b)  Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass and crockery. 
    Safety shall mean the condition of being free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease. 
    Septic tank shall mean a receptacle, usually underground, to which sewage is drained and retained to effect disintegration of the organic matter by bacteria. 
    Space heater shall mean a self-contained, automatically controlled, vented, fuel-burning appliance of either circulating type or the radiant type. 
    Structure shall mean all structures used or intended to be used for commercial, business, or industrial use or occupancy. 
    Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished, provided by, or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing shall mean any tent, trailer, mobile home or any other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-4. - Responsibilities of owners and occupants. 
(a)  No owner or operator or other person shall occupy, or let to another person, any vacant dwelling, dwelling unit or structure unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and comply with this chapter and all applicable legal requirements of the State of Rhode Island and the Town of West Warwick. 
(b)  Every owner of a multiple dwelling shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. Occupants of two- and three-family dwellings shall share the maintenance of clean and sanitary conditions within the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(c)  Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or structure shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit or structure and premises thereof that he occupies and controls. 
(d)  Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or structure shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. 
(e)  Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or structure shall dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents in a clean, sanitary and safe manner, and if a container is used for storage pending collection it shall be rodentproof, insectproof, and watertight. 
(f)  Every owner or operator of a dwelling containing five or more dwelling units shall supply facilities or containers for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of single-, two- or three-family dwellings and structures it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or refuse containers. 
(g)  The owner of a dwelling, dwelling unit or structure shall be responsible for providing and hanging all screens and double or storm doors and windows where used for ventilation whenever the same are required under the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where there is a written agreement between the owner and occupant. In the absence of such an agreement, maintenance or replacement of screens, storm doors and windows, once installed in any one season, become the responsibility of the occupant. 
(h)  The owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for providing and hanging of shades or other devices on every window of every room used for sleeping and for every room equipped with a flush water closet or bathtub, affording privacy to persons within said rooms. Once installed in any one rental by the owner, replacements become the responsibility of the occupant. 
(i)  Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and every occupant of a structure shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit, in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit, shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling is the only one infected. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodentproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(j)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit or structure shall keep all supplied plumbing fixtures and facilities therein in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(k)  No owner or occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or structure shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rodent harborage in or about any dwelling, dwelling unit or structure. Stored materials shall be stacked neatly in piles elevated at least 18 inches above the ground or floor. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to firewood or kindling wood stored in or about any dwelling, dwelling unit, or structure by the owner or occupant of that property, provided, that the wood is stored for use within the dwelling, dwelling unit or structure, unless prohibited by town ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-5. - Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities. 
    No person shall occupy as owner, occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked, which shall have adequate circulation area and which shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority, and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system or septic tank which is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(2)  Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating and drinking and cooking equipment and utensils, and of food that does not, under ordinary maximum summer conditions, require refrigeration for safe keeping and a counter or table for food preparation; said cabinets and/or shelves shall be adequate for the permissible occupancy of the dwelling unit and shall be of sound construction finished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that will not impart any toxic or deleterious effect to food. 
(3)  A stove or similar device, for cooking food, and a refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than 50 degrees Fahrenheit, but more than 32 degrees Fahrenheit, under ordinary maximum summer conditions, which are properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation, provided that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar devices, need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy, and that sufficient space and adequate connections for the safe and efficient installation and operation of said stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices is provided. 
(b)  Within every dwelling unit there shall be a uninhabitable room, affording privacy to a person within said room, which is equipped with a flush water closet and lavatory basin in good working condition. Said flush water closet and lavatory basin shall be equipped with easily cleanable surfaces, be connected to a water system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure so as to cause the water closet to be operated properly, and shall be connected to a sewer system or septic tank which is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(c)  Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a bathtub and/or shower in good working condition. Said bathtub and/or shower may be in the same room as the flush water closet or in another uninhabitable room and shall be properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated, running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system or septic tank which is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(d)  Every dwelling unit above the first floor shall have approved dual means of egress, with minimum head room of six feet, six inches, leading to safe and open space at ground level. Every dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling shall have immediate access to two or more approved means of egress, one of which will have a minimum head room of six feet, six inches, leading to safe and open space at ground level, or as required by the laws of this state and the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-6. - Minimum standards for light and ventilation. 
    No person shall occupy as owner, occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the requirements of this section: 
(a)  Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly outdoors (provided, that if connected to a room or area used seasonally (e.g., porch), then adequate daylight must be possible through this interconnection). The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall not be less than ten percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls, or other portions of structures, face a window of any such room, and such light-obstructing structures are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type window in the top of such room the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least ten percent of the total floor area of such room. Each window shall be not less than three square feet in area. 
(b)  Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly outdoors which can be easily opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room, provided that if connected to a room or area used seasonally, then adequate ventilation must be possible through this interconnection. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 50 percent of the minimum window area size, or minimum skylight type window size, as required in this section, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the appropriate authority. 
(c)  Every bathroom and water closet compartment and uninhabitable room used for food preparation shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in this section, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with a ventilation system which is approved by [an] appropriate authority. 
(d)  Where there is usable electric service available from power lines, which are not more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every dwelling unit, and all public and common areas, shall be supplied with electric service, outlets and fixtures which shall be properly installed shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the corporate unit. The minimum capacity of such services, and the minimum number of outlets and fixtures, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Every habitable room shall have an electric service and outlets and/or fixtures capable of providing at least three watts per square foot of floor area. 
(2)  Every habitable room and uninhabitable room used for food preparation shall have at least one floor or wall type electric convenience outlet for each 60 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area, and in no case less than two outlets. 
(3)  Every water closet compartment, bathroom, and kitchen or kitchenette, laundry room, furnace room, and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. 
(4)  Convenient switches or equivalent devices for turning on one light in each room or passageway shall be located so as to permit the area ahead to be lighted. 
(5)  Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by natural or electric light at all times so as to provide in all parts thereof at least six foot-candles of light at the tread or floor level. Every public hall and stairway in structures containing not more than three dwelling units, may be supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-7. - Minimum thermal standards; heating and cooling. 
    No person shall occupy as owner, occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed and are maintained in safe and working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein at a distance of 18 inches above the floor level under average winter conditions to a temperature of at least 70 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(b)  Unvented flame space heaters are prohibited. No owner or occupant shall install, operate, or use a space heater employing a flame that is not vented outside the structure in an approved manner. Portable electric heaters, approved under the appropriate local or state electrical and/or fire prevention code, are acceptable where they meet the above provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-7.1. - Unvented portable space heaters. 
(a)  "Unvented portable space heater", as used in the section, means a non-flue connected, self contained, self supporting, oil fueled heating appliance with an integral reservoir designed to be carried from one room to another. 
(b)  "Oil" as used in this section, means any liquid fuel with a flash point of greater than 100 degrees Fahrenheit, including, but not limited to, kerosene, 
(c)  "Listed" as used in this section, means any unvented portable space heater evaluated with reasonably foreseeable hazards to life and property by a nationally recognized testing or inspection agency, including, but not limited to, an organization such as underwriters laboratories, inc., and which has been listed as being reasonably safe for its specific purpose and shown in a list published by the agency and/or bears the mark, and/or symbol of the agency as indication that it has been so listed. 
(d)  Listed unvented portable space heaters which comply with the requirements established in subsection (e) of this section may be offered for sale, sold, and used in any dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(e)  Unvented portable space heaters must adhere to the following requirements: 
(1)  Unvented portable space heaters must have labeling affixed to caution and inform concerning: 
(i)  Provision of an adequate source of ventilation when the heater is in operation; 
(ii)  Use of only suitable fuel for the heater; 
(iii)  Proper manner of refueling; 
(iv)  Proper placement and handling of the heater when in operation; 
(v)  Proper procedures for lighting, flame regulation, and extinguishing the heater; and 
(vi)  Prohibition on use of unvented portable space heaters in sleeping areas which particular label must be permanently affixed thereto; 
(2)  Unvented portable space heaters must be packaged with instructions to inform consumers regarding proper maintenance and operation, including, as a minimum, information regarding the provisions stated in subsections (e)(1)(i) through (e)(1)(vi) of this section; 
(3)  Unvented portable space heaters must be constructed with a low center of gravity and minimum tipping angle of 33 degrees from the vertical with an empty reservoir; 
(4)  Unvented portable space heaters must have an automatic safety shut off device or inherent design feature which eliminates fire hazards in the event of tip over and otherwise conform with the standards established in national fire protection association (NFPA) No. 31; 
(5)  Unvented portable space heaters must not produce carbon monoxide at rates which create a hazard when operated as intended and instructed; and 
(6)  A notice containing the following must be delivered with each unit sold: 
(i)  Unvented portable space heaters that incorporate electric components shall be connected to grounded outlets; 
(ii)  A portable fire extinguisher shall be required in close proximity to unvented portable space heaters; 
(iii)  A smoke detector shall be required in the area where an unvented portable space heater is to be used. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-8. - General requirements relating to the safe and sanitary maintenance of parts of dwellings and dwelling units. 
    No person shall occupy as owner, occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Every foundation, floor, roof, ceiling, and exterior wall must be reasonably weather tight, watertight and damp-free, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Floors, interior walls, and ceilings shall be sound and in good repair. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment. Potentially hazardous materials will not be used where readily accessible to children. Walls shall be capable of affording privacy for the occupants. Every premises shall be graded, drained, free of standing water, and maintained in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition. 
(b)  Potentially hazardous material on the interior surfaces of any dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or facility occupied by children is prohibited. Such interior surfaces include, but are not limited to window sills, window frames, doors, door frames, walls, ceilings, stair rails and spindles or other appurtenances. 
(c)  Lead-based substances are prohibited whenever circumstances present a clear and significant health risk to the occupants of the property, as defined by regulations of the department of health. Where required because of the tenancy of an at-risk occupant, lead hazards must be mitigated as provided for in chapter 128.1 of title 42 or abated pursuant to chapter 24.6 of title 23. 
(d)  In each instance where there is reason to believe that lead-based substances are present, the enforcing officer shall either ascertain whether the lead hazard mitigation standard has been met, or confirm whether suspect substances are lead-based by arranging for a comprehensive environmental lead inspection which conforms to department of health regulations. 
(e)  In all instances where either compliance with mitigation standards cannot be confirmed by the enforcement officer by review of certifications for the same or where substances are confirmed to be lead-based by an environmental lead inspection, and there exists a lead exposure hazard, the enforcing officer shall identify necessary lead hazard reductions that must be taken pursuant to department of health regulations. 
(f)  In all instances where lead-based substances are identified on a dwelling, a dwelling unit, or premises occupied by a child suffering from "lead poisoning", as defined in the Rhode Island Lead Poisoning Prevention Act,  23-24.6-1 through 23-24.6-26, the enforcing officer shall consider these instances under "emergencies", pursuant to  45-24.3-2 (g) During the portion of the year when there is a need for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other flying insects, every door, opening directly from a dwelling unit to outside space, shall have supplied properly fitting screens having at least 16 mesh and self-closing device; and every window, door or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall be supplied with screens. 
(h)  Every window located at or near ground level, used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening located at or near ground level which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with adequate screen or such other devices as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(i)  Every dwelling or accessory structure, and the premises upon which located, shall be rodent proofed and maintained so as to prevent rodent harborage. 
(j)  All openings in the exterior walls, foundations, basements, ground or first floors and roofs which have a half-inch diameter or more opening shall be rat-proofed in an approved manner if they are within 48 inches of the existing exterior ground level immediately below such openings, or if they may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing unguarded pipes, wires, cornices, stairs, roofs and other items such as trees or vines or by burrowing. 
(k)  Skirting, lattice, or other non-rat proofed enclosure creating a possible rat harborage under a porch or any portions of a building shall be rat-proofed at all locations where a rat could find, burrow, or gnaw an access opening. 
(l)  In the event that occupancy usages would result in stacking or piling materials, the materials shall be so arranged as to prohibit the creation of a harborage area. This can be accomplished by orderly stacking and elevating so that there will be a 12-inch opening between the material and the ground level. No stacking or piling of material shall take place against the exterior walls of the structure. 
(m)  All doors, including swinging, sliding, and folding types, shall be constructed so that the space between the lower edge of the door and the threshold shall not exceed three-eighths-inch; provided further that the space between sections of folding and sliding doors when closed shall not exceed three-eighths-inch. 
(n)  Basement floors and/or the floors and areas in contact with the soil, and located at a maximum depth of four feet or less from the grade line, must be paved with concrete or other rat impervious material. 
(o)  Any materials used for rodent control shall be acceptable to the appropriate authority. 
(p)  All fences provided by the owner or agent on the premises and/or all fences erected or caused to be erected by an occupant shall be constructed of manufactured metal fencing material, wood, masonry, or other inert material. Such fences shall be maintained in good condition. Wood materials shall be protected against decay by use of paint or other preservative. The permissible height and other characteristics of all fences shall conform to the appropriate statutes, ordinances, and regulations of this state, and the corporate unit. Wherever any egress from the dwelling opens into the fenced area, there shall be a means of egress from the premises to any public way adjacent thereto. 
(q)  Accessory structures present or provided by the owner, agency, or tenant occupant on the premises shall be structurally sound, and be maintained in good repair and free from insects and rodents, or such structures shall be removed from the premises. The exterior of such structures shall be made weather-resistant through the use of decay-resistant materials or the use of paint or other preservatives. 
(r)  Every plumbing fixture and all water and waste pipes shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition. 
(s)  No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from, or shut off from, or discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alteration are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(t)  All construction and materials, ways and means of egress, and all installation and use of equipment shall conform to applicable state and local laws dealing with fire protection. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-9. - Minimum space, use and location requirements. 
    No person shall occupy, or let to be occupied, any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, unless there is compliance with the requirements of this section: 
(a)  Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof, and at least 130 square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room space. 
(b)  (1)  In every dwelling unit for two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space for the first occupant, and at least 50 square feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof. A bathroom or water closet compartment shall not be used as the only passageway to any habitable room, hall, basement, or cellar or to the exterior of a dwelling unit. 
(2)  At least 75 percent of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of no less than seven feet and the floor area of that part of any room, where the ceiling height is less than five feet, shall not be considered as part of the floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. At least 50 percent of the floor area in attic rooms shall have a ceiling height of seven feet. 
(3)  No space, located totally or partially below grade, shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(i)  The floor, and those portions of the walls below grade, are of waterproof and damp proof construction; 
(ii)  The minimum window area required in section 9-6 is located entirely above grade of the ground adjoining such window area or, if windows are located wholly or partly below grade, that there be constructed a properly drained window well whose ground open area shall be equal to, or greater than, the area of the window opening; the bottom of the window well shall be below the top of the impervious masonry construction under this window; and the minimum horizontal projections of the bottom of the window well shall be equal to, or greater than, the vertical dimensions (depth) of the window well as measured from the bottom of the masonry opening for the window and no part of the window well opposite this window shall protrude above the line projected at a 45-degree angle from the bottom of the window opening at right angles to the outer wall; 
(iii)  The total openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum, as required under this chapter, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and humidity control and approved by the appropriate authority; 
(iv)  There are no pipes, ducts, or other obstructions, less than six feet above the floor level which interfere with the normal use of the room or area. 
(c)  Every dwelling unit shall have at least four square feet of floor-to-ceiling height closet space, for the personal effects of each permissible occupant. If it is lacking in whole or in part, an amount of space, equal in square footage to the deficiency, shall be subtracted from the area of habitable room space used in determining permissible occupancy. 
(d)  A dwelling unit shall not be occupied by more than one family plus two occupants unrelated to the family, except for guests or domestic employees or by not more than one household if the occupants are unrelated, unless a permit for a rooming house has been granted by the appropriate authority. 
(e)  Each dwelling shall have a suitable facility for the safe storage of medicines, toxic materials, and household poisons, such as ammonia, paint, gasoline, etc., to ensure safety for children in the residential environment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-10. - Rooming houses. 
(a)  No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy, or let to another for occupancy, any rooming house except in compliance with the provisions of section 9-4 and section 9-5 and section 9-9 of this chapter. No owner or other person shall occupy, or let to another person, any vacant rooming unit unless it is clean, sanitary, and fit for human occupancy, and in compliance with all applicable requirements of this state and of the corporate unit. 
(b)  No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid rooming house permit issued by the appropriate authority in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit specified therein. The operator shall apply to the appropriate authority for such permit, which shall be issued only after it has been determined that the rooming house is in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and with any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming house at all times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such permit shall give notice in writing to the appropriate authority within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or control of any rooming house. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership, or control, of such rooming house. Every rooming house permit shall expire at the end of the year of license following its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system or septic tank, approved by the health officer and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each six persons, or fraction thereof, residing within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of said facilities, provided: 
(1)  That in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number of water closets; 
(2)  That all such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible for a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities; 
(3)  That every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with heated and unheated water under pressure at all times; 
(4)  That no such facilities shall be located in a basement, except by written approval of the appropriate authority; 
(5)  That cooking in a rooming unit shall be prohibited unless utilities are installed therein in accordance with applicable local and state law; 
(6)  That communal cooking and dining facilities in a rooming house shall be prohibited, except as approved by the enforcing officer in writing; 
(7)  That rooming unit doors shall have operating locks to ensure privacy. 
(d)  Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping by more than one person shall contain at least 60 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof, and every such room shall also contain at least four square feet of closet space per occupant with at least an unobstructed height of five feet. If it is lacking in whole or in part, an amount of space, equal in square footage to the deficiency, shall be subtracted from the area of habitable room space used in determining permissible occupancy. 
(e)  Every rooming unit above the first floor shall have immediate access to two or more safe, unobstructed means of egress, appropriately marked, one of which will have a minimum headroom of six feet six inches, leading to a safe and open space at ground level, as required by the appropriate statutes, ordinances, and regulations of this state and of the corporate unit. 
(f)  Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also apply to hotels and motels, except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this state or the corporate unit. 
(g)  Structurally sound handrails shall be provided on any steps containing five risers or more. If steps are not enclosed, handrails and balusters spaced no more than six inches apart shall be provided. Porches and/or balconies located more than three feet higher than the adjacent areas shall have structurally sound protective handrails 30 to 36 inches high and, if unenclosed, balusters spaced no more than six inches apart shall also be provided. Alternate systems providing at least the same degree of safety, if approved by the appropriate authority, will be accepted. 
(h)  Access to or egress from each rooming unit shall be provided without passing through any other rooming unit, dwelling unit or bathroom. 
Sec. 9-11. - General requirements relating to the safe and sanitary maintenance of nonresidential structures and premises. 
    No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any vacant dwelling or nonresidential structure unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and comply with sections 9-4, 9-7, 9-8 and 9-12 through 9-20 of this chapter and all applicable legal requirements of the State of Rhode Island and the Town of West Warwick. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-12. - Adoption of plans of inspection. 
(a)  The enforcing officer is hereby authorized and directed to develop and adopt plans for the inspection of dwelling units subject to the provisions of this chapter, including a plan for the systematic inspection of dwelling units contained in such contiguous areas within the corporate units as may from time to time be designated by the enforcing officer, with the approval of the town council. 
(b)  Before making inspections within a contiguous area pursuant to a plan authorized in this section, the enforcing officer shall advise the organization which represents the property owners and other residents of such contiguous area, if any such organization exists. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-13. - Inspections; powers and duties of the enforcing officer. 
(a)  The enforcing officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections pursuant to one or more of the plans for inspection authorized by section 9-12 or in response to a complaint that an alleged violation of the provisions of this act or of applicable rules or regulations pursuant thereto may exist; or when the enforcing officer has valid reason to believe that a violation of this chapter or any rules and regulations pursuant thereto has been or is being committed. 
(b)  The enforcing officer is hereby authorized to enter and inspect between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. as a matter of right and at any other time by prior notification to the occupant or owner by the enforcing officer and such notice shall be by certified or registered mail all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, dormitory rooms, and structures subject to this chapter, for the purpose of determining whether there is compliance with its provisions. 
(c)  The enforcing officer is hereby authorized to inspect the premises surrounding dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, dormitory rooms, and structures subject to this chapter, for the purpose of determining whether there is compliance with its provisions. 
(d)  The enforcing officer and the owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, rooming house, dormitory room, or structure subject to this chapter may agree to an inspection by appointment at a time other than the hours provided in this section. 
(e)  The owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, rooming house, dormitory room or structure, upon presentation of proper identification by the enforcing officer, a copy of any relevant plan of inspection pursuant to which entry is sought, and a schedule of the specific areas and facilities to be inspected, shall give the enforcing officer entry and free access to every part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or dormitory room, or structure to the premises surrounding any of these. 
(f)  The enforcing officer shall keep confidential all evidence and information not related to the purposes of this chapter which he may discover or obtain in the course of an inspection made pursuant to this section and such evidence shall be considered privileged. Evidence so obtained shall not be disclosed except as may be necessary in the judgment of the enforcing officer for the proper and effective administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto and shall not otherwise be admissible in any judicial proceeding without the consent of the owner, occupant, or other person in charge of the dwelling unit or rooming unit, or structure inspected. 
(g)  If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or of a multiple dwelling or a rooming house or structure, fails or refuses to permit free access and entry to the structure or premises under his control, or any part thereof, with respect to which an inspection authorized by this chapter is sought to be made, the enforcing officer may, upon a showing that probable cause exists for the inspection and for the issuance of an order directing compliance with the inspection requirements of this section with respect to such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, multiple dwelling, or rooming house or structure, petition and obtain such order from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(h)  Any person who refuses to comply with an order issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to such penalties as may be authorized by law for violation of a court order. 
(i)  The enforcing officer shall have the right to prosecute for any violation of this chapter as provided by law, and is hereby authorized to execute all warrants, with the exception of search warrants, for the violation of laws, rules and regulations relating to this chapter and to serve subpoenas issued for the trial of all offenses against the laws, rules and regulations relating to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-14. - Rules and regulations-Enforcement agencies-Housing board of review. 
(a)  The local authority is authorized to make, adopt, revise, and amend rules and regulations that it deems necessary for the carrying out of the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  Establishment of enforcement agencies. The local authority will further provide for the creation and establishment of divisions, offices, departments, bureaus, and agencies and their respective officers, deputies, and agencies that may be required to enforce and administer the powers and duties authorized by this chapter. 
(c)  Housing board of review. The local code enforcement committee shall be known as the housing board of review consisting of five members. The chairperson, or, in his or her absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of such board shall be open to the public. The housing board of review established pursuant to this chapter be governed by the following procedure: 
(1)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote upon each question, and shall keep records of its decisions and findings and the reasons therefore, and of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(2)  The housing board of review shall be governed by sections 9-18 and 9-19 of this chapter pertaining to appeals there from. 
(d)  Upon failure of the local authority to appoint or establish a local housing board of review, the functions of the housing board of review shall be performed by the Rhode Island state building standards committee pursuant to the provisions of the state housing maintenance occupancy code. Hereinafter the housing board of review and the state building standards committee shall be referred to as "housing board of review". 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-15. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever the enforcing officer determines that any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure, or the premises surrounding any of these, fails to meet the requirements set forth in this chapter or in applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, he shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged failures, and advising the owner, occupant, operator, or agent that such failures must be corrected. This notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Set forth the alleged violations of the chapter or of applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto; 
(3)  Describe the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure where the violations are alleged to exist or to have been committed; 
(4)  Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, for the correction of any violation alleged; 
(5)  Be served upon the owner, occupant, operator, or agent of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure personally, or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known place of residence of the owner, occupant, operator, or agent. 
(b)  The owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or structure who is a nonresident of the state of Rhode Island shall have and continuously maintain with the city or town clerk where the property is located a registered agent, which agent may be either an individual who resides in this state or corporation authorized to do business in this state. The landlord's designation shall be in writing, shall include the name and address of the agent, and shall include the street address of each property designated to the agent. The agent so appointed shall be the agent of the owner upon whom any notice process or demand required or permitted by law to be served may be served. Any person who fails to maintain a registered agent shall be subject to a fine of $100.00. 
(c)  If one or more persons to whom such notice is addressed cannot be found after diligent effort to do so, service may be made upon such person or persons by posting a notice in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure described in the notice, or by causing any such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation, for a period of three consecutive days; or 
(d)  At the end of the period of time allowed for the correction of any violation alleged, the enforcing officer shall re-inspect the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or structure described in the notice. 
(e)  If upon re-inspection the violations alleged are determined by the enforcing officer not to have been corrected, he shall issue a second notice of violation which shall constitute an order requiring that the then-existing failures to meet the requirements of this chapter or of applicable existing rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto, shall be corrected within a reasonable time allowed, but not to exceed 60 days after the date of such re-inspection, if the person served with such notice does not petition for a hearing on the matter in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(f)  The enforcing officer shall cause a copy of the second notice to be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure where the violations are alleged to exist, and shall serve it in the manner provided in this section. 
(g)  The enforcing officer, after the expiration of time granted the person served with such second notice to seek a hearing in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter, or after a final decision by the housing board of review or by a court of competent jurisdiction to which an appeal has been taken, shall cause the second notice to be recorded in the land registry of the Town of West Warwick. 
(h)  Such notice shall state that a cumulative civil penalty has been imposed. No notice and lien recorded under this chapter shall be released until such violation has been abated and the penalty imposed as provided for in section 9-16 has been paid. 
(i)  All subsequent transferees of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure in connection with which a second notice has been so recorded shall be deemed to have notice of the continuing existence of the violations alleged, and shall be liable to all penalties and procedures provided by this chapter and [bound] by applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto to the same degree as was their transferor. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential building upon whom a notice of violation or order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose thereof to another until the provisions of the notice or order have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish to the grantee, lessee or mortgagee prior to such transfer, lease or mortgage, a true copy of any notice or order issued by the enforcing officer, and at the same time notify the enforcing officer in writing of the intent to transfer, lease, or mortgage either by delivering said notice of intent to the enforcing officer and receiving a receipt therefore, or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, giving the name and address of the person to whom the transfer, lease or mortgage is proposed. A transferee, lessee, or mortgagee who has received actual or constructive notice of the existence of a notice or order shall be bound by such notice or order as of the date of such transfer, mortgage or lease without service of further notice upon him. 
(k)  The notice once recorded in the land registry, is effective for a period of three years from the date of recording, and, in the absence of an intervening renewal by the enforcing officer or by the enforcing officer taking other action as provided by this chapter, shall cease to be a notice of violation at the expiration of the three-year-term. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-16. - Penalties municipal court jurisdiction-Review by supreme court-Duties of prosecutor. 
(a)  Civil penalty. Any owner, occupant, operator or agent of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure who has received the second order or notice of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to a cumulative civil penalty of $50.00 per day for each day each violation continues after expiration of the specified reasonable consideration period, provided that no such penalty shall be applicable while a reconsideration, hearing or appeal to the municipal court of the Town of West Warwick is pending in the matter. In those instances where emergencies exist pursuant to section 9-19, hereof, any owner, operator, occupant, or agent of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure is subject to a cumulative civil penalty of $100.00 per day for each day an emergency violation continues. 
(b)  Criminal penalties; willful or reckless violations; false statements. 
(1)  Any person who: 
(i)  Willfully or recklessly violates any provision of this chapter; or 
(ii)  Willfully or recklessly violates, or fails to comply with, any requirements of an order of the enforcing officer; or 
(iii)  Makes, or causes any other person to make, any false or misleading statement on any registration statement notice, or other document required to be filed pursuant to this chapter, or on any application, or any accompanying document, for the granting of any permit or any other action by the appropriate authority pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such violation, and each days failure to comply with any provision constitutes a separate violation. 
(2)  A person commits a willful violation when he intentionally acts, or intentionally fails to act, to cause a condition that violates this chapter. A person commits a reckless violation when he acts, or fails to act with a conscious disregard of a substantial risk that the act or failure to act will result in a condition, constituting a violation of this chapter, which will endanger the life, health or safety of another person. The municipal court for the Town of West Warwick has exclusive original jurisdiction of all these violations. A party aggrieved by any judgment of the district court imposing a fine may seek review by the supreme court. 
(c)  The solicitor for the Town of West Warwick shall immediately seek civil and criminal penalties, as defined in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, against an owner of premises subject to this chapter who fails to comply with a second notice of violation of this chapter and who willfully or recklessly violates this chapter. 
(d)  Where the violations continue one year or more after notice of the violations, an additional civil penalty is imposed on the owner, occupant, operator, or agent of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure. The additional civil penalty shall be a cumulative penalty of $100.00 per day for each day each violation continues. This penalty constitutes a lien on the real estate until paid. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-17. - Repairs and other corrective action; demolition; revolving fund. 
(a)  Repairs and other corrective action. 
(1)  Whenever an owner, operator, or agent of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure fails, neglects, or refuses to make repairs or other corrective action called for by a second order or notice of violation issued pursuant to section 9-15, the enforcing officer may undertake such repairs or action, when in its judgment a failure to make them will endanger the public health, safety or welfare, and the cost of such repairs and action will not exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure to be repaired. 
(2)  Notice of the intention to make such repairs or take other corrective action shall be served upon the owner, operator, or agent pursuant to section 9-15 or upon the appropriate authority as designated agent for service pursuant to section 9-15. 
(3)  Every owner, operator, or agent of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure who has received notice of the intention of the enforcing officer to make repairs or take other corrective action shall give entry and free access to the agent of the enforcing officer for the purpose of making such repairs. 
(4)  Any owner, operator, agent or occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or structure who refuses, impedes, interferes with, hinders, or obstructs entry by such agent pursuant to a notice of intention to make repairs or take other corrective action shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25.00 for each such failure to comply with this section. 
(5)  When repairs are made or other corrective action taken at the direction of the enforcing officer, cost of such repairs and corrective action shall constitute a debt in favor of the Town of West Warwick against the owner of the repaired structure. In the event such owner fails, neglects, or refuses to pay the Town of West Warwick the amount of this debt, it shall be recoverable in a civil action against the owner or his successor, brought in a the municipal court for the Town of West Warwick by the Town of West Warwick which shall possess all right of a private creditor. 
(b)  Designation of unfit dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and structures. 
(1)  Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure, shall be designated as unfit for human habitation, when any of the following defects or conditions are found, and when, in the opinion of the enforcing officer, these defects create a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or of the public: 
(i)  The structure is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin infested. 
(ii)  The structure lacks illumination, ventilation, or required thermal and sanitation facilities. 
(iii)  The general condition or location is unsanitary, unsafe, or unhealthful. 
(2)  Whenever any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure has been designated as unfit for human habitation the enforcing officer shall placard the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure, indicating that it is unfit for human habitation, and, if occupied, shall order the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure vacated within a reasonable time, such time to be not more than 30 days. 
(3)  No dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure, which has been designated as unfit for human habitation and which has been placarded as such and has been vacated shall be used again for human habitation until written approval is secured from the enforcing officer and the placard removed by the enforcing officer. 
(4)  The enforcing officer shall rescind the designation and remove the placard when the defect or condition upon which such designation and such placarding was based has been removed or eliminated as to cause the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure, to be deemed by the enforcing officer as a safe, sanitary, and fit place or unit for human habitation. 
(5)  No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure which has been designated as unfit for human habitation and has been placarded as such except as provided in this section. 
(6)  Any person affected by any decision of the enforcing officer or by any designation or placarding of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or structure as unfit for human habitation shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the enforcing officer under the procedure set forth in section 9-19 of this chapter. 
(7)  The enforcing officer may order the owner of any building, which has been in the past and/or is vacant and open at door and/or window, to be boarded to comply with the following specifications: all openings (including doors and windows) from cellar to second floor inclusive, and all windows above the second floor leading to fire escapes, porches, or structural appurtenances on all floors must be covered from the exterior with three-eighths-inch thick exterior plywood or one-half-inch notched boards firmly secured and with protective coating. All other windows must be so secured by either one-quarter-inch thick exterior plywood or one-half-inch notched boards. 
(8)  When any cost of any type is incurred by the Town of West Warwick in the providing of alternative housing to any person which has resulted from the declaring of a dwelling as being unfit for human habitation by the building official as provided herein all such costs shall constitute a debt in favor of the Town of West Warwick against the owner of such dwelling and shall constitute a lien to run with the land, against such property, in favor of the Town of West Warwick. In the event the owner fails, neglects or refuses to pay the Town of West Warwick the amount of this debt shall be recoverable in a civil action against the owner or his successor, brought in a the municipal court for the Town of West Warwick by the Town of West Warwick, which shall possess all the rights of a private creditor. 
(c)  Demolition of dwellings, dwelling units or rooming units designated as unfit for human habitation. 
(1)  The enforcing officer shall order a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit to be demolished if it has been designated as unfit for human habitation, has been placarded as such, has been vacated, has not been put into proper repair as to rescind the designation as unfit for human habitation and to cause the placard to be removed, and is determined by the enforcing officer not to warrant repair under this chapter. 
(2)  The owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which has been ordered demolished, shall be given notice of this order in the manner provided for service of notice in section 9-15 and shall be given a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, to demolish such structure. 
(3)  Any owner aggrieved by the notice to demolish may within ten days seek a reconsideration of the matter in the manner hereinafter provided, and may seek a formal hearing in the manner provided in section 9-19. 
(4)  When the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to demolish an unfit, unsafe, or unsanitary dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit within the requisite time, the enforcing officer may apply to the municipal court for the Town of West Warwick for a demolition order to undertake the demolition. The court may grant such order when no reconsideration or hearing on the matter is pending. The cost of such demolition shall create a debt in favor of the Town of West Warwick against such owner, and shall be recoverable in a civil action brought by the Town of West Warwick which shall possess all the rights of a private creditor. 
(5)  Whenever a dwelling is demolished, whether carried out by the owner or by the enforcing officer, such demolition shall include the filling in of the excavation remaining on the property on which the demolished dwelling was located, in such manner as to eliminate all potential danger to the public health, safety, or welfare arising from such excavation. 
(6)  All demolition shall be preceded by an inspection of the premises by the appropriate authority as provided for by the laws of Rhode Island. 
(d)  Revolving fund. There is hereby created a revolving fund for the purpose of supporting the cost of repairs and other corrective action of demolition made by the enforcing officer pursuant to this section. Into this fund shall be paid: 
(1)  All civil penalties collected for violations of this chapter. 
(2)  All license fees collected pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  All judgments collected in actions to recover the costs of repair and other corrective action and demolition, pursuant to this section. 
(4)  Such other revenues as the Town of West Warwick may from time to time authorize to be paid into this fund. 
(5)  All donations and grants designated to promote the purposes of this chapter from public or private sources. The enforcing officer is hereby declared to be the authorized agency of the Town of West Warwick to apply for and receive all grants, loans, and gifts of funds to promote the purposes of this chapter. 
(f)  Rent payments. Notwithstanding any lease or other agreement, if the enforcing officer of the Town of West Warwick shall have ordered the repair, alteration or improvement of a dwelling in that he shall have designated the same to be an unfit dwelling as provided for in this section, then the obligation of rent therefore to the landlord shall be suspended and the same shall be paid into the revolving fund as established herein by the enforcing officer, to be paid thereafter to the landlord or any other party authorized to make repairs (including the enforcing officer) to defray the cost of correcting the conditions and no action shall be maintained by the landlord against the tenant for such rent or for possession. Sums paid into the revolving fund in excess of those necessary to make repairs shall be paid to the landlord on completion. If the tenant shall fail to make payments to the enforcing officer then an action for rent or possession may be maintained, subject to such defenses as the tenant may have under the lease or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10 , 5-27-14; Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-17.1. - Avoiding residential demolition through owner neglect. 
    The town council of the Town of West Warwick is hereby empowered in consultation with the building official, to identify residential structures the physical condition of which have deteriorated so as to endanger the preservation of the structure or its appurtenances. Upon the petition to the building official that a residential structure is so determined that its preservation is endangered, the town council may establish a reasonable time not less than 30 days within which the owner(s) must begin repairs. If the owner(s) have not begun repairs within the time allowed, the town council or a body it may designate may conduct a hearing at which the owner(s) may appear and state their reasons for not commencing repairs. If the owner(s) do not appear at the hearing or do not comply with the council's orders, the council may cause the required repairs to be made at the expense of the Town of West Warwick, and cause a lien to be placed against the property for repayments. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-18. - Collection and dissemination of information. 
    The enforcing officer is hereby authorized to collect and disseminate information concerning techniques of maintenance, repair, and sanitation in housing, and concerning the requirements of this chapter and applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-19. - Application for reconsideration; conferences; hearings; appeals. 
(a)  Application for reconsideration. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a notice of the enforcing officer issued in connection with any alleged violation of this act or of applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, or by any order requiring repair or demolition pursuant to section 9-17, may apply to the enforcing officer for a reconsideration of such notice or order within ten days after it has been issued. 
(2)  The enforcing officer shall set a time and place for an informal conference on the matter within ten days of the receipt of such application and shall advise the applicant of such time and place in writing. 
(3)  At the informal conference, the applicant shall be permitted to present his grounds for believing that the order should be revoked or modified to one or more representatives of the enforcing officer. 
(4)  Within ten days following the close of the informal conference, the enforcing officer shall advise the applicant whether or not it will modify or set aside the notice or order issued by the enforcing officer. 
(b)  Hearings. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a notice of the enforcing officer issued in connection with any alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto, or by any order requiring repair or demolition pursuant to section 9-17, may file with the housing board of review a petition setting forth his reasons for contesting the notice or order. 
(2)  Such petition shall be filed within ten days after the notice or order is served on the petitioner in the manner prescribed by section 9-15. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a valid petition, the housing board of review shall either grant or deny the hearing requested, and shall advise petitioner of its decision in writing within ten days of the day on which his petition was received. 
(4)  When the housing board of review determines to hold a hearing, it shall serve petitioner with notice of its decision in the manner provided for service of notice in section 9-15. Such notice shall be served within ten days of the receipt of the petition. 
(5)  At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice or order should be modified or withdrawn, or why the period of time permitted for compliance should be extended. 
(6)  The housing board of review shall have the power to affirm, modify or revoke the notice or order, and may grant an extension of time for the performance of any act required of not more than three additional months where the housing board of review finds that there is practical difficulty or undue hardship connected with the performance of any act required by the provisions of this chapter or by applicable rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto, when the housing board of review finds that there is practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship connected with the performance of any act required by this chapter and applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto; that strict adherence to such provisions would be arbitrary in the case at hand; that extension would not provide an appropriate remedy in the case at hand, and that such extension is in harmony with the general purpose of this chapter to secure the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Emergencies. 
(1)  Whenever, in the judgment of the enforcing officer, an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, notice of violation may be issued, directing the owner, occupant, operator, or agent to take such action as is appropriate to correct or abate the emergency. 
(2)  The owner, occupant, operator, or agent may petition for a code enforcement hearing, but the hearing shall in no case stay the abatement of correction of such emergency. 
(3)  Every owner of a dwelling or multiple dwelling unit is responsible for maintaining all surfaces covered by lead-based substances in an appropriate manner as to ensure no unsafe conditions exist as described in section [9-]8 hereof. 
(4)  It is unlawful for any owner, operator or agent to evict occupants from a dwelling or dwelling unit without just cause during conferences, hearings, appeals or when served with a notice of violation. 
(5)  To expedite correction or abatement of emergency violations the following intervals hold: 
(i)  A notice of violation provides a time period not to exceed ten days for the correction of any violation. The person served with the notice of violation has a time period not to exceed five days to petition for an informal hearing with the code enforcement agency which will be held within five days. 
(ii)  Second notice of violation. A second notice of violation provides a time period not to exceed five days for the correction of any violation. 
(d)  Court proceedings. 
(1)  The West Warwick Municipal Court shall upon due proceedings instituted in the name of the Town of West Warwick have power to proceed according to equity: 
(i)  To restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate or correct a violation; or 
(ii)  To order the repair, vacation or demolition of any dwelling existing in violation of the provisions of this chapter or to otherwise compel compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter or ordinances of the Town of West Warwick adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
When, under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance passed pursuant to the authority hereof, any work is done or material furnished by any enforcing officer or by his order at the expense of the owner or other persons interested, the value of such work and material may be recovered in an action of the case brought against such owner or other interested person or persons, and if any such work or materials shall have been done or furnished at the cost of the Town of West Warwick,, such enforcing officer shall cause the same to be brought in the name of Town of West Warwick. Upon the entry of any case or proceeding brought under the provisions of this chapter, the court shall, at the request of either party, advance the case so that it may be heard and determined with as little delay as possible. 
(2)  The court shall extend priority to the scheduling of emergency cases. 
(e)  Filing fees: judicial review. All proceedings instituted in the name of the Town of West Warwick are exempt from paying court filing fees. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by the final judgment, decision or order of the court may seek review by the supreme court in accordance with 8-8-3.2(b). 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-20. - Conflict of ordinances; effect of partial invalidity. 
    In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance or code of the town or of this state on or after the effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail except those provisions established under the state building code. In any case where a provision of this chapter is [found] to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the Town of West Warwick or of this state which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this chapter. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
ARTICLE II. - NON-RESIDENTIAL PREMISES AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 9-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of all non-residential properties, premises and structures establishing minimum standards governing utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to make non-residential properties, premises and structures safe, sanitary and fit for human occupancy and maintained in a condition so as not to create conditions detrimental to the welfare of the neighborhood; fixing certain responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of non-residential properties, premises and structures; and fixing the conditions whereby certain non-residential properties, premises and structures may be declared unfit for occupancy and condemned for human occupancy or may be declared as detrimental to the welfare of the neighborhood; and fixing the penalties for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-22. - Applicability. 
    Every portion of a building or its property or premises, including any item located on the property or premises, whether or not permanently affixed thereto, used or intended to be used for the purposes of occupancy for any non-residential purpose shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, irrespective of when such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired or the property first occupied; and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use and occupancy of the non-residential property, premises or structure, for the repair of the structure or for the installation of equipment prior to the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto. This chapter establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy of all non-residential properties, premises and structures. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-23. - Unsafe structures-General provisions. 
    All buildings, signs or other structures or any portion thereof shall be kept and maintained in a safe and sound condition at all times by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-24. - Unsafe conditions. 
    A building, sign, or structure shall be declared unsafe by the building official if any one of the following conditions exists upon the premises: 
(a)  The building is vacant, unguarded, and open at doors or windows thereby permitting unauthorized entry; or 
(b)  There is a hazardous accumulation of dust, debris, or other combustible material therein; or 
(c)  There is a falling away, hanging loose or loosening of any siding, block, brick, or other building material; or 
(d)  There is a deterioration of the structure, or structural parts, or a structural weakness exists whereby the continued use and occupancy would endanger the lives of the occupants or those using public or private land in the immediate area; or 
(e)  The building has been partially destroyed or has been substantially damaged by the elements, acts of God, fire, explosion, or otherwise, and is vacant, regardless of whether or not the building is secured to prevent unauthorized entry; or 
(f)  The building or structure has been vacant or unused for more than 180 days, whether or not it has been boarded, guarded, and/or closed at all doors and windows, and has remained in a condition such that the repairs necessary to make the building or structure safe and sanitary for occupancy exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the building or structure in its present condition; or 
(g)  The building, sign, or structure constitutes a fire or windstorm hazard or is, in the opinion of the building official, otherwise dangerous to human life or public health, safety, and welfare; or 
(h)  There is an unusual sagging or leaning out of plumb of the building or any parts of the building, and the effect is caused by deterioration or over-stressing; or 
(i)  The electrical or mechanical installation or systems create a hazardous condition contrary to the standards of this code or the code in effect at the time of construction; or 
(j)  An unsanitary condition exists by reason of inadequate or malfunctioning sanitary facilities or waste disposal systems; or 
(k)  The use or occupancy of the building is illegal or improper because the building does not comply with the allowable areas, height, type of construction, fire resistance, means of egress, live load, or other features regulated by the code in effect at the time of construction; or 
(l)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-25. - Notice of unsafe condition. 
    When the whole or any part of any building, sign, or other structure shall be declared to be in an unsafe condition, the building official shall issue a notice of the unsafe condition to the owner of record describing the building or structure deemed unsafe, and an order either requiring that the building, sign, or structure be made safe or be demolished within a reason able, stipulated time. All notices and orders shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the owners of the building by the building official or his or her designated agent or shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the owner or owners. Orders to demolish any building, a sign, or structure shall also be issued to all mortgagees of record. If any owner or mortgagee cannot be located after due and diligent search, the notice and order shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure, and the procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. When a building or structure is ordered secured for any reason by the building official, the owner shall board the building or structure in accordance with section 9-30, hereof, within seven days, or the building official may cause the necessary work to be done to secure the building or structure. The cost of the work shall be billed to the owner and be a lien against the real property as provided in sections 9-33 and 9-34 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-26. - Appeals. 
(a)  The owner shall either comply with the order or shall appeal the order to the local board of appeals, within 30 days of mailing or posting of the notice and order. There shall be no appeal to the order to board an unsecured or vacant building or structure. The board of appeals shall, if requested by the owner, hold a hearing where it will either confirm, modify, or revoke the notice and order of the building official in accordance with the provisions of section 9-35 hereof, as may be deemed just and proper in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Upon failure of the local authority to appoint or establish a local board of appeals, the functions of the board of appeals shall be performed by the Rhode Island state building standards committee pursuant to the provisions of the state building code. Hereinafter the local board of appeals and the state building standards committee shall be referred to as "board of appeals". 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-27. - Restoration of unsafe buildings. 
(a)  A building, sign, or structure declared unsafe by the building official shall be restored to a safe and usable condition in one of the following manners: 
(1)  When no change in use or occupancy is contemplated or compelled and the reconstruction or restoration is less than 50 percent of the physical value of the building, sign, or structure as defined in RIGL  23-27.3-106.5, the building, sign, or structure shall be repaired in accordance with the applicable requirements of the rehabilitation building and fire code for existing buildings and structures, or if the rehabilitation code for existing buildings and structures is not applicable, the applicable requirements of RIGL  23-27.3-106.3 or  23-27.3-106.4; or 
(2)  When a change in use or occupancy is contemplated or compelled, or reconstruction or restoration is in excess of 50 percent of the physical value of the building, sign, or structure as defined in RIGL  23-27.3-106.5, exclusive of foundations, the building, sign, or structure shall be made to comply in all respects with the requirements for materials and methods set forth in the rehabilitation building and fire code for existing buildings and structures, or if said code does not apply, the requirements for materials and methods for new buildings, signs, or structures erected under the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-28. - Compliance. 
    The owner of an unsafe building, sign, or other structure shall obtain the necessary permits to perform the restoration or reconstruction work required by the building official within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of an unsafe condition and shall proceed immediately with the work as required in RIGL  23-27.3-114.2. The work shall continue until the unsafe condition has been abated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-29. - Disregard of unsafe notice. 
    When an owner or the owner's authorized agent has been served with a notice of an unsafe condition and fails to comply with the order to either make the building, sign, or structure safe or to have it demolished within a stipulated time and has not appealed the order to the board of appeals within the 30 days required, the legal counsel of the municipality shall be advised and shall institute the appropriation action to compel compliance as provided in RIGL  23-27.3-122.0. If in the opinion of the building official the condition poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, the building official shall cause all the necessary work to be done to either make the building, sign, or structure safe or to have it demolished as provided in chapter 9A hereof. The cost of the work shall be billed to the owner and shall be a lien against the real property as provided in sections 9-33 and 9-34 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-30. - Boarding. 
    Any building or structure which is ordered secure for any reason by the building official shall be boarded in accordance with the following specifications: 
(a)  All openings (including doors and windows) from cellar to second floor inclusive, and all windows above the second floor leading to fire escapes, porches, or structural appurtenances on all floors must be covered from the exterior with a minimum of one-half inch thick exterior grade plywood secured with screws of minimum length one and five-eighths inches or two inches (6d) ring shank nails placed 12 inches on center around the perimeter of the opening. Plywood shall be fitted so it rests snugly against the exterior frame butting up to the molding or siding. All other windows must be secured in a similar manner with three-eighths inch plywood from either the exterior or interior of the building. 
(b)  All gas, electric, water, and other services to a boarded building or structure except sewer lines shall be disconnected. 
(c)  Prior to boarding a building or structure, all decomposable debris and rubbish shall be removed from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-31 - Emergency measures. 
(a)  Vacating buildings. When, in the opinion of the building official, there is actual and immediate danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen or collapsed and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, the building official is authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the building immediately. The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to the building a notice reading as follows: 
THIS BUILDING IS UNSAFE AND ITS USE OR OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the building or structure. 
(b)  Temporary safeguards. When, in the opinion of the building official, there is actual and immediate danger of collapse or failure of a building or structure or any part thereof, which would endanger life or property, the building official shall cause all necessary work to be instituted to render the building or structure or part thereof temporarily safe despite the fact that the action may occur prior to the institution of those legal procedures provided for by this code. 
(c)  Closing streets. When necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare, the building official may temporarily close sidewalks, streets, buildings, and structures and areas adjacent to any unsafe buildings, and prohibit the use thereof. 
(d)  Hazardous buildings. Whenever a building is in such hazardous condition as to create an immediate danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, either because of its potential as a fire hazard or because of the danger from collapse, the building official may board up the building immediately at the owner's expense and may order its immediate demolition. In the event that the owner fails to comply immediately with the order to demolish then the building official may demolish the building at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-32. - Emergency repairs. 
    For the purpose of sections 9-29 through 9-31, inclusive, of this chapter, the building official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-33. - Costs of emergency repairs. 
    Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the building official; and the legal authority of the municipality shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the unsafe building or structure was located for the recovery of the costs. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-34. - Lien for emergency repairs. 
(a)  Recording of lien. Whenever the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, board, or demolish a building, sign, or structure as required by the building official, and the building official has made repairs, boarded, or demolished the building, sign, or structure, reasonable costs incurred by the building official in the action shall be a lien against the real property. The lien shall be recorded with the records of land evidence of the municipality, and the lien shall incur legal interest from the date of recording. 
(b)  Lien as a tax. The cost incurred by the building official, plus the interest as provided in the Code thereon, in the boarding or demolishing of a building, sign, or structure, shall be added to the amount of taxes due on the real estate where the building, sign, or structure was located. The tax collector of the city or town shall have the same powers and shall be subject to the same duties with respect to such claim as in the case of the annual taxes upon real estate, and the provisions of law relative to the collection of annual taxes, the sale or taking of land for the nonpayment thereof and the redemption of land so sold or taken shall apply to such a claim. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Sec. 9-35. - Appeals from orders in regard to unsafe buildings. 
(a)  Application. The owner of a building or other structure or the owner's duly authorized representative who has been served with an order pertaining to an unsafe building or other structure and a notice to make the building or other structure safe, secure, or habitable or to take down and remove the building or other structure, shall have the right, except in cases of emergency, to demand a hearing before the board of appeal if the owner deems such order to be unnecessary, improper, or unreasonable, and the demand shall be in writing with a statement of reasons therefore. 
(b)  Procedure. The powers and duties of the board of appeal under this section shall be: 
(1)  To inspect the building or other structure and to confirm, modify or revoke the order of the building official as may seem just and proper in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  To determine the suitable cost of reconstruction, restoration or rehabilitation in the repair of the unsafe building or other structure in the case of disagreement or dispute in relation thereto. 
(c)  Findings. The board of appeals shall determine its findings and submit a written report in writing affirming, modifying or revoking the order of the building official in whole or in part, and shall determine the remedial steps if any to be taken to render the building or other structure safe. The findings and determination agreed upon by a majority of the board shall be deemed conclusive, and certified copies of the report shall be filed with the building official and with the owner or the owner's representative, and shall be binding upon the building official and all parties in interest. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17 , 9-2-14) 
Chapter 9A - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 9A-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing the minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of private property within the town to ensure that conditions that create a danger to the health and safety of the occupants of such property and/or the members of the public may be declared as unsafe and for establishing procedure of the correction of such conditions and for fixing of procedure for the payment of any cost incurred in the correction of such condition. 
(Ord. No. 2013-51, 12-19-13) 
Sec. 9A-2. - Applicability. 
    All areas of any parcel of private property, including appurtenances thereon, including, without limiting thereto, such appurtenances as trees, swimming pools, decorative items and any appurtenance not presently provided for in chapter 9, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2013-51, 12-19-13) 
Sec. 9A-3. - Definitions. 
    Appurtenance shall mean any item located on a parcel of property, whether or not permanently affixed thereto, which is not governed by the provisions of chapter 9. 
    Enforcing officer shall mean the town official designated by the town manager to administer and enforce these regulations, depending on the nature of the of the violation. 
    Occupant shall include any and all persons residing or in any way inhabiting the parcel of property. 
    Owner shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to the parcel of property, or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of the parcel of property as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person, thus representing the actual owner, shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as if he or she were the owner. 
    Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership. 
    Potentially hazardous condition shall mean any condition, which in the opinion of the designated town office and the town manager is a condition that renders a danger to the health and safety of the owners or occupants of the property or the members of the public. 
    Property or parcel of property shall mean the entire parcel of real estate whether platted or unplatted, owned by the same owner and excluding any structures governed by the provisions of chapter 9. 
    Rubbish shall mean any solid wastes. 
    Safety shall mean the condition of being free from conditions which may cause harm or injury to the owners or occupants of the property or members of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2013-51, 12-19-13) 
Sec. 9A-4. - Responsibilities of owners and occupants. 
    Every owner of property and/or occupant of property shall maintain that property so that no condition exists that creates a danger to the owner, occupant or member of the public because of the failure to maintain the property and all appearances thereon in a safe and maintained condition. Such dangerous conditions shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of deceased trees, unprotected swimming pools, unstable land or the collection of rubbish and hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. 2013-51, 12-19-13) 
Sec. 9A-5. - Inspections; powers and duties of the enforcing officer. 
(a)  Upon the receipt of any credible information of the existence of a condition on a parcel of property that creates a danger to the owner, occupant and/or member of the public or has received a complaint that such conditions exists, the designated enforcing officer is hereby authorized and directed to make an inspection of such parcel of property for the purpose of determining whether such dangerous conditions does, in fact, exist. 
(b)  Upon a positive determination being made by the enforcing officer that a dangerous condition does, in fact, the enforcing officer shall take action pursuant to the provisions of the Chapter to insure that correction and removal of such dangerous conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2013-51, 12-19-13) 
Sec. 9A-6. - Notice of existence of dangerous condition. 
(a)  Condition not creating imminent danger; corrective action. 
(1)  Whenever the enforcing officer determines that a dangerous condition exists, but that the condition does not create a danger of imminent harm or danger to the owner or occupant of the property or to members of the public, he shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged dangerous condition and advising the owner and occupant that such condition must be removed and/or corrected. This notice shall: 
a.  Be in writing; 
b.  Set forth a detailed description of the alleged dangerous condition; 
c.  Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days for the correction and/or removal the dangerous condition. 
d.  Be served upon the owner and occupant personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the address of the owner in the records of the tax assessor of the town and to the occupant at the address of the property. 
(2)  At the end of the period of time allowed for correction or removal of the dangerous condition, the enforcing officer shall re-inspect the property. If upon reinspection the enforcing officer determines that the dangerous condition has not been corrected or removed the enforcing officer shall issue a summons and complaint to the owner and occupant ordering them to appear before the municipal court of the town seeking a judicial order compelling the correction or removal of the dangerous condition. 
(b)  Condition creating an imminent danger. 
(1)  Whenever the enforcing officer determines that a dangerous condition exists, and that the condition creates a danger of imminent harm or danger to the owner or occupant of the property or to members of the public and requires action without delay to protect the public health, safety or welfare, he shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged dangerous condition and directing the owner and occupant that such condition must be removed and/or corrected. This notice shall: 
a.  Be in writing; 
b.  Set forth a detailed description of the alleged dangerous condition; 
c.  Shall require the immediate correction and/or removal the dangerous condition. 
d.  Be served upon the owner and occupant personally and in the event of the inability to accomplish such personal service shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the property. 
(2)  The owner and/or occupant shall be granted a conference on the matter upon request, as soon as practicable, but such conference shall in no case stay the abatement of the correction or removal of the dangerous condition. 
(3)  Upon the failure of the owner and/or occupant to correct and/or remove the dangerous condition within 48 hours from the service or posting of notice, the enforcing officer shall cause to make the correction or removal of the dangerous condition for the safety and welfare of the owner, occupant and members of the public. Any owner or occupant who shall impede, interfere, hinder or obstruct the enforcing officer or his designee from making such correction and/or removal of the dangerous condition shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00 per day for each day that such action continues. 
(4)  Whenever the corrective action or removal of the dangerous condition is taken at the direction of the enforcing officer, the cost of such corrective action or removal action shall constitute a debt in favor of the town against the owner and occupant and a lien against the property. In the event the owner and/or occupant fails, neglects or refuses to pay the town the amount of this debt, it shall be recoverable in a civil action against the owner and occupant in an action brought in the municipal court for the town. 
(c)  Condition determined by enforcing officer to be of emergency nature. 
(1)  Whenever the enforcing officer determines that a dangerous condition exists, and that the condition creates a danger of an emergency nature creating the immediate risk of harm or danger to the owner or occupant of the property or to members of the public and requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety or welfare, he shall attempt to give notice of the dangerous condition in any reasonable means possible to the owner and/or occupant and directing the owner and occupant that such condition must be removed and/or corrected immediately. 
(2)  After reasonable attempt to give notice, neither the owner nor occupant can be located or after receipt of notice the owner and/or occupant refuses to take such immediate action to correct or remove the dangerous condition. the enforcing officer shall immediately cause to make the correction or removal of the dangerous condition for the safety and welfare of the owner, occupant and members of the public. Any owner or occupant who shall impede, interfere, hinder or obstruct the enforcing officer or his designee from making such correction and/or removal of the dangerous condition shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00 per day for each day that such action continues. 
(3)  Whenever the immediate corrective action or removal of the dangerous condition is taken at the direction of the enforcing officer, the cost of such corrective action or removal action shall constitute a debt in favor of the town against the owner and occupant and a lien against the property. In the event the owner and/or occupant fails, neglects or refuses to pay the town the amount of this debt, it shall be recoverable in a civil action against the owner and occupant in an action brought in the municipal court for the town. 
(Ord. No. 2013-51, 12-19-13) 
Chapter 9B - INTEREST AND COURT COSTS 

Sec. 9B-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to enable the Town of West Warwick to provide a rate of interest to be charged upon those sums of money owed to the town either pursuant to court judgment or lien or building official imposed lien, to authorize the municipal court to add the expenses incurred in the sending of court notices by certified mail and the expenses incurred for the service of process and to add those liens where authorized by the general laws of the State of Rhode Island to the taxes due on the real estate on which the lien is placed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16 , 9-16-14) 
Sec. 9B-2. - Court costs. 
    Upon the presentation of a matter to the West Warwick municipal court, the official of the Town of West Warwick shall also present a statement in writing of the itemized and total costs incurred by the Town of West Warwick for the sending of notices by certified mail and for the payment to constables or other authorized persons for the making of service of process in the matter before the court. The officer presenting such statement, if requested by the court, shall testify to the truth and correctness of the statement. In the event that the court shall enter judgment against the defendant in the matter before the court, those expenses so incurred by the town shall be added by the court as court costs. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16 , 9-16-14) 
Sec. 9B-3. - Interest on judgments. 
    Every judgment rendered by the West Warwick municipal court shall incur interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum or such other rate as shall from time to time be the legal rate of interest in the State of Rhode Island commencing on the date of issuance of such judgment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16 , 9-16-14) 
Sec. 9B-4. - Interest on liens-Liens to be added to real estate tax. 
(a)  Building official liens. Any lien imposed by the West Warwick building official pursuant to the provisions of sections 9-17 or 9-34 of this Code shall incur interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum or such other rate as shall from time to time be the legal rate of interest in the State of Rhode Island commencing on the date of recording of such lien in the records of land evidence of the Town of West Warwick. 
(b)  Lien added to real estate tax. Any lien imposed by the West Warwick building official pursuant to the provisions of sections 9-17 or 9-34 of this Code shall be added to the real estate taxes for the real estate on which such lien is placed and shall be due and payable with the real estate taxes on said real estate. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16 , 9-16-14) 
Chapter 9C - MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITIES 

Sec. 9C-1. - Zoning districts. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this zoning code, medical marijuana cultivation and cooperative cultivation of marijuana are permitted uses within all zoning districts of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Ord. No. 2015-5 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 9C-2. - Definitions. 
    The definitions of all terms used herein shall be as stated in G.L.  21-28.6-3, specifically including, but not limited to, "cardholder" meaning a qualifying patient or a caregiver. 
(Ord. No. 2015-5 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 9C-3. - Building requirements. 
    All medical marijuana building facilities in all zoning districts in the Town of West Warwick shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  All licensed caregivers and cooperative cultivators, shall apply for all appropriate building, electrical, mechanical and plumbing permits as required by the building official. The building official shall grant the application for permits pursuant to G.L.  23-27.3-100.1, et seq. All permits applied for in furtherance of the Act and any and all documents related thereto shall be sealed by the building official and not subject to review by any party other than the caregiver or cooperative cultivator who has filed said application. 
(b)  All licensed caregivers and cooperative cultivators, shall apply for appropriate approvals and inspections by the local fire marshal. The fire marshal shall grant the application for permits pursuant to G.L.  23-28.1-1, et seq. All permits applied for in furtherance of the Act and any and all documents related thereto shall be sealed by the local fire marshal and not subject to review by any party other than the caregiver or cooperative cultivator who has filed said application. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements above, the building official shall require the following: 
(1)  That the area used for growing be secured by locked doors and an alarm system. 
(2)  That the area used for growing have two means of ingress and egress. 
(3)  That the area used for growing not be below grade and not in a basement. 
(4)  That the area used for growing shall not be within ten feet of a fuel or heating source including but not limited to propane, natural gas or an oil tank. 
(5)  That no single non-residential location may have more than one medical marijuana facility. For the purposes of this section, location means one structural non-residential building, not units within a structural building. 
(6)  That the licensed cardholder shall not exceed the allowed limits of cultivation as prescribed in G.L. 21-28.6. 
(d)  Cooperative cultivations. Two or more licensed cardholders may cooperatively cultivate marijuana in residential or non-residential locations subject to the following restrictions in addition to items (1) through (6) contained in Section 9C-3(c) above: 
(1)  Cardholder's can only cooperatively cultivate in one location. 
(2)  No single location may have more than one cooperative cultivation. For the purposes of this section, location means one structural building, not units within a structural building. 
(3)  The cooperative cultivation shall not be visible from the street or other public areas 
(4)  A written acknowledgement of the limitations of the right to use and possess marijuana for medical purposes in Rhode Island that is signed by each cardholder and is displayed prominently in the premises cooperative cultivation. 
(5)  Cooperative cultivations are restricted to the following possession limits: 
a.  A non-residential, cooperative cultivation may have no more than ten ounces of usable marijuana, 48 mature marijuana plants, and 24 seedlings. 
b.  A residential, cooperative cultivation may have no more than ten ounces of useable marijuana, 24 mature marijuana plants, and 12 seedlings. 
(6)  Cooperative cultivations must be inspected as follows: 
a.  A non-residential, cooperative cultivation must have displayed prominently on the premises documentation from the municipality where the single location is located that the location and the cultivation has been inspected by the municipal building and/or zoning official and the municipal fire department and is in compliance with any applicable state or municipal housing and zoning codes. 
b.  A residential cooperative cultivation must have displayed prominently on the premises an affidavit by a licensed electrician that the cultivation has been inspected and is in compliance with any applicable state or municipal housing and zoning codes for the municipality where the cooperative cultivation is located. 
(7)  Cooperative cultivations must report the location of the cooperative cultivation to the division of state police. 
(Ord. No. 2015-5 , 8-11-15; Ord. No. 2017-5 , 2-28-17) 
Sec. 9C-4. - Confidentiality. 
    Any application for a permit or any other use pursuant to this chapter 9C, any inspection reports, approvals, certificates of occupancy or any other document prepared or created pursuant to this chapter shall not include the term marijuana, cardholder, caregiver, cooperative cultivation or any other term that may indicate that such document is or has been prepared or created pursuant to this chapter 9C and shall be sealed and not subject to review by any party other than the caregiver or cooperative cultivator who has filed said application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-5 , 8-11-15; Ord. No. 2015-17 , 3-15-16; Ord. No. 2017-5 , 2-28-17) 
Sec. 9C-5. - Violations. 
    The building official, fire marshal and/or other designated official shall be required to report a violation of any of the provisions of this section to the Rhode Island Department of Health and any such violation may result in a revocation of the cardholder's registry identification card in accordance with G.L. 21-28.6. 
(Ord. No. 2015-5 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 9C-6. - Probable cause and searches. 
    Once permitted, the growing of medical marijuana shall not constitute probable cause or reasonable suspicion, nor shall it be used system to support the search of the property of the person possessing, or otherwise subject the property of the person to inspection by any governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 2015-5 , 8-11-15) 
Chapter 10 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements generally, ch. 3; license to remove or transport garbage and rubbish,  8-4; permits for rooming houses,  9-10; licensing of constables,  14-3 et seq.; licensing of persons emptying cesspools and privies,  15-25 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Fees for victualling license. 
    In accordance with G.L. 1956,  5-24-1, as amended, applicants for restaurant licenses shall pay such fees as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Res. of 5-10-66; Res. of 4-2-79; Res. of 2-2-82; Res. of 6-14-83; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-2. - Statutes on closing-out sales accepted. 
    The town hereby accepts the provisions of G.L. 1956, tit. 6, ch. 14, as amended, and said provisions shall be applicable throughout the town. 
(Ord. of 8-24-65) 
Sec. 10-3. - Closing time for shops, places of resort. 
    All shops and places of resort within the town, restaurants excepted, shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Comp. Ords. ch. 40,  1) 
Sec. 10-4. - Yard sales. 
(a)  No yard sale may be conducted without the prior approval and securing of a permit and the payment of a fee as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  An application for a yard sale to be held at a specific date shall be obtained from the town clerk's office and, upon approval by the chief of police the town clerk shall issue the license with the payment of a fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. An applicant will not be permitted to have in excess of four yards sales per year. 
(c)  Yard sales for charitable purposes and for person's 65 years of age or older shall be exempt from the payment or the fee, but must first obtain a permit approved by the chief of police. 
(d)  The applicant, upon refusal by the police chief; may file an appeal with the town council. Said appeal shall be simply written and filed with the town clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-9-74; Res. of 9-7-82; Res. of 6-16-88; Ord. of 5-7-91; Res. No. 96-84, 5-7-96; Ord. No. 99-03, 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-46, adopted October 1, 2013, amended  10-4 to read as set out herein. Previously  10-4 was titled yard sales; permit required; application; certain exemption; appeal; penalty. 
Sec. 10-5. - Licensing of jukeboxes and pool or billiard tables. 
(a)  Definition. This section shall apply to the following amusement devices operated by the public by the insertion of a coin, slug, token or payment in any other manner: 
(1)  Jukebox; 
(2)  Pool table or billiard table. 
(b)  It hall be unlawful for any person to operate such machines or devices without first having obtained a license therefore. Applications for the licenses shall be made to the clerk. The fee therefore shall be as fees as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(c)  All machines presently in existence, on adoption of this section, will be entitled to a license upon payment of said fee until September 1, 1978. Thereafter, any unlicensed machine or any new machine which seeks to be licensed, must received the approval of the town council after filing an application fee of $10.00, an advertising fee, and if granted, a license fee of $20.00 per machine. The town clerk shall forward each new application to the chief of police for his report to the council and a public hearing will be held after notice in a local newspaper for three weeks, at a regular or special council meeting for the granting of said license. 
(d)  Revocation. Any licenses, whether issued prior to September 1, 1978, or subsequent thereto, shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation after due notice to the owner or operator thereof, and (after granting said owner or operator) an opportunity to be heard. 
(e)  Any violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with the general penalty provision of this Code, being section 1-10. 
(Res. of 8-8-78,  1-5; Res. of 4-26-79; Res. of 1-19-82; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Secs. 10-6-10-12. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND DEALERS 

Sec. 10-13. - Statutes adopted. 
    The town hereby adopts provisions of G.L. 1956, tit. 5, ch. 21, as amended, entitled "Secondhand Dealers." 
(Res. of 12-29-65) 
Sec. 10-14. - Licensing authority designated; scope. 
    The town council by and in accordance with the enabling provisions of G.L. 1956,  5-21-1, as amended, does hereby constitute itself as the licensing authority or board for issuing and revocation of licenses at pleasure to all persons including corporations, selling, purchasing bartering and dealing in junk, old metals and any other secondhand articles, excluding and operating or maintaining automobile junk yards, which shall be subject to the provisions of section 10-15 relating to the license requirements for such automobile junk yards. All licenses issued under this section shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 12-20-65,  1; Res. No. 97-233, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-15. - License required. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this section shall specify the purpose for which it shall be used. 
(b)  No person shall engage in the business of selling, purchasing, bartering or dealing in junk, old metals, secondhand jewelry, precious metals or other metals, or any other secondhand articles, nor keep a shop or storehouse for the receipt of any junk, old metals, secondhand jewelry, precious metals or other secondhand articles, nor engage in business as a foundryman or other person receiving any junk, old metals, secondhand jewelry precious metals or other metals, or any other secondhand articles for the purpose of melting the same or converting the same into castings, nor gather any junk, old metals, secondhand jewelry, precious metals or other metals or other secondhand articles in any bag, wagon or cart unless such person shall have first obtained a license for the conducting of the same in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  No person shall engage in the business of selling, purchasing, bartering or dealing in junk cars nor engage in the business of operating or maintaining an automobile junkyard, as hereinafter defined in section 10-21 and Rhode Island General Laws, unless such person shall have first obtained a license for the conducting of the same in accordance with the provisions of this section. Every license granted for the operation or maintenance of an automobile junkyard, under this section, shall be distinct from all other types of licenses issued hereunder and shall clearly and definitively indicate it issuance is solely for the purpose of operating and maintaining an automobile junkyard. 
(Ord. of 12-29-65,  7; Res. of 4-30-80; Res. No. 97-233, 9-2-97) 
Sec. 10-16. - License application; fees. 
    All applications for licenses included in the provisions of sections 10-14 and 10-15 shall be filed with the town clerk, accompanied by the following license fees, which shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. of 12-29-65,  3; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-17. - Publication of notice of application. 
    All applications for licenses included in the provisions of section 10-14 shall be advertised by the town clerk in some newspaper having a general circulation in the town at least one time a week for two successive weeks prior to the date of hearing upon said application. At least 14 days shall elapse between the date of the first advertisement and the date scheduled for hearing upon said application; provided, however, that before such application shall be filed and published for hearing, the town clerk shall collect from the applicant a filing fee of $10.00 plus the cost of publishing said notice. 
(Ord. of 12-29-65,  4) 
Sec. 10-18. - License term. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions hereof shall be issued for a term not exceeding one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. of 12-29-65,  2) 
Sec. 10-19. - License expiration; rebates. 
    All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall expire on May 1 succeeding the date of such license, and no rebate shall be made from any license fee for such license for any licensed term less than one year. 
(Ord. of 12-29-65,  2) 
Sec. 10-20. - Location. 
    No license shall be granted under the provisions hereof to the keeper of any shop, yard, or storehouse for the reception of any junk, old metals, or other secondhand articles, in any location not occupied for such purpose at the time of the application for such license, where the owners or occupants of the greater part of the land within 200 feet of such building or place shall file with the town council their objection to the granting of such license; provided, however, this section shall not apply to any applicant whose business as herein stated was located in the town and is being acquired by eminent domain proceedings. 
(Ord. of 12-29-65,  5) 
Sec. 10-21. - "Automobile junkyard" defined; conditions and licensing. 
    As used in this article "automobile junkyard" means a place where one or more unserviceable, discarded, worn-out or junked automobiles, or bodies, engines, tires, parts or accessories thereof are gathered together, and no license shall be granted for the same unless: 
(a)  It is to be operated and maintained entirely within a building; or unless 
(b)  It is to be operated and maintained exclusively for the purpose of salvaging the value as scrap of the material collected, as opposed to reselling parts to be used for the purpose for which they were originally manufactured, and is to be located in a built-up commercial or industrial area or contiguous to a railroad siding, or on or contiguous to docking facilities; or unless 
(c)  It is: 
(1)  More than 600 feet from any state highway; and 
(2)  More than 300 feet from any park, bathing beach, playground, school, church or cemetery and is not within ordinary view therefrom; and 
(3)  Screened from view either by natural objects or well constructed and properly maintained fences at least eight feet high acceptable to the town and so specified on the license. 
(4)  More than 1,000 feet from the nearest edge of any highway on the interstate or primary system. 
(Ord. of 12-29-65,  6; Res. of 12-7-82) 
Sec. 10-22. - Penalty. 
    Any person carrying on within the town any business required to be licensed under the provisions of this article, without first having obtained such license as herein provided, shall be fined for any one offense a sum not exceeding $200.00 or imprisoned for a term not exceeding six months. 
(Ord. of 12-29-65,  8) 
State Law reference- Penalty authorized, G.L. 1956,  5-21-1. 
Secs. 10-23-10-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUNDAY SALES 

Sec. 10-33. - Authority. 
    The town council under and by virtue of the authority granted to it by G.L. 1956,  5-23-1 et. seq. hereby makes and adopts the following rules, regulations and conditions relative to the granting, holding and exercising of Sunday and holiday sales licenses. 
(Regs. 8-9-55; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-34. - Issuance of licenses. 
    Sunday and holiday sales licenses shall be issued in conformance with G.L. 1956,  5-23-2, as amended. 
(Regs. 8-9-55; Res. of 4-2-79; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-35. - License fees. 
    License fees for Sunday and holiday sales shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Regs. 8-9-55; Res. of 4-2-79; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-36. - Referral, investigation, report on application. 
    All applications for licenses required by this article shall be referred to the chief of police for investigation and report. 
(Regs. 8-9-65) 
Sec. 10-37. - Regular business, good reputation required. 
    Only those persons occupying stores to sell on secular days the above-described articles and whose reputation is satisfactory to the town council may receive licenses under this article. 
(Regs. 8-9-55) 
Sec. 10-38. - When licenses terminate. 
    All Sunday and holiday licenses shall terminate on June 30 in each year. 
(Regs. 8-9-55; Res. of 4-2-79) 
Sec. 10-39. - License revocation, suspension. 
    The town council may avail itself of the authority given it to suspend or revoke licenses, especially if the licensed places attract noisy, disorderly or otherwise offensive people. 
(Regs. 8-9-55) 
Sec. 10-40. - Presence on premises. 
    The licensee or his duly authorized agent must always be on the premises while it is open for business. 
(Regs. 8-9-55) 
Secs. 10-41-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Duty on auction sales, G.L. 1956,  44-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-51. - License required. 
    No sale at auction of goods, wares, and merchandise shall be held within the town unless the owner of said goods, wares, and merchandise shall have first procured a license to hold said sale at auction from the town council. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 38,  1) 
Sec. 10-52. - Issuance of license; fee. 
    The town council is authorized and empowered to grant licenses for sales at auction within the town of goods, wares and merchandise and to charge therefore a fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 38,  2; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Secs. 10-53-10-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Local licensing of hawkers, peddlers, G.L. 1956,  5-11-18. 

Sec. 10-63. - License required. 
    No person shall hawk or peddle, or sell or offer for sale articles and substances from carts or baskets without first obtaining a license authorizing such person to sell such goods, wares, merchandise or other articles and substances within the town, in accordance with the following provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-12-38,  1; Ord. of 3-14-50,  1) 
Sec. 10-64. - Application for license; issuance. 
    All hawkers and peddlers and all persons selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise and other articles and substances within the town shall make application for a license to the town council even if such person holds a state license under the provisions of G.L. 1956,  5-11-1.1 et seq.; and upon approval of such application by the town council the town clerk shall issue a license accordingly to such persons, respectively, to sell the articles and substances hereinbefore mentioned in such manner as shall be specified in such license upon any street in said town. 
(Ord. of 4-12-38,  1A; Ord. of 3-14-50,  1-A) 
Sec. 10-65. - License fees. 
    Every person to whom a license required by this article shall be granted by the town council for the selling or offering for sale, as a hawker or peddler and goods, wares, merchandise or other articles and substances within the town, before receiving the same, shall pay to the town clerk such fees as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. of 4-12-48,  2; Ord. of 3-14-50,  2; Res. of 3-5-79; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-66. - Special licenses for limited times. 
    In addition to the foregoing licenses, the town clerk may issue special licenses for one or more days for such fees as he shall prescribe, not less than $1.00 nor more than $10.00 per day. 
(Ord. of 4-12-38,  3) 
Sec. 10-67. - Location restrictions. 
    Any person seeking to hawk or peddle, or sell or offer for sale within the town and goods, wares, merchandise or other articles or any substances from carts, baskets, or vehicles, as hereinbefore mentioned, shall not do so within 1,000 feet of any established business licensed by the town to sell at retail the same types of items that are being sold by said licensed business, and in accordance with the provisions of this article such person must obtain a license authorizing the activity. 
(Ord. of 8-1-95) 
Editor's note- An ordinance of August 1, 1995, purported to amend this Code by adding provisions designated as  10-66. At the discretion of the editor, such provisions have been included herein as  10-67. 
Secs. 10-68-10-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- A resolution enacted Sept. 1, 1981, deleted former  10-67-10-70 which pertained to badge, deposit required; misuse of badge; number plates for vehicles required, display; and replacement of number plates. Said former sections were derived from an ordinance enacted April 12, 1938,  4-7. 
Sec. 10-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- A Resolution of February 24, 1983, provided that  10-71, misuse of number plates, as derived from an ordinance of April 12, 1938,  2, be deleted. 
Sec. 10-72. - Special license for resident veterans. 
    The town clerk may issue without cost for a term not exceeding one year a license, under this article, to any resident of the town, who shall have resided therein for one year or more and who has at any time served in a military organization in the United States or in the naval service of the United States, who has at any time served the United States of America faithfully and honorably in time of war, who shall present to him suitable evidence that he is the person who so served and produce a certificate of his honorable discharge. 
(Ord. of 4-12-38,  9) 
Sec. 10-73. - Scope of licenses; transfer. 
    No license shall authorize any person otherwise than the one named therein, to act thereunder; and no license shall be transferable, excepting that any such license may be transferred by the town clerk on the payment of a fee of $1.00. 
(Ord. of 4-12-38,  10) 
Sec. 10-74. - Failure to exhibit license. 
    Any person who shall neglect or refuse for the space of ten minutes after being demanded by any police officer to exhibit to him his license, shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 4-12-38,  12; Res. of 2-24-83) 
Sec. 10-75. - Hawking, shouting. 
(a)  All hawking or shouting by hawkers and peddlers for the purpose of barter or sale of anything enumerated in section 10-63 hereof is hereby prohibited before 8:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. 
(b)  Where two or more persons are on one wagon or cart used in hawking and peddling, only those having licenses shall be permitted to hawk or shout, and in no case shall more than one of such licensees hawk or shout at the same time. 
(c)  Hawking or shouting is hereby prohibited in the immediate vicinity of any house in which there is any person suffering from serious illness, after notice of the same from any person. 
(d)  Hawkers and peddlers may make reasonable announcement of the merchandise which they have for sale, but loud, unnecessary outcries likely to disturb or annoy persons in the vicinity shall not be made at any place or time. 
(Ord. of 4-12-38,  11) 
Sec. 10-76. - Invitation required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler or itinerant person to go to any house within the town and to knock at or ring any bell thereof, or otherwise to induce the occupant thereof to come to or open any door thereof for the purpose of buying or selling or offering to buy or sell, peddle or barter, or to leave thereat or take therefrom any chattels, wares or merchandise, or for the purpose of delivering or leaving thereat any sample or inquiry concerning certain wares or merchandise for sale without permission of said occupants had or given. This section shall not be construed to affect any farmer or huckster with vehicle, who cry their wares along the street, or any local tradesmen who take orders for their wares for immediate delivery from their shops. 
(Ord. of 4-12-38,  15) 
Sec. 10-77. - Exemptions from regulations. 
    Nothing herein contained shall apply to milkmen, nor to farmers selling the produce of their farms, or selling both the produce of their farms and the produce of other farms, nor to vendors of ice or newspapers. 
(Ord. of 4-12-38,  16) 
Sec. 10-78. - Exemption from fees. 
    No fee shall be charged for licenses issued to any person selling religious books and publications in behalf of Bible, Tract or other religious or moral societies for the purpose of prompting religious or moral improvement and which are sold for that purpose and not for pecuniary profit, or to butchers retailing meats or to fishermen selling fish or shell fish from carts or otherwise, or to any person peddling or selling any tow cloth, knit stockings, gloves, mitts or other articles of household manufacture, or articles manufactured with his or her own hands or to any person who has been licensed according to G.L. 1956,  5-11-7. 
(Ord. of 4-12-38,  14) 
Sec. 10-79. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be imprisoned not more than ten days or fined not more than $20.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. of 3-14-50,  3) 
Secs. 10-80-10-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FILLING STATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Regulation of self-service motor fuel dispensing stations,  7-20. 
State Law reference- State licensing and regulations of filling stations, G.L. 1956,  31-37-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-90. - Permit required for pumps near streets. 
    No owner or other person shall hereafter locate a pump to be used to distribute petroleum products or any attachment thereof within ten feet of the boundary line of a town or state highway, without first obtaining the permission of the town council and the council shall determine application for such permission upon the basis of public safety and may impose, upon permits granted, reasonable conditions to insure public safety. 
(Ord. of 6-8-37,  31) 
Sec. 10-91. - License required. 
    Every person shall before continuing or commencing to transact the business of operating a filling station, obtain from the town council a license for each filling station operated. 
(Ord. of 6-8-37,  31) 
Sec. 10-92. - Application for license; issuance. 
    Applications for filling station licenses shall be made to the council on forms to be obtained from the town clerk and the council, if satisfied as to the facts stated in said application, shall issue a license for each such filling station. 
(Ord. of 6-8-37,  31) 
Annotation- The council has no discretion to deny an application for a filling station license if it shows compliance with requirements of ordinances. Aldes Corp. v. Flynn, 72 R.I. 199,49 A.2d 46  (1946). 
Sec. 10-93. - Scope of license; term. 
    A filling station license shall entitle the owner to continue or commence to engage in said business within this town until the following July 1, providing said owner shall have complied with all ordinances or other town regulations regarding the location of pumps. 
(Ord. of 6-8-37,  31) 
Sec. 10-94. - License fee. 
    A filling station fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council for each license shall be paid to the council, from the date of issuance of the license until July 1 next ensuing such date. 
(Ord. of 6-8-37,  31; Res. of 4-2-79; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-95. - Storage of fuel. 
    No person shall store, keep or have in possession for any purpose or use in any building or place within the town more than five gallons but not exceeding 10,000 gallons of naphtha, gasoline or other products of petroleum unless such person shall have first filed with the inspector of building a statement of maximum quantity of the same to be kept, stored, or had in possession, and of the place, way and manner in which the same is to be kept, stored or had in possession, and obtained his approval thereof, and the same shall not be stored, kept or had in possession by such person in any greater quantity or in any other place or manner than that specified in said approval. Any such approval may be rescinded at any time in the leisure of the town council. Not more than five barrels in the aggregate of any one or more substances shall be stored or kept in any building or place in said town except in a steel tank or tanks which shall be located underground, the top of which if located in any building shall be below the level of the lowest floor basement in the building containing the same and all pipes of which shall be arranged to drain back into the supply tank, or if in the opinion of the building inspector, the public safety will be as well or better protected by having said tank or tanks in any particular location otherwise than underground, than in such other location as may be approved in writing by said inspector of building, but any such approval may be rescinded at any time at the pleasure of the inspector. Nothing in this section shall apply to the storing of naphtha, benzene, gasoline or other products or petroleum in the tanks of vehicles using the same for fuel or motor power. 
(Ord. of 6-8-37,  31) 
Sec. 10-96. - Storage of flammable liquids; plans, permits and inspections. 
    No person, as defined in G.L. 1956,  23-28.22-1, 1979 Reenactment, as amended, shall store or permit to be stored more than five gallons of flammable liquids, petroleum products, or other hydrocarbons without first filing an application with the chief of the fire department as provided for in G.L. 1956,  23-28.22-3, 1979 Reenactment, as amended. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee of $10.00. 
    This section shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Res. of 6-2-81) 
Secs. 10-97-10-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An Ord. of January 11, 1977,  1-6, did not specifically amend the Code. Codification herein as Art. VII,  10-106-10-111, was, therefore, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 10-106. - Registration required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor, calling at residences without the previous consent of the occupant for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions, or business of any kind, or seeking for information or donations, without first having registered in the office of the town clerk. The registrant shall give his complete identification, his signature, the name of his employer, the nature of the products or services in which he is interested, the names of the manufacturers of such products, or of the organization which he is representing, and the proposed method of operation in the town. 
(Ord. of 1-11-77,  1) 
Sec. 10-107. - Fee. 
    Each person engaging in business as a canvasser or solicitor shall pay to the town clerk a registration fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. of 1-11-77,  2; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-108. - Approval and appeal. 
(a)  Each applicant who shows evidence of good character and is granted a permit, and who pays the fee provided for herein, shall be furnished a certificate indicating that he or she has registered and showing the dates covered by such registration. The town clerk will issue said permit only after approval of the chief of police. If the chief of police refuses to approve said permit, the applicant therefor may appeal to the town council which matter will be put on the docket for the next regular council meeting. 
(b)  Each person shall at all times, while soliciting or canvassing in the town, carry upon his person the registration certificate and the same shall be exhibited by such registrant whenever he is required to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
(Ord. of 1-11-77,  3) 
Sec. 10-109. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to officers or employees of the town, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(Ord. of 1-11-77,  4) 
Sec. 10-110. - Revocation. 
    Any such registration may be revoked by the town council or the chief of police because of any violation by the registrant of this article or of any other ordinance of the town, or any state or federal law, or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in this article for the original registration. 
(Ord. of 1-11-77,  5) 
Sec. 10-111. - Fine. 
    Every person who shall sell or solicit without a license heretofore issued, as provided in this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. of 1-11-77,  6) 
Secs. 10-112-10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MECHANICAL AND ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 10-121. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
(a)  Amusement game. Any mechanical, electric or electronic device used or designed to be operated for entertainment or as a game by the insertion of a piece of money, coin, token or other article or by paying money to have it activated. This definition does not include: 
(1)  A jukebox. 
(2)  Rides. 
(3)  Bowling alleys. 
(4)  Any device maintained within a residence for the use of the occupants thereof and their guests. 
(5)  Any device the possession or use of which is prohibited by law. 
(b)  Person. The terms "person," "firm," "corporation," or "association" as used herein shall include the following: any person, firm, corporation or association which owns any such machine; the person, firm, corporation or association having control over such machine; provided, however, that the payment of such fee by any person, firm, corporation or association enumerated herein shall be deemed a compliance with this section. 
(c)  Game room. Any establishment containing four or more amusement games as defined in subsection 10-121(a). 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Sec. 10-122. - Gambling devices not permitted. 
    Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State of Rhode Island. 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Sec. 10-123. - License required. 
(a)  Fee, term. Any person, firm, corporation or association displaying for public patronage of keeping for operation any mechanical amusement devise as herein defined by section 10-121 shall be required to obtain a license from the town, upon payment of a license fee. Application for such license shall be made to the town council upon a form to be supplied by the town clerk for that purpose. The fee therefore shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. The town clerk shall issue a sticker to be attached to said devise on a yearly basis. 
(b)  Number per establishment. No more than three licenses may be issued for any one establishment, except as authorized below. 
(c)  Game rooms. Any establishment wishing to operate four or more amusement games must first obtain permission of the zoning board of review to operate a game room as defined in subsection 10-121(c). 
(Res. of 1-19-82; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-124. - Application for license. 
    The person owning or controlling any unlicensed amusement game or any new amusement game as herein defined in section 10-121, who seeks to have it licensed, must receive the approval of the town council after filing and application fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council and advertising fee as charged by newspaper. The town clerk shall forward each new application to the chief of police for his report to the council and a public hearing will be held after notice in a local newspaper for three weeks, at a regular ore special council meeting for the granting of said license. 
(Res. of 1-19-82; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-125. - Inspection. 
    Application for license shall be made out in duplicate, one copy being referred to the chief of police and the other copy to the town building inspector. 
(a)  The chief of police shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate such machine, ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character and, based upon his investigation, either approve or disapprove the application. 
(b)  The building inspector shall inspect all wiring connections to the machine, determine if the same complies with the electrical code of the State of Rhode Island, and shall, based upon his inspection, either approve or disapprove the application. 
(c)  No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the chief of police and the building inspector. 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Sec. 10-126. - Display, transferability of license. 
(a)  The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. 
(b)  Such license may be transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon application to the town clerk to such effect and the giving of a description and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine displayed or operated by him. 
(c)  A license shall not be transferable from person to person nor place to place, and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated in the license. 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Sec. 10-127. - Prohibitions and restrictions. 
    No person, firm, corporation or association holding a license under this article shall permit persons under 16 years of age to play or operate any mechanical amusement device as defined in section 10-121 of this article, unless said minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Sec. 10-128. - Revocation of license; hearing; notice of hearing. 
    Every license issued under this article is subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any mechanical amusement device contrary to the provisions of this article, the ordinances of the Town of West Warwick, or the laws of the State of Rhode Island. Said license may be revoked by the town council after written notice of hearing to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which the licensee is charged and, after a hearing, if the licensee is found to be guilty of such violations. Ten days' notice of the hearing shall be given the licensee. At such hearing the licensee may present and submit evidence or witnesses in his defense. 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Sec. 10-129. - Seizure and destruction of machine. 
    If the chief of police shall have reason to believe any mechanical amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may be seized by the police and impounded and if, upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it to be used as a gambling device, said exhibitor be found guilty, such machine shall be destroyed by the police. 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Sec. 10-130. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article, in addition to the revocation of his or its license, shall be liable to a fine or penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense. 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Sec. 10-131. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
    All existing ordinances of the Town of West Warwick, are hereby repealed insofar as they may be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Sec. 10-132. - Separability of provisions. 
    It is the intention of the town council that each separate provision of this article shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the town council that if any provision of this article be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable. 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Sec. 10-133. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be in full force and effect upon its passage. 
(Res. of 1-19-82) 
Secs. 10-134-10-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FLEA MARKETS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- A resolution adopted September 7, 1982, provided for the inclusion of provisions designated as Art. IX,  10-130-10-136. Inasmuch as other provisions had been designated as  10-130-10-133, those adopted September 7, 1982, were renumbered by the editor as  10-140-10-146, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 10-140. - Definitions. 
    [As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed, unless the context otherwise requires:] 
    Flea markets. Any indoor or outdoor operation, activity or facility at which three or more persons, for their own account, buy, sell or exchange any tangible personal property from or to the general public on either a casual or regular basis at one or more locations within the town. 
    Operator. Any person who owns, controls or leases the premises, site or grounds at which the activity defined as a "flea market" is conducted. 
    Person. An individual, either male or female, a sole proprietor, a joint venturer, a partner or partners and a foreign or domestic corporation. 
    Vendor. Any person who, at a flea market, engages in or conducts the activity of buying, selling or exchanging, for his own account, on a casual or regular basis, any tangible, personal property, whether new or used, either alone or in concert with others. 
(Res. of 9-7-82) 
Sec. 10-141. - License-Required. 
(a)  No person shall be the operator of a flea market without first obtaining from the town council a license authorizing said person to conduct such an activity at a particular location. 
(b)  The town council, before granting a new license under this article, shall hold a public hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general local circulation for two successive weeks prior to the date of hearing. Before posting and publishing said notice, the town clerk shall collect from the applicant the cost thereof, together with the license fee set forth in section 10-142. Notice of the hearing shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the location of the premises sought to be licensed, the time and place of the hearing and shall advise the public of the right to remonstrate against the granting of said license. If a license is not granted, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Res. of 9-7-82) 
Sec. 10-142. - Same-Term and fees. 
(a)  Applications for a flea market license shall be on a form provided by the town clerk. Each such license issued by the town council shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(b)  The license fee to operate a flea market shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Res. of 9-7-82; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-143. - Hours of operation; number of vendors. 
(a)  No flea market shall open before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or remain open after the hour of 9:00 p.m. 
(b)  No flea market shall contain more than 50 vendors. 
(Res. of 9-7-82) 
Sec. 10-144. - Sunday sales permit required. 
    In addition to the license required by section 10-141, any vendor who wishes to operate on a Sunday shall obtain a Sunday sales permit as required by state law. 
(Res. of 9-7-82) 
Sec. 10-145. - Records-Business name and employees. 
    Every vendor, prior to conducting any business in a flea market, shall provide the operator with the true name of the person or persons who will conduct the business, any alias or fictitious name or names under which the business is to be conducted, and the names of all employees, whether paid or not. 
(Res. of 9-7-82) 
Sec. 10-146. - Same-Inspection. 
    The records required by section 10-145 above shall be kept current by the operator and shall be made available to the police department upon demand. 
(Res. of 9-7-82) 
ARTICLE X. - FLOWER VENDORS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- It should be noted that this article takes effect June 15, 2005. 

Sec. 10-147. - Permit required. 
    Any person who intends to sell flowers at a location other than his/her principal place of business and who engages in the business of selling flowers on the streets or the sidewalks of the town shall be duly licensed for such purpose by the town clerk in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 5-24-05) 
Sec. 10-148. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a flower vendor's permit shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 10-149. - Application for permit. 
    An application for a flower vendor's permit will be sworn to and shall be filed in the town clerk's office no less that 21 days prior to the time when the permit applied for shall become effective. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 5-24-05) 
Sec. 10-150. - Location of sales; prohibited locations. 
    Not withstanding the other provisions within this code, flower vendor permits shall specify the location where the flowers are intended to be sold. The applicant for the permit shall provide evidence that he/she has the authority and permission form the property owner to sell flowers at the location designated on the application. There shall be one permit issued per location. No flower vendor permit shall be granted for a location within the town that is within 3,000 feet of a licensed retail florist or greengrocer, or within 3,000 feet of places of worship one-half hour before, during or one-half hour after services or activities within such places of worship. No flowers shall be sold within 1,000 feet of the intersection of two or more arterial streets (those having a right-of-way width of 60 feet or greater) or from any location from which such activity would restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of abutting property owners, create a public nuisance, increase traffic congestion or delay, constitute a hazard to life and property, or obstruct adequate access to fire, police or safety vehicles to include but not limited to ambulances and rescue vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 5-24-05) 
Sec. 10-151. - Expiration of permit. 
    Flower vendor permits shall expire five days from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 5-24-05) 
Sec. 10-152. - State sales tax permit required. 
    The applicant shall have a valid State of Rhode Island sales tax permit, which shall be presented at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 5-24-05) 
Sec. 10-153. - Transfer of permit. 
    No permit issued under this article shall authorize any person, firm or corporation other than the applicant named therein to act thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 5-24-05) 
Sec. 10-154. - Violations. 
    Should any applicant violate the terms and conditions of this article, they shall be presented with a summons to appear before the West Warwick Municipal Court and be subjected to fines not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, 5-24-05) 
ARTICLE XI. - BUSINESS REGISTRATIONS 

Sec. 10-155. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the locating of businesses and other profit making enterprises within the town and at the same time to provide for the general welfare and safety of the citizens of the town, in that concern for zoning, police protection, fire protection and other services depend on knowledge of the needs of certain areas and locations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-44, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 10-156. - Registration required. 
    Each business, including, but not limited to, wholesale, retail, commercial, professional services, personal services or manufacturing, whether by sole proprietorships, partnerships, corporations or any form of business entity, shall register its business, company, trade name or office situated in the town with the town clerk. Each registration shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the firm or business, the name, address and telephone number of the owner or operator of the firm or business, the type of business to be operated and such other information as shall be required on the registration form provided by the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2013-44, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 10-157. - Fees. 
    There shall be fees paid with each business registration as shall from time to time be set by resolution by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-44, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 10-158. - Procedure. 
(a)  Each business located in the Town of West Warwick which is not registered with the town in accordance with the provisions of this article, shall within 30 days after notification received by the town clerk's office shall apply for registration of said business in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(b)  All businesses registered with the town in accordance with the provisions of the article, at the time of passage of the section of the Code by the town council, shall be issued a registration certificate by the town clerk's office in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(c)  Upon registration of a business, a registration certificate shall be issued to the registrant. No other business of the same trade name shall be allowed to register once a certificate of registration has been issued, without the approval in writing from the prior registrant. Thereafter every registration certificate shall expire on the annual anniversary date of the registration certificate and thereafter shall be renewed annually upon payment of the required fee. No certificate shall be issued or renewed if the registrant fails to provide proof from the town tax collector that all tangible municipal taxes on any tangible property located at the address of the business, have been paid in full to date or that the business licensee or the owner of the property at which the tangible property is located has entered into an agreement with the tax collector for the payment of past due tangible taxes as follows: 
(1)  That all past due tangible taxes plus interest shall be paid within six months from the date of such agreement or not less than 30 days prior to the date of the next annual renewal of said license, whichever shall first occur. 
(2)  That such business licensee or property owner shall be eligible to enter into no more than two such agreements in any consecutive five tax year period. 
(3)  Any license issued or renewed pursuant to such agreement shall be contingent upon compliance with said agreement and subject to revocation in the event of failure to comply with all of the terms of the agreement. 
Every certificate of registration shall be placed in a conspicuous place in each business establishment. 
(d)  In the event that the town becomes aware that a registered business is no longer operating in the town, the town clerk shall send written notice to the name on the registration certificate at the address shown in the town records for the business, by regular mail, that if no response indicating a reason why such registration should not be revoked is received by the town clerk within 30 days from the date of the notice, the registration will be automatically revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2013-44, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 2014-8 , 5-27-14; Ord. No. 2015-6 , 7-21-15) 
Sec. 10-159. - Exemptions. 
    Any business required to register or to obtain a license or permit under any other section of this Code shall exempt from the registration requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-44, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 10-160. - Violations. 
    Any person or entity subject to the provisions of this article, who shall be in violations of any provision of this article shall be fined, not exceeding $25.00, for each offense, with each day the violation exists to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2013-44, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 10-161. - Payment of fees and costs. 
    No application, filing or request of any kind, filed with the town pursuant to the general laws of the state, this Code, [the] zoning code, [the] subdivision regulations or any other rule or regulation of the town for which there shall be any costs such as advertising or otherwise, or fees of any kind shall be accepted for filing until all such costs and fees are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2013-44, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 10-162. - Compliance with codes and ordinances. 
    Every person, firm or company that shall receive any license or permit from any town official shall comply with any and all provisions of this Code, the zoning code and/or the subdivisions regulations which in anyway relate to the license or permit so granted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-44, 9-17-13) 
ARTICLE XII. - BODY WORKS SERVICES 

Sec. 10-163. - License required. 
(a)  Body works personnel license. All personnel must obtain a body works personnel license issued by the town council before performing or offering to perform any body works services for hire, compensation, or reward; before being compensated for any services or work in any establishment; and before conducting any type of business for reward, hire, or compensation within any establishment. 
(b)  Body works establishment license. All persons, firms, corporations, or other entities who own, operate, conduct, or manage a location used to provide body works services or that holds themselves out as being engaged in the practice of body works services at any location in the Town of West Warwick must obtain a body works establishment license for that location from the town council before offering, engaging in, providing, or allowing body works services for hire, reward, or compensation at that location. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-164. - Authority to promulgate rules. 
    The town council is hereby authorized to formulate rules and regulations governing body work personnel and body work establishments and to establish fees for the issuance of licenses thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-165. - License required and fee; non-transferability. 
(a)  Body works personnel license. The fee to obtain a body works personnel license and any renewal thereof shall be $75.00. Said license is not transferable. 
(b)  Body works establishment license. The fee to obtain a body works establishment license and any renewal thereof shall be $250.00. Said license is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-166. - Expiration date of license. 
    Body works personnel licenses and body works establishment licenses shall automatically on the annual anniversary date of the issuance of the license and thereafter shall be renewed annually upon payment of the required fee. Applications for renewal must be submitted at least 30 days prior to expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-167. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article: 
(a)  Applicant shall mean any person who applies for a license as required by this article. In the event the applicant is a non-natural person (e.g., a corporation), the term applicant shall also include a natural person legally authorized to act on behalf of the applicant and the person submitting the application to the town council pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Approved shall mean approved by the town council in accordance with accepted standards. 
(c)  Town shall mean the Town of West Warwick. 
(d)  Body rubs and body stimulations shall mean the manipulation or conditioning of part or parts of the body by any means not regulated by G.L. ch. 23-20.8, Licensing of Massage Therapists. 
(e)  Body works and body works services shall encompass body rubs, body stimulations, spa services, and spa treatments. 
(f)  Body works establishment license and establishment license shall mean the license required by section 10-163(b) of this article. 
(g)  Body works personnel license and personnel license shall mean the license required by section 10-163(a) of this article. 
(h)  Establishment shall mean the office, place of business, premises, or location where body works are offered or provided for hire, reward, or compensation. 
(i)  Personnel shall mean any person who performs body works services for hire, compensation, or reward or any person who is employed by or otherwise compensated by any establishment as defined herein or any person who is permitted by an establishment to conduct any type of business for reward, hire, or compensation within said establishment. 
(j)  Inspector shall mean but is not limited to the police chief, the building official and/or the fire marshal and their designees. 
(k)  Spa services and spa treatments shall mean any service or treatment not regulated by G.L. ch. 23-20.8 provided to treat the skin or body for remedial, hygienic, relaxation, or other purposes including but not limited to, vapor, pool, baths, saunas, dry saunas, towel treatments, showers, body scrubs, and body showers. 
(l)  Specified anatomical areas shall mean human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(m)  Supervisor shall mean the person or persons designated by an establishment to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-168. - Exceptions and exclusions. 
(a)  Persons excepted. Physicians, nurses, physical therapists, school athletic trainers, chiropodists, chiropractors, massage therapist, barbers, hair dressers, manicurist, and estheticians duly licensed by the State of Rhode Island are exempt from the license requirements of section 10-163(a) of this chapter. 
(b)  Establishment exceptions. Hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes and other similar licensed institutions where massage and baths may be given are exempt from the license requirements of section 10-163(b) of this chapter. Also, any facility conducting services of a hospital, nursing and convalescent home, or other similar institutions as determined by the town council, but due to some limiting factor is not subject to licensing, shall be similarly exempt from the license requirements of section 10-163 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-169. - Display of licenses. 
(a)  Body works personnel license. Every licensee shall carry his or her original personnel license at all times when on the premises of an establishment during the hours of operation. Additionally, every licensee shall display his or her original personnel license in a conspicuous manner whenever practicing or providing body works for hire, reward, or compensation. 
(b)  Body works establishment license. The body works establishment license shall be conspicuously displayed in a public area of the body works establishment at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-170. - Advertisement. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall advertise any body works services unless such services are to be performed by a licensed body works personnel and said advertisement includes the body works personnel license number of the person or persons offering to provide the body works services. 
(b)  No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall advertise any body works establishment unless the advertisement includes the body works establishment license number. 
(c)  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-171. - Required records. 
    Each body works establishment shall maintain records on the premises of all personnel. Said records shall be subject to inspection upon request by any inspector or his/her designee. The records shall include the following: 
(a)  Each personnel's full legal name, date of birth, home address, and telephone number, employment position, date first employed, and, if applicable, date terminated. 
(b)  Each personnel's body works personnel license number and the expiration date of said license. 
(c)  All current personnel records and records of all personnel associated with the establishment for the previous one year. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-172. - Supervisor. 
    Each body works establishment shall designate at least one supervisor who is responsible for the body work establishment's compliance with this chapter. Said supervisor shall agree to be on the premises of any body works establishment whenever the establishment is open to the public and shall agree to be responsible for cooperating with inspections or investigations conducted by the inspectors authorized to inspect the establishment pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable section or chapter of this Code or the Rhode Island General Laws. Upon the request of any authorized inspector, the supervisor shall immediately provide personnel records that are required by this article to be maintained on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-173. - Requirements for body works personnel licensure. 
    Before performing or offering to perform body works services for hire, compensation, or reward or conducting any type of business for hire, compensation, or reward within any establishment, all personnel shall submit an application to the town council that includes the following information: 
(a)  The full legal name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(b)  The current residential address and telephone number of the applicant, and the two previous residential addresses and business addresses, if any. 
(c)  The applicant's height, weight, eye color, and hair color. 
(d)  Written proof to the satisfaction of the town council that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(e)  The applicant's business, occupation, or employment history for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(f)  The body works personnel or similar license history of the applicant; including whether such person, in previously operating in this town or another municipality, county or state under a license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or suspended; the reasons and dates for any the revocation or suspension. 
(g)  All criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations. 
(h)  The name(s) of the establishment at which the applicant plans to be employed or whether the applicant intends to provide body works services off-site. If the applicant intends to work at multiple businesses, he or she shall designate a primary address for receiving all correspondence related to his or her permit renewal. 
(i)  Such other identification and information as may be required by the town council to verify the truth of the matters specified in this section, or any additional information required to show that the applicant has met the minimum qualifications to be licensed pursuant of this article. 
(j)  An application is deemed complete and validly filed when the town council has received all information required by this Code, the results of the department of justice criminal background check, and any fees associated with the application. 
(k)  One portrait photograph of the applicant at least two inches by two inches and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or his/her designee. If the applicant is a corporation, one portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches of all officers and managing agents of said corporation and a complete set of the same officers and agents fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or his/her agent. If the applicant is a partnership, one front face port photograph at least two inches by two inches in size of each partner, including a limited partner in said partnership, and a complete set of each partner or limited partners fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or his/her agents. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-174. - Requirements for body works establishment licensure. 
    Before conducting any type of business for reward, hire, or compensation within any establishment, all persons, firms, corporations, or other entities who own, operate, or conduct said establishment shall first submit applications to the town council that includes the following information: 
(a)  The full legal name any other names used by the applicant. If the applicant is: 
(1)  An individual, the individual shall state his/her full legal name; 
(2)  A partnership, the name of the partnership shall be set forth exactly as how in its partnership agreement, and the information required by this section shall be furnished for the responsible person; 
(3)  A corporation, the name of the corporation and name and address of its registered agent shall be set forth exactly as show in its articles of incorporation and the information required by this section shall be furnished for the responsible person. 
(b)  The current residential address and the telephone number of the applicant, and the two previous residential addresses and business addresses, if any. 
(c)  Written proof to the satisfaction of the town council that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(d)  The applicant's occupation or employment history for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(e)  If the applicant intends to practice body works at the proposed establishment, a copy of his or her body works personnel license. 
(f)  The body works establishment or similar business license history of the applicant; including whether such person, in previously operating in this town or another municipality, county or state under a license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or suspended; the reasons and dates for any such revocation or suspension. 
(g)  All criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations. 
(h)  A statement of how many personnel the applicant intends to employ at the establishment. 
(i)  The full name, address, telephone number of every personnel who will be associated with the proposed establishment and a copy of every proposed personnel's body works personnel license. 
(j)  The full name, address, telephone number of each personnel who will be designated as the supervisor for the proposed establishment and a copy of each proposed supervisor's body works personnel license. 
(k)  A statement as to whether the applicant intends to provide body works services off-site. 
(l)  Information demonstrating that the proposed establishment is consistent with the applicable land use designation and town's zoning code. 
(m)  Written proof that the proposed establishment is compliant with all applicable health, safety, building, fire safety, and sanitary standards under this Code and the Rhode Island General Laws. 
(n)  Where a building permit is necessary as a prerequisite to occupancy of a building, the body works establishment license application is not complete and validly filed until proof of submittal of the building permit application is provided. 
(o)  Such other identification and information as may be required by the town council to verify the truth of the matters specified in this section, or any additional information required to show that the applicant has met the minimum qualifications to be licensed pursuant of this article. 
(p)  An application is deemed complete and validly filed when the Town Council has received all information required by this chapter, the results of the department of justice criminal background check, and any fees associated with the application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-175. - Employee and independent contractor restrictions. 
    It is a violation of this article for any person, partnership, corporation, establishment, owner, or other entity to employ any person not holding a personnel license for the purpose of providing body works; to employ any person not holding a personnel license to work in an establishment in any capacity; or to allow any person not holding a personnel license to provide or offer to provide body works services or otherwise conduct business in the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-176. - Sanitation and decency code. 
(a)  All personnel who are engaged in the practice of body works shall wear garments which cover the entire body, exclusive of the head, neck, arms, legs, hands and feet. All personnel must be fully covered from a point not more than four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck, excluding the arms. Such garments shall not be transparent and must be maintained in clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any personnel to directly or indirectly touch or offer to touch a customer's specified anatomical areas. 
(c)  All customer's specified anatomical areas must be fully draped at all times while any personnel is in the same cubicle or room. 
(d)  No instruments or devices designed or used for direct application to the skin shall be applied directly to the skin unless sterilized. The part of the body being treated shall be covered with a clean towel or else the instrument shall be covered in a similar manner. 
(e)  Cleaning of hands. All personnel shall thoroughly cleanse his or her hands by washing with soap and hot water immediately before providing body works services. 
(f)  Working hours. No establishment shall offer or provide body works services between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(g)  Designation of name. No licensed person shall operate under any name or conduct his or her business under any designation not specified in his or her license. 
(h)  [Violation.] It is a violation of this article for any person, partnership, corporation, establishment, owner, or any other entity to conduct, cause to be conducted, or allow to be conducted any activity prohibited by G.L. tit. 11, ch. 11-1 et seq., in any establishment. 
(i)  Change of address. Every licensee shall notify the town council not longer than ten days after any change of address, home or business, or name. Any new license or amendment to an existing license required because of the foregoing shall be issued with a set fee of $50.00. 
(j)  Inspections. Town inspectors may at any time with or without prior notice inspect an establishment and investigate the manner of the operation of the establishment to ensure that it is operating in compliance with this article. 
(k)  [Devices.] Devices which can be utilized as an early warning system to alert personnel, supervisors, owners, or any other persons to the presence of law enforcement or local authorities on the premises are prohibited in establishments. Such prohibited devices include, but are not limited to, light or music dimmers, electronic detection devices, external or internal video equipment and alarm systems other than those used for fire alarms. 
(l)  Invalidation. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of these rules and regulations shall be decided invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of these regulations which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of these regulations are hereby declared severable. 
(m)  Minors on premises. No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or remain on the premises of any establishment as an employee or patron. 
(n)  Alcoholic beverages. No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide, keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or any alcoholic beverage on the premises of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-177. - Facilities. 
    Every establishment shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  It shall be connected to the public sewerage system, or an approved private sanitary sewage system in the event public sewerage is not available. 
(b)  It shall be well lighted, well ventilated and properly heated when seasonally indicated. 
(c)  No room used by personnel or an establishment to provide body works may be used as a residence or sleeping quarters. 
(d)  There shall be an adequate supply of hot and cold running water at all times. 
(e)  There shall be approved toilet and washing facilities within the premises, readily available to the patrons and affording sufficient privacy. 
(f)  Adequate dressing rooms, toilets and washing facilities shall be provided. 
(g)  All rooms and furniture and equipment therein shall be kept clean at all times. 
(h)  There shall be installed a heat and smoke detecting system approved by the Town Fire Marshal. 
(i)  There shall be adequate facilities for the cleaning and sterilizing to prevent infectious organisms. 
(j)  All rooms shall be arranged so as to afford adequate fire protection and shall have satisfactory means of egress in case of fire as approved by the building inspector and fire marshal. 
(k)  All equipment, instruments, devices, robes, sheets, blankets, pillow cases, wearing apparel, towels and other materials which may come in direct contact with the body shall be properly cleaned and sterilize. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-178. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Revocation of license. Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the town council for the breach by the holder thereof of any provision of this article, any rules and regulations pertaining thereto which have been established by the town council, or for any violation of any other provision of this Code, of the Rhode Island General Laws, or of any other applicable municipal, state, or federal rule or regulation. Revocation shall be in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed as a result of a violation. 
(b)  Separate offense for each day. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such entity commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof. 
(c)  Public Nuisance. Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions in this article shall be and is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall, at the discretion of the town council, be a cause of action pursuant to G.L.  10-1-1 et seq. 
(d)  Criminal penalties. In addition to any applicable provision of this article or of the Rhode Island General Laws, any violation of this article may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and punishable as follows: 
(1)  Upon a first conviction, by a fine not exceeding $100.00; 
(2)  Upon the second conviction within one year of a prior conviction, by a fine not exceeding $200.00 and by imprisonment not exceeding 30 consecutive days; and 
(3)  Upon any subsequent conviction within one year of two prior convictions, by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and by imprisonment not exceeding one year. 
(e)  Civil injunction. The violation of any provision of this article shall be and is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the town council, create cause for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8 , 8-11-15) 
ARTICLE XIII. - TOBACCO DEALER'S LICENSE AND SALES REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-179. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, to give away or deliver or to possess with the intention of selling tobacco products within the Town of West Warwick without having first having obtained a tobacco dealer's license pursuant to this article. Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by state and/or federal law. A tobacco dealer's license is valid for one person at one location and may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. A tobacco dealer's license shall be approved by the town council upon application made to the town clerk. The tobacco dealer's initial license shall be valid until September 1 following the initial issuance and thereafter shall be valid for a period of one year to September 1 of the following year. A fee, to be set from time to time by the town council, shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license. All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the business so licensed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-15 , 2-7-17; Ord. No. 2018-14 , 5-22-18) 
Sec. 10-180. - Failure to obtain license. 
(a)  Any person selling tobacco products at the effective date of this article shall within 90 days of the effective date of this article obtain a tobacco dealer's license. Failure to obtain such license within said 90 days shall result in a fine of $250.00. 
(b)  Any person who shall commence the sale of tobacco products subsequent to the effective date of this article without first obtaining a tobacco dealer's license shall be fined $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 2016-15 , 2-7-17) 
Sec. 10-181. - Definitions. 
    Electronic nicotine delivery system means an electronic device that may be used to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or other substance to a person inhaling from the device, and includes, but is not limited to, an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe or electronic hookah and any related device and any cartridge or other component of such device. 
    Flavored tobacco product means any tobacco product, other than a cigarette, that contains a constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor. 
    Licensee means the person to whom a tobacco dealer's license has been issued and all employees or agents of such licensee. 
    Non-cigarette tobacco product means a tobacco product that is not a cigarette. 
    Person means any natural person, partnership, firm, joint stock company, corporation, any employee thereof or any other legal entity. 
    Sale means any transfer, exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale or distribution for commercial purpose in any manner or by any means whatsoever. 
    Self-service means the open display of tobacco products in a manner accessible to the general public without assistance of the licensee or which the public has access to without the intervention of the licensee. 
    Tobacco product means: (1) any product containing, made or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed or ingested by any other means, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco and snuff, and (2) any electronic device that delivers nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe or hookah or refills for such devices. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of clauses (1) and (2) in this definition to the contrary, tobacco product includes any component, part or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. Tobacco product does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and sold separately for such an 
    Vending machine means any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device which upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment dispenses a tobacco product. 
(Ord. No. 2016-15 , 2-7-17; Ord. No. 2018-17 , 6-19-18) 
Sec. 10-182. - Purchase, sale or delivery of tobacco products to persons under the age of 18. 
    No person under 18 years of age shall purchase, any tobacco in the form of cigarettes, bidi cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, flavored cigars known as "blunts" unflavored "blunts", flavored and unflavored blunt wraps, cigarette rolling papers of any size or composition, cigarillos, and Tiparillos, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, electronic nicotine delivery systems or snuff. 
(Ord. No. 2016-15 , 2-7-17) 
Sec. 10-183. - Requirements and prohibitions applicable to licensees. 
(a)  All tobacco products as hereinabove defined, shall be placed and maintained behind all counters available to the public. 
(b)  Licensees are prohibited from selling, distributing or delivering any tobacco product to any individual who is under the age of 18, whether said tobacco product is sold, distributed or delivered in person or via vending machine. 
(c)  No licensee shall sell or possess with intention of selling a tobacco product to another person who appears to be under the age of 27 without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is not under the age of 18. 
(d)  The price of each tobacco product offered for sale shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed to clearly indicate the price of the product. 
(e)  No licensee shall sell any tobacco product unless such product (1) is sold in the original manufacturer's packaging intended for sale to consumers, and (2) conforms to all applicable federal labeling requirements. 
(f)  No licensee shall sell as a single cigarette sale or as a sale of cigarettes by the individual piece, known as "loosies". 
(g)  No licensee shall: 
(1)  Accept or redeem, or offer to accept or redeem any coupon that provides any tobacco product to a person under the age of 18 without charge or for less than the full retail price, 
(2)  Sell any tobacco product to a person under the age of 18 through a multi-package discount (e.g., "buy-two-get-one-free") or otherwise provide any tobacco product a person under the age of 18 for less than the full retail price in exchange for the purchase of any other tobacco product, 
(3)  Provide any free or discounted item to a person under the age of 18 in exchange for the purchase of any tobacco product. 
(h)  No licensee shall sell any flavored tobacco product to any person under the age of 18. A non-cigarette tobacco product is presumed to be a flavored tobacco product if a manufacturer or any of the manufacturer's agents or employees has: (1) made a public statement or claim that the non-cigarette tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor, including, but not limited to, text and/or images on the product's labeling or packaging that are used to explicitly or impliedly communicate information about the flavor, taste or aroma of a non-cigarette tobacco product; or (2) taking action directed to consumers that would be reasonably expected to result in consumers believing that the non-cigarette tobacco product imparts a characterizing flavor. Each licensee shall maintain on the premises the original labeling and packaging provided by the manufacturer for all tobacco products that are sold or offered for sale by the licensee separately from any original packaging designed for the retail sale to the consumer. The original labeling and packaging from which the contents are sold separately shall be maintained during such times as the contents of the package are offered for sale, and may be disposed of upon the sale of the entire contents of the package. 
    This subsection (h) shall not apply to a smoking bar as defined in the G.L.  23-20.10-2(15). 
(Ord. No. 2016-15 , 2-7-17; Ord. No. 2017-18 , 7-11-17; Ord. No. 2018-17 , 6-19-18) 
Sec. 10-184. - Signs concerning sales to individuals under age 18. 
    All licensees shall exhibit a sign in red bold lettering a minimum of three-eighths inches high on a white backboard with the following wording in both English and Spanish: 
THE SALE OF CIGARETTES, TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DELIVERY SYSTEM PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 18 IS AGAINST RHODE ISLAND LAW (G.L.  11-9-13.8(1)). PHOTO ID FOR PROOF OF AGE IS REQUIRED FOR PURCHASE. 
WARNING: SMOKING CIGARETTES CONTRIBUTES TO LUNG DISEASE, CANCER, HEART DISEASE, STROKE AND RESPIRATORY ILLNESS AND DURING PREGNANCY MAY RESULT IN LOW BIRTH WEIGHT AND PREMATURE BIRTH. 
    The sign shall also include the telephone number at the department of behavioral healthcare, developmental disabilities and hospitals, where violations of the law can be reported. 
(Ord. No. 2016-15 , 2-7-17) 
Sec. 10-185. - Enforcement of ordinance; fines and costs. 
(a)  The West Warwick Police Department shall enforce this article. 
(b)  All licensees shall be subject to a compliance check at least once a year, with violators being checked more frequently until two checks are completed without a violation. 
(c)  Any licensee that is sells, distributes a tobacco and/or electronic nicotine delivery system product to (1) an individual under 18 years of age or [(2)] in any form other than an original factory-wrapped package shall be subject to fines as follows: 
(1)  A fine of $250.00 for the first violation within any 36 month period, 
(2)  A fine of $500.00 for the second violation within any 36 month period, 
(3)  A fine of $1,000.00 and a 14 day suspension of the license for the third violation within any 36 month period, 
(4)  A fine of $1,500.00 and a 90 day suspension of the license for each violation in excess of three. 
(d)  Any licensee that sells or distributes "loosies" shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-15 , 2-7-17) 
Sec. 10-186. - Use of premises during license suspension. 
    During the period of any suspension of a tobacco dealer's license, the licensee shall remove all tobacco products from the shelves and secure them in a locked area for the duration of the suspension. If, at any time during the suspension period, the licensee is found to be selling, distributing or delivering any tobacco products the license shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2016-15 , 2-7-17) 
Sec. 10-187. - Vending machines. 
(a)  No cigarettes or any other tobacco product the electronic nicotine delivery system products shall be sold from any device of vending machine which is in an area not continuously supervised and in direct line of sight of the licensee in which the device of vending machine is located, nor shall any tobacco product nor electronic nicotine delivery system be sold from any device of vending machine which is in an area supervised by the licensee unless the device of vending machine is equipped with an electronic locking device which will not allow the device of vending machine to dispense of a pack of cigarettes, or any tobacco product, nor any electronic nicotine delivery system product unless it is electronically unlocked from a secured position and accessible to the public and under the supervision of the licensee. "Direct line of sight" means that the vending machine and the purchaser of cigarettes or electronic nicotine delivery system must be visible to the licensee pressing the unlock button while the unlock button is being activated. Provided, a locking device shall not be required in an establishment to sell alcoholic beverages which limits access to persons over the age of 21 years. 
(b)  No cigarettes nor any other tobacco product nor electronic nicotine delivery system product shall be sold from any device or vending machine from which non-tobacco products are sold. 
(c)  No cigarettes shall be sold in packs which contain less than 20 cigarettes. 
(d)  Any licensee who shall violate the provisions of this section shall for the 1 st offense be subject to a fine of $75.00, for the 2 nd offense to a fine of $150.00, for a 3 rd offense and any subsequent offense to a fine of $500.00, provided, that in the event there are no offenses in three successive years from the date of the last offense, then the next offense shall be treated as a 1 st offense. 
(Ord. No. 2016-15 , 2-7-17) 
Chapter 11 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Covering of vehicles used to transport garbage and refuse,  9-8; consumption, possession of alcoholic beverages while in motor vehicle,  12-4.1; congregating, obstructing traffic,  16-4; vehicles for hire, ch. 19; traffic ordinances, App. C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Council to make regulations; emergency regulations. 
(a)  The town council is hereby empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergency and special conditions. 
(b)  In the exercise of such enforcement power the town council hereby appoints a traffic committee to advise it in the enforcement of such power. The traffic committee shall be comprised of the town manager, police chief, fire chief and director of public works, or their designee, and such other members as the town manager shall from time to time appoint to said committee. The traffic committee shall upon receipt from any member of the town council a specific request for the exercise of the herein stated powers of the town council or upon its own initiative make a report to the town council as to the feasibility and advisability of putting into effect the specific request. Upon receipt of said report the town council shall then act upon the request, shall determine the specific notice to be given regarding the enactment of the ordinance and shall determine the date on which the ordinance shall become effective, and upon affirmative vote of the town council said request shall be enacted as an ordinance of the Town of West Warwick. 
(c)  The town council shall within the reasonable exercise of the police power enact such ordinances as shall be necessary to: 
(1)  Regulate the standing or parking of vehicles; 
(2)  Regulate traffic by means of police officers or traffic control signals; 
(3)  Regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highway; 
(4)  Designate particular highways as one way highways and require that all vehicles on them be moved in one specific direction; 
(5)  Regulate the speed of vehicles in public parks; 
(6)  Designate any highway as a through highway and require that all vehicles stop before entering or crossing the highway or designating an intersection as a stop intersection and requiring all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to the stop intersection; 
(7)  Restrict the use of highways as authorized by G.L.  31-25-25 regarding prohibiting the operation of vehicles upon a highway or the imposition of restrictions as to the weight of vehicles to be operated upon a highway, for a total period of not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year, whenever the highway by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles on it is prohibited or the permissible weights of them is reduced and G.L.  31-25-26 regarding prohibiting the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles, or imposing limitations as to the weight of those vehicles on designated highways, which prohibitions and limitations shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on the highways. 
(8)  Regulate the operation of bicycles and requiring the registration and licensing of bicycles, including the requirement of a registration fee; 
(9)  Regulate or prohibit the turning of vehicles or specified types of vehicles at intersections; 
(10)  Alter the prima facie speed limit as authorized by Title 31 of the Rhode Island General Laws; and 
(11)  Adopt any other traffic regulations that are specifically authorized by Chapters 12-27 of Title 31 of the Rhode Island General Laws. 
(d)  In the exercise of said power, the traffic ordinances of the town as previously included in the West Warwick Code of Ordinances as Appendix C, traffic ordinances are hereby re-enacted as ordinances of the town in their entirety, shall be included in the West Warwick Code of Ordinances as Appendix C and shall remain in full force and effect. Appendix C, as hereby re-enacted shall from time to time be amended by the addition or deletion of traffic ordinances through the exercise of the said power regarding traffic ordinances by the town council. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  3; Ord. No. 2016-10 , 8-16-16) 
Cross reference- Traffic ordinances, App. C. 
Sec. 11-2. - Enforcement by police; directing traffic. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in conformance with the provisions of this chapter; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may temporarily direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  2) 
Cross reference- General duties of police,  14-1. 
Sec. 11-3. - Obedience to police. 
    No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 37,  1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-12-3. 
Sec. 11-4. - Types of signs, signals; erection, maintenance. 
    The town council shall determine and designate the character or type of all official traffic signs or signals. The chief of police is hereby authorized, and as to signs and signals required hereunder it shall be his duty, to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official traffic signs and signals. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform throughout the town. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  7) 
State Law reference- Manual of devices, G.L. 1956,  31-13-1. 
Sec. 11-5. - When signs required. 
    No provisions of this chapter for which signs are specifically required shall be enforceable against an alleged violator, if at the time and place of the alleged violation, the sign required is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being erected to give notice thereof. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  7) 
State Law reference- Local regulations to be posted, G.L. 1956,  31-12-13. 
Sec. 11-6. - Obedience to devices. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-13-4. 
Sec. 11-7. - Unauthorized devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon or in view of any street any unofficial signal or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic other than signs denoting construction or obstructions in the street, or which hides from view any official sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign, signal or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same or have it removed without notice. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  10) 
Sec. 11-8. - Damaging signs, devices. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-13-11. 
Sec. 11-9. - Designation of crosswalks. 
    The town council is hereby authorized to establish and to designate and shall thereafter maintain, or cause to be maintained, by appropriate devices, marks or lines on the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in their opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as they may deem necessary. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  12) 
Sec. 11-10. - Designation of safety zones. 
    For the protection of pedestrians, the town council, from time to time, is authorized to locate safety zones, by suitable designations, within the roadways of squares or highways. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  13) 
Sec. 11-11. - Marking of lanes. 
    The chief of police is authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  13) 
Sec. 11-12. - When emergency vehicles entitled to privileges. 
    The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in section 11-13, but subject to the conditions stated in sections 11-14 and 11-15. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 37,  1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-12-6. 
Sec. 11-13. - Privileges allowed emergency vehicles. 
    The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(a)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of any law; 
(b)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(c)  Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; 
(d)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 37,  1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-12-7. 
Sec. 11-14. - Warning signals by emergency vehicles. 
    The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 37,  1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-12-8. 
Sec. 11-15. - Care by emergency vehicles. 
    The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 37,  1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-12-9. 
Sec. 11-16. - Boarding, alighting from moving vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  19) 
Sec. 11-17. - Unlawful riding. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of his duty or to riding within truck bodies in the space intended for merchandise. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  20) 
Sec. 11-18. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 37,  1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-19-7. 
Sec. 11-19. - Lamps, reflectors on bicycles. 
    Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the registry of motor vehicles which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 2,  2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-19-10. 
Sec. 11-20. - Authority of police chief to detail police officers, special officers and police constables. 
(a)  The police chief of the Town of West Warwick is authorized to detail police personnel (police officers, special officers, reserve officers or police constables) and to require payment of an hourly amount by the following persons or entities, which hourly amount shall be that amount determined as due the personnel in accordance with the contract between the police officers' collective bargaining agent and the town and which amount shall be due and payable to the Town of West Warwick upon completion of each week during which a detail has been required: Whenever construction on, improvement on, or installation of any utility on, any highway, street or road within the Town of West Warwick shall cause disruption of the normal flow of traffic or create a hazard to motorists, the chief of police may, if he determines police personnel are necessary to regulate the traffic, after notifying the general contractor involved, detail the number of police personnel that he deems necessary to ensure the safety of motorists and the general contractor shall be responsible for the cost of the detail. 
(b)  Any person who is aggrieved by a determination of the chief of police that a detail is or was necessary may appeal said determination by written notification to the town council within ten days of receipt of the notification from the chief of police. Said town council shall, as soon as practicable, grant a hearing and make a de novo determination as to the necessity for the detailing of police personnel. The town council shall use the same standards the chief of police is required to use in determining the necessity for such detail. 
(c)  The notice by the chief of police required in paragraph (a) shall not be required in writing. The chief of police shall not be required to await a hearing of the town council before the detailing of police personnel deemed necessary. In the event that the town council overrules such decision, the cost of such detail shall be the responsibility of the Town of West Warwick. 
(Res. of 12-1-81) 
Editor's note- A resolution adopted December 1, 1981, enacted provisions designated as  11-79, which provisions have been redesignated as  11-20 for purposes of classification at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 11-21-11-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION 

Sec. 11-30. - Specific regulations saved from repeal. 
    Nothing contained in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect any ordinances regulating or restricting the operation of vehicles on particular streets or parts of streets or in particular places. 
Sec. 11-31. - U-turns. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  32) 
Sec. 11-32. - Unnecessary vehicle noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to so operate any automobile, motorcycle or other motorized vehicle on any highway, street, gangway, court, square, private parking lot, public parking lot, or any other public place in any part of the town in such a manner as to cause or create unnecessary noise by causing the spinning of wheels of any such vehicle so operated on the pavement or to cause or to create unnecessary noise by reason of a defective or altered exhaust system on such vehicle. Unnecessary noise shall be any noise other than that usually occasioned by the reasonable and normal operation of any such automobile, motorcycle, or other motorized vehicle. 
(Ord. of 7-30-68,  1) 
Sec. 11-33. - Duty to give way to vehicle about to load or unload. 
    The operator of any parked vehicle shall promptly give place to a vehicle about to take on or let off passengers or to load or deliver merchandise in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  33) 
Sec. 11-34. - Motor vehicle restricted routes. 
(a)  The use of any commercial vehicle, herein defined as a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles to transport passengers or property, if the motor vehicle: 
(1)  (a) Has a combination gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, (b) a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more or (c) a gross vehicle weight of 26,001 pounds or more; 
(2)  Is designed to transport 21 or more passengers including the driver; 
(3)  Is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be placarded in accordance with 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F as it may be revised from time to time; 
In and upon the following streets or highways, as the same shall from time to time be amended, at any time, is prohibited and the chief of police is directed to cause conspicuous signs to be placed on such streets or highways giving notice of such prohibition: 
Border Street 
Church Street 
Clyde Street 
Coit Avenue 
Earl Street 
East Greenwich Avenue 
Factory Street 
Gough Avenue 
Grandview Drive 
Greenbush Road 
Harris Avenue 
Harding Street 
Highland Avenue 
Maple Avenue 
New London Avenue-From Route 117 (Legris Avenue) to Main Street 
Pawtuxet Terrace 
Prospect Hill Avenue 
Pulaski Street 
Robinson Way 
Sunrise Avenue 
Wakefield Street 
Wilson Street 
Woodside Avenue 
Youngs Avenue 
    Provided however, that nothing contained herein shall affect the use of such streets or highways by any fire trucks, city public works department vehicles, police vehicles, emergency vehicles, school or public transportation buses or other vehicle using such streets or highways in any emergency or engaged in delivering goods, wares, merchandise or materials to or from any residence, building or lot within the town bordering on such streets or highways. 
(b)  Violations hereof shall be punishable in the West Warwick Municipal Court by a fine not in excess of $500.00 for each violation. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of G.L.  31-13-4 "Obedience to Devices" the West Warwick Police shall issue violations to offenders of said section by using secondary roads as a divergent route around a proposed toll locations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-8 , 9-6-16; Ord. No. 2017-27 11-21-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-8 , adopted Sept. 6, 2016, repealed the former  11-34, and enacted a new  11-34 as set out herein. The former  11-34 pertained to routes where trucks prohibited and derived from Comp. Ords., Ch. 42,  42; Ord. of 12-8-64,  1; Res. of 5-5-81; Ord. of 7-7-81; Res. of 4-20-82. 
Sec. 11-35. - Driving through funeral processions. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between or attempt to cut across the line of a hearse and the other vehicles and pedestrians constituting a funeral procession. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  34) 
Sec. 11-36. - One-way traffic pattern on River Street. 
    River Street from Providence Street at Sheldon Court to the East Avenue Bridge shall be one-way traffic entering; River Street from the East Avenue Bridge to the intersection of Providence Street and Wakefield Street shall remain two-way traffic. 
(Res. of 5-14-85) 
Sec. 11-37. - Reasonable and prudent speeds. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements; and it shall be the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Res. of 9-27-88) 
Sec. 11-38. - Conditions requiring reduced speed. 
    The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of section 11-37, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(Res. of 9-27-88) 
Sec. 11-39. - Riding recreational vehicles on private property. 
    No person shall ride, drive, or otherwise use an off-road motor vehicle, motorcycle, dirt bike, mini-bike, go-cart, ATV, snowmobile, or like recreational vehicle on private property, whether posted or not, without permission of the owner of such property. An exception shall be provided for all such vehicles if used by police, fire, or any other emergency service agency in furtherance of their official duties. 
    Operators of such vehicles must have written permission from the landowner on their person while in operation. Failure to have such written permission shall be prima-facie evidence of not having permission from the property owner. 
    Violations will be processed through the West Warwick Municipal Court. Each violation of this section shall be subject to a $250.00 fine and the violator may further be sentenced to perform community service. In addition to all fines and sanctions, the West Warwick Municipal Court may impose court costs. 
(Ord. No. 2004-8, 6-17-04) 
Secs. 11-40-11-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING, GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Street obstructions generally,  16-1. 

Sec. 11-45. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Camping recreational vehicle" means a vehicular type camping unit, certified by the manufacturer as complying with ANSI A119.2 Standards, designed primarily as temporary living quarters for recreation that has either its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle. The basic units are tent trailers, fifth wheel trailers, motorized campers, travel trailers, and pick-up campers. 
    "Vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    "Tent trailer" means a recreational vehicle that can be towed and is mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial side walls that fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold for use and which is eligible to be registered for highway use. 
    "Fifth wheel trailer" means a towable recreational vehicle, not exceeding 400 square feet in area, designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle that contains a towing mechanism that is mounted above or forward of the tow vehicle's rear axle and which is eligible to be registered for highway use. 
    "Motorized camper" means a camping recreational vehicle, built on or permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis cab or van that is an integral part of the completed vehicle. 
    "Travel trailer" means a recreational vehicle, not exceeding 320 square feet in area, designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle containing a towing mechanism that is mounted behind the tow vehicle's bumper and which is eligible to be registered for highway use. 
    "Pick-up camper" means a camping recreational vehicle consisting of a roof, floor, and sides designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the back of a pick-up truck. 
    "Park trailer" means a camping recreational vehicle that is eligible to be registered for highway use and meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis mounted on wheels; and 
(2)  Certified by the manufacturer as complying with ANSI A119.5. 
(Ord. No. 2005-21, 1-3-06, eff. 1-25-06) 
Sec. 11-46. - Vehicles obstructing traffic and recreational vehicle or trailer parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to place the same in any street so as to prevent or obstruct the passing of other vehicles, not exceeding five minutes at a time. 
(b)  No person shall park a trailer or recreational vehicle upon any town street unless it is attached to a vehicle by which it may be drawn. 
(c)  An owner or operator of a recreational vehicle or vehicle with attached trailer shall not park the recreational vehicle or vehicle with attached trailer on any town street unless immediately adjoining the owner or operator's residence and for no more than 72 consecutive hours. The recreational vehicle or vehicle with attached trailer may not be parked on any town street for 60 days thereafter. 
(d)  Within 24 hours of service of the notice of violation, the owner shall remove the vehicle to lawful parking location or the subject vehicle shall be towed at the owner's expense to a tow company storage facility. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  25; Ord. No. 2005-21, 1-3-06, eff. 1-25-06) 
Sec. 11-47. - Overtime parking violations; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle on any of the town's highways for more than two hours continuously. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any parking meter space overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time or shall be found parked therein during any period when parking is prohibited or shall be found parking in violation of any provision of this article, a police officer shall serve upon the owner or operator of such vehicle or attach to such vehicle a notice directing the owner or operator thereof to appear at police headquarters of the town at a time specified in such notice. 
(c)  When any person shall receive notice from the police department to appear at police headquarters of the town, such person may pay to the police department in person or by mail the sum of $3.00 in cash or check for each violation; and, upon payment of said amount, a prosecution under this article for the violation in question shall be barred. Provided, however, that if said sum of $3.00 is not paid to the police department within seven days after the violation in question, the owner shall be brought before the court and prosecuted under the provisions of section 11-76; provided, also, that for any attempted payment by check written against insufficient funds, an additional penalty of $10.00 shall be imposed upon and paid by such person. 
(d)  In any prosecution or proceeding hereunder, the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred. 
(Ord. of 7-13-43,  1; Res. of 4-29-85) 
Cross reference- Penalty for check written against insufficient funds to pay parking meter violation fine,  11-72. 
Sec. 11-48. - Regulations in specific locations. 
    The town council may from time to time regulate, restrict or prohibit the parking, stopping or standing of vehicles on particular streets or parts of streets or in other places. Whenever signs or markings are in place giving notice of such regulations, restrictions or prohibitions, it shall be unlawful to disobey such signs or markings. 
Sec. 11-48.1. - Handicapped parking. 
(a)  The town council may, from time to time by resolution, regulate the parking of motor vehicles on private streets by designating a certain part of the street or other place "handicapped parking space." The handicapped parking space shall be designated and identified by the posting of a sign incorporating the international symbol of access of white on blue indicating that the parking space is reserved for the handicapped for vehicles displaying the required plate. The posting of such signs shall be in accordance with the building code when the location of such parking spaces on public and private land is within the purview of the state building code. 
(b)  A person, other than a person issued a special plate pursuant to this section, or a person transporting said person and displaying the special portable plate who unlawfully parks a vehicle in a parking space designated for the handicapped shall be fined $25.00 for the first violation, $75.00 for the second violation, and $100.00 for the third or subsequent violation. The vehicle may be subject to towing at the owner's expense. 
(Res. of 4-2-85) 
Sec. 11-49. - Removal of vehicles. 
    Any police officer in uniform, in his discretion, may remove any vehicle left upon any street not in apparent charge of any driver or other person, or in violation of the provisions of any ordinance, to another place on such street or from such street to some other street, or to the police station. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  36) 
Sec. 11-50. - Moving vehicles to avoid regulations. 
    The moving of vehicles from one location to another to avoid the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be a violation hereof. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  37) 
Sec. 11-51. - Transferring goods between vehicles. 
    No vehicles shall be allowed to stop in a street for the purpose of transferring goods or merchandise from one vehicle to another except when it may be done with the vehicles abreast or backed up to each other, and in no event shall it be done in such a manner or to such an extent as to obstruct the regular course of travel. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 37,  1) 
Sec. 11-52. - Parking during snow removal; illegally parked cars to be towed away. 
(a)  When it commences to snow, after publicized predictions of at least three inches of snow, it shall be unlawful to park on any public street in the town at any time and until 12 hours after a snowfall has occurred 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street of said town at any time when such street is being cleaned. 
(c)  The police department and its members are hereby authorized to remove and tow away or to have removed and towed away by commercial towing any car or vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parking of vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of fire hydrants or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle or within 12 hours after a snowfall ceases, after publicized predictions of at least three inches. 
(d)  Cars so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in some place and returned to the owner or operator upon the payment of all towing and storage charges to the person or firm towing and storing the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 3-9-71,  1, 2; Res. of 1-25-83; Res. No. 99-317, 12-21-99) 
Editor's note- An Ord. of March 9, 1971,  1 and 2, amended this Code by adding provisions designated as ch. 20, "Snow Removal." The provisions were redesignated as  11-52 by the editors in order that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters and the classification of subject matter as established in this Code might be preserved. 
Sec. 11-53. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of section 11-52, a police officer shall serve upon the owner or operator of such vehicle or attach to such vehicle a notice directing the owner or operator thereof to appear at police headquarters of the town at a time specified in such notice. 
(Res. of 1-25-83) 
Sec. 11-54. - Payment in lieu of penalty. 
    When any person shall receive notice from the police department to appear at police headquar ters of the town such person may pay to the police department in person or by mail the sum of $25.00 in cash or check for the first violation, of $50.00 in cash or check for the second violation, and of $75.00 in cash or check for the third and each subsequent violation, and upon payment of said amount a prosecution under this article for the violation in question shall be barred; provided, however, that if said sum of fine money is not paid to the police department within seven days after the violation in question, the owner shall be brought before the court and prosecuted under the provisions of section 11-55. 
(Res. of 1-25-83; Res. No. 99-317, 12-21-99) 
Sec. 11-55. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply shall, except as otherwise herein provided, be punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(Res. of 1-25-83) 
Sec. 11-56. - Vehicle registrant presumed violator. 
    In any prosecution or proceeding hereunder, the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred. 
(Res. of 1-25-83) 
Secs. 11-57-11-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING METERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, meters generally, G.L. 1956,  31-28-1 et seq. 

Sec. 11-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article: 
    Operator means and includes every individual who operates a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, upon the street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle. 
    Parking meter means and includes any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this article placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this article. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the town and when operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal time and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
    Parking meter space means any space within a parking meter zone adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meter. 
    Parking meter zone means and includes any restricted street upon which parking meters are installed and in operation. 
    Street means any public street, avenue, alley, highway, lane, path or other public place located in the town and established for the use of vehicles. 
    Vehicle means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  1) 
Sec. 11-63. - Designation of zones. 
    The council shall from time to time designate the areas or streets which shall constitute parking meter zones, in which parking meters shall be installed. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  2) 
Sec. 11-64. - Designation, use of spaces. 
    The chief of police is hereby directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces in the parking zones designated and described in this article, said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street. At each space so marked off it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  3) 
Sec. 11-65. - Installation, maintenance, type of meters. 
    In parking meter zones the chief of police shall cause parking meters to be installed upon the curb or sidewalk immediately adjacent to the parking spaces provided in section 11-64, said installation to be placed not more than two feet from the curb nor more than four feet from the front line of the parking space as indicated, and the chief of police shall be responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use of such parking meter. Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins, lawful money of the United States of America, for the period of time prescribed by this article. Each device shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper visible signal that the lawful parking period has expired and in such cases the right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the operator, owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  4) 
Sec. 11-66. - Operation of meters. 
    Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the fire or police department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space along-side or next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking meter space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in said meter such proper coin of the United States as is required for such parking meter and as is designated by the proper directions on the meter, and when required by the directions on the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the deposit of the proper coin or coins, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on such meter in accordance with the directions properly appearing thereon, and failure to deposit such proper coin, and to set the timing mechanism in operation when so required, shall constitute a violation of this article. Upon the deposit of such coin (and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation when so required) the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which said parking space is located; provided, that any person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as his occupancy of said space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. If said vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit set for such parking space, and if the meter shall indicate such illegal parking, then, and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  5) 
Sec. 11-67. - Time limitation; hours of meter operation. 
(a)  Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a parking meter zone shall be lawful for 12 minutes upon the deposit of a one-cent coin, 24 minutes upon the deposit of two one-cent coins, 36 minutes upon the deposit of three one-cent coins, 48 minutes upon the deposit of four one-cent coins, or 60 minutes upon the deposit of five one-cent coins or one five-cent coin of the United States of America. 
(b)  Said parking meters shall be operated in said parking meter zones every day between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except each and every Friday when said parking meters shall be operated in said parking meter zones between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays; provided however that within the meaning of this article the term "holiday" shall include the following days only: January 1, May 30, July 4, the first Monday in September, December 25, and any and all other days set aside by the state legislature as legal holidays, and the day designated and set aside by the President of the United States as a day of Thanksgiving. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  6) 
Sec. 11-68. - Violations enumerated. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any person: 
(a)  To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by such person to be parked overtime, or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein described. 
(b)  To permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space. 
(c)  To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. 
(d)  To deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article. Any violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both. 
(e)  To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metal substance, or other substitute for lawful coins. Any violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  7) 
Sec. 11-69. - Feeding meters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter additional proper coins of the United States for the purpose of increasing or extending the legal time which has been established by this article for the parking meter space adjacent to which said parking meter is placed. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  8) 
Sec. 11-70. - Police to enforce. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  9) 
Sec. 11-71. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any parking meter space overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, or shall be found parked therein during any period when parking is prohibited or shall be found parking in violation of any provision of this article, a police officer shall serve upon the owner or operator of such vehicle or attach to such vehicle a notice directing the owner or operator thereof to appear at police headquarters of the town at a time specified in such notice. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  10) 
Sec. 11-72. - Payment in lieu of penalty. 
    When any person shall receive notice from the police department to appear at police headquarters of the town such person may pay to the police department in person or by mail the sum of $3.00 in cash or check for each violation, and upon payment of said amount a prosecution under this article for the violation in question shall be barred. Provided, however, that if said sum of $3.00 is not paid to the police department within seven days after the violation in question, the owner shall be brought before the court and prosecuted under the provisions of section 11-76; provided, also, that for any attempted payment by check written against insufficient funds, an additional penalty of $25.00 shall be imposed upon and paid by such person. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  11; Res. of 6-8-65; Res. of 4-2-85) 
Cross reference- Penalty for check written against insufficient funds to pay parking violation fine,  11-47(c). 
Sec. 11-73. - Collections from meters. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to designate some member or members of the police department to make regular collections of the money deposited in parking meters. The chief of police is required, and shall make a complete accounting of all moneys collected or derived from the operation of said meters to the town treasurer on or before April 30 each and every year. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  12) 
Sec. 11-74. - Use of funds. 
    The coins deposited in parking meters are required and shall be used to defray the expense of proper regulation of traffic upon the public streets of the town; to provide for the cost of supervision, regulation and control of the parking of vehicles in parking meter zones; and to cover the cost of purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operating, maintenance, control and use of parking meters; the balance of the money shall be deposited with the town treasurer to be used as the town council shall direct. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  13) 
Sec. 11-75. - Vehicle registrant presumed violator. 
    In any prosecution or proceeding hereunder, the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  14) 
Sec. 11-76. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply shall, except as otherwise herein provided, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  15; Res. of 6-8-65; Res. of 11-23-88) 
Cross reference- Penalty for violation of fire lane provisions,  7-3. 
Sec. 11-77. - Reservation of powers. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the town from providing for bus stops, for taxicab stands and other matters of similar nature, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans, or other commercial vehicles. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  16) 
Sec. 11-78. - Exercise of police power declared. 
    This entire article shall be deemed and construed to be an exercise of the police power of the town for the preservation and protection of public safety, and all of its provisions shall be liberally construed with a view to the effectuation of such purpose. 
(Ord. of 8-15-51,  19) 
Secs. 11-79-11-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 11-89. - Applicability of regulations. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. ch. 42,  15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-18-1. 
Sec. 11-90. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
    When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger; but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(Comp. Ords. ch. 42,  14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-18-3. 
Sec. 11-91. - Crossing other than at crosswalks. 
    Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(Comp. Ords. ch. 42,  14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-18-5. 
Sec. 11-92. - Hitchhiking. 
    No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
(Comp. Ords. ch. 42,  16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956,  31-18-12. 
Secs. 11-93-11-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISMANTLED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 11-101. - Findings; statement of fact. 
    The presence of dismantled or abandoned vehicles on public or private property constitutes an attractive nuisance for children and endangers their safety; provides harborage for rats and other animals, constituting a menace to public health; creates a fire hazard; causes neighborhoods to become unsightly, resulting in the depreciation of property values; and if on town streets or public highways, creates a traffic hazard and endangers the public safety. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 11-102. - Permit for storage required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored or kept in the open upon public or private property a dismantled, unserviceable, junked or abandoned vehicle of one legally or physically incapable of being operated, unless a permit for said storage has theretofore been obtained from the proper authority. A fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council shall be paid prior to the issuance of such permit. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 11-103. - Notice by police department or building official or designee; removal. 
(a)  The owner of any aforedescribed vehicle shall remove the same within five days after being ordered to do so in writing by the West Warwick Police Department, or building official or designee, or by the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises where said vehicle shall be found. If the owner of any aforesaid vehicle is not known or cannot readily be ascertained, notice to remove may be given by attaching such notice to said aforesaid vehicle. Failure to remove said vehicle after the fifth day shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  The police department or building official or designee may serve notice in writing upon the owner of any property located within the town to remove a dismantled, unserviceable, junked or abandoned vehicle from said property. The owner of said property shall remove the same within five days after said notice has been received. Failure to remove said vehicle after the fifth day shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)  If the owner of any aforesaid vehicle is also the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, notice to remove as aforesaid shall be given by the police department or building official or designee. 
(d)  If said vehicle is on a town street or public highway, 24-hour notice, as aforesaid to remove the same, shall be given by the police department; provided that if said vehicle constitutes a present hazard or unduly obstructs traffic's ingress to or egress from private or public property, the same may be removed by said police department immediately without any prior notice. 
(e)  An unregistered vehicle on premises not owned or occupied by the owner of said vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87; Ord. No. 2003-6, 3-4-03) 
Sec. 11-104. - Removal to designated location. 
    Upon failure to remove any aforesaid vehicle within the time limit stated herein, said owner, lessee, occupant of the premises or police department shall forthwith remove or cause the said vehicle to be removed from the premises to a location to be designated by the police department. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 11-105. - Application required and payment of charges to regain possession. 
    The owner of any vehicle so removed may regain possession thereof from said town or its agents by making application therefor within 30 days after its receipt by said town or its agents, upon paying to said town all reasonable costs of removal, which shall be repaid to the person who paid or incurred such charges, plus an additional charge of $15.00 per day for the storage charge of said vehicle while in possession of said town or its agents. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 11-106. - Town may sell unclaimed vehicle. 
    If no claim for said aforedescribed vehicle is made within 30 days after receipt thereof, said town may sell said vehicle for the best price obtainable as junk or otherwise; and the proceeds thereof shall be available to pay the reasonable charges of delivering the same to said town if a claim therefor is made by the person who paid said charges, the expense of keeping and disposing of said vehicle; and any balance shall be paid into the general fund. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 11-107. - No liability for loss or damage. 
    Neither the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises from which any aforedescribed vehicle shall be removed, his or its servant or agent or the town shall be liable for any loss or damage to said vehicle while being removed, or while in the possession of said town, or as a result of any subsequent sale or other disposition. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 11-108. - Definitions of terms as used in this article. 
(a)  Dismantled, unserviceable, junked or abandoned vehicles or vehicles legally or physically incapable of being operated shall be any motor vehicle for which there is not a validly issued registration, valid inspection sticker and in effect insurance and shall be deemed to include major parts thereof, including bodies, engines, transmissions, rear ends, etc. 
(b)  Public property shall include property owned by the town or state, property acquired by the town at tax sales and all streets and highways within the town, whether or not they are public highways. 
(c)  A vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated shall include one which has not been duly registered according to law or which lacks the equipment in good operating condition, as required by law, to enable it to be registered and/or receive a valid state inspection sticker. 
(d)  Premises shall include public or private property, town streets and public highways. 
(e)  Dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicles shall not be deemed to include unregistered seasonal farm vehicles operated by the owner of said vehicles on his own property. 
(f)  Dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicles shall not be deemed to include vehicles which are purchased for purposes of restoration, which comply with the definition of antique vehicles, as set out in G.L. 1956,  31-1-3, and possess a valid antique registration. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87; Ord. No. 2013-48, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 11-109. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation which shall violate any provisions of this article, or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be liable to a fine of not more than $500.00, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 11-110. - Temporary permits issued upon application; purposes. 
    Temporary permits shall be issued through the police department upon application by the owner of the vehicle. Permits shall be valid for a period of three months. Permits shall be issued to the owner of a vehicle which normally falls within the prohibitions of this article by the police department by [for] any of the following purposes: 
(1)  Vehicles in legal operating condition which are temporarily unregistered. 
(2)  Unregistered vehicles in legal operating condition which are being stored on private property by persons serving in the military forces of the United States. 
(3)  Vehicles stored on private property by persons repairing such vehicles for profit, such person being presently permitted to conduct such business by the zoning ordinances of the Town of West Warwick. 
(4)  One vehicle may be temporarily stored for a maximum of seven days on the premises for purposes of cannibalization; provided that, if said reclamation of all usable parts is completed prior to the expiration of said seven-day permit, the remainder of the vehicle shall be promptly removed from the premises; provided, further, that the owner of those cannibalized parts, normally falling within the definition set forth in section 11-108(a), shall be eligible for a permit therefor only if said parts are stored out of sight and in accordance with the provisions of this act. 
(5)  Said permits may be extended for additional three-month periods by the police department, upon the showing of good cause by the owner of said vehicle. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 11-111. - Appeals for declined permit. 
    Appeals from the decision of the police department declining a request for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be submitted to the town council in writing within ten days of the declination of the permit by the police department. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 11-112. - Additional causes for permits. 
    Permits shall be issued in writing by the police department and without fee for any of the causes listed in section 11-110. The police department's authority shall not be limited solely to the causes set out in section 11-110, but it shall be granted authority to issue permits for other causes in its discretion. Permits issued by the police department for causes other than those delineated in section 11-110 shall be issued only upon written application by the owner of said vehicle, setting out those causes excepting him from the prohibitions of this article. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87) 
Sec. 11-113. - Savings clause. 
    If any provision, paragraph, sentence, word or section of this article shall be invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, paragraphs, sentences, words or sections shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Res. of 2-17-87; Res. of 6-2-87) 
Chapter 11.5 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- A Res. of June 7, 1988 (No. 88-316), added a new ch. 20, which has been redesignated as ch. 11.5 by the editor to maintain the Code's alphabetical sequence and to facilitate indexing. 
Charter reference- Probate court and probate judge,  1201 et seq. 
Cross reference- General penalty,  1-10; housing, ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11; offenses-miscellaneous, ch. 12; police, ch. 14. 
Special acts- When district court sits,  1-4; drawing of grand and petit jurors for district and superior courts,  1-5. 

Sec. 11.5-1. - Established. 
    Pursuant to title 45, chapter 82-26 of the Public Laws of Rhode Island, 1956, as amended, there is established a municipal court in the town. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Sec. 11.5-2. - Appointment, term, qualifications of municipal court judge. 
(a)  Said court shall be composed of one judge appointed by the town council. Said judge shall serve until his successor shall be duly appointed, as aforesaid. 
(b)  The term of appointment for the judge shall be five years, commencing July 1 of the year of appointment. 
(c)  The judge shall be a lawyer in good standing admitted to practice before the supreme court of the State of Rhode Island and shall have not less than five years' experience in the active practice of law and shall be a qualified elector of the town. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Sec. 11.5-2.2. - Assistant municipal court judge. 
    The appointed municipal court judge is authorized to select a specific member of his/her law firm to act as an assistant municipal court judge, subject to the approval of the town council and meeting all qualifications as provided below: 
(1)  Candidate shall be an attorney, in good standing, licensed in the State of Rhode Island for a period of at least five years. 
(2)  Candidate must be a member of the municipal court judge's law firm. 
(3)  Candidate shall not be compensated in any form for the services performed as the assistant municipal court judge. 
(4)  Candidate shall not be considered an employee nor independent contractor of the town. 
(5)  Candidate can only serve in the position of assistant municipal court judge for the five year term of the appointed sitting municipal court judge. 
(6)  The selection of the candidate to this position shall terminate immediately upon the conclusion of the appointed, sitting municipal court judge's term. 
(7)  Candidate is required to have legal malpractice insurance. 
    The assistant municipal court judge shall be able to preside when the appointed municipal court judge is incapacitated and cannot reside over any municipal court docket. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1 , 3-15-16) 
Sec. 11.5-2.5. - Acting judge. 
    The judge of the probate court shall perform the duties of the municipal court judge in case of sickness, absence from the state, or other disability or ineligibility of said municipal court judge. The acts of said probate judge in the performance of said duties shall have the same effect as if performed by said municipal court judge. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Sec. 11.5-3. - Witnesses; attendance; subpoenas. 
    Said court shall have the power to issue writs or summonses for witnesses and compel their attendance and to punish for contempt by fine or imprisonment. Said court may also issue writs of habeas corpus ad testificandum upon continuance of any complaint or proceeding before it, may take recognizance to the state with surety or sureties in such sum as said court shall think proper with condition to appear before said court and make further answer to such complaint or proceeding and, in the meantime, to keep the peace; and, in want thereof, may commit the same to the state adult correction institution until such recognizance shall be given or the parties lawfully discharged therefrom. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Sec. 11.5-4. - Municipal court clerk; appointment and duties. 
(a)  The town clerk or his/her designee, shall act as clerk of the municipal court. 
(b)  The clerk of the court shall keep a regular docket of all cases disposed of; shall record the judgments, orders and sentences of said court, and shall furnish certified copies thereof when required, for which copies said clerk shall charge the same fees as are by law allowed to clerks of the superior court. The court clerk's office shall be open to the public during such hours as the court shall determine. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the police department or the town council from providing the secretarial and administrative assistance necessary for the court to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(d)  In the event the town clerk and/or his/her designee are unable to perform the duties of clerk of the court, the town council may, in the absence of a duly appointed clerk of said court, appoint a clerk pro tem who shall be a qualified elector of the town. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1; Res. of 9-13-88; Ord. No. 96-06, 6-3-97) 
Sec. 11.5-5. - Seal; oaths. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have a seal which shall contain such words and device as the town council shall adopt and approve. 
(b)  The judge and the municipal court clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Sec. 11.5-6. - Sessions; time; place. 
    The municipal court shall be considered to be in session at all times and at such place or places in the town as the said court or justice holding the same shall appoint. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Sec. 11.5-7. - Jurisdiction. 
    The town council hereby confers on the municipal court original jurisdiction to hear and determine causes involving violations of: 
(1)  Any ordinance of the town. 
(2)  Minimum housing ordinances, including any violation of G.L. 1956,  45-24.3-1 et seq., entitled, "The Rhode Island Housing, Maintenance and Occupancy Code." 
(3)  Any other jurisdiction conferred by state law. 
    Provided, however, that any defendant found guilty of any offense, excluding violations of said minimum housing ordinances or G.L. 1956,  45-24.3, within the jurisdiction of the court, may, within seven days of such conviction, file an appeal from said conviction to the Kent County Superior Court and be entitled in the latter court to a trial de novo; and provided, further, however, that any defendant found guilty of any violation of a minimum housing ordinance or of said G.L. 1956,  45-24.3-1 et seq., may, within seven days of such conviction, file an appeal from said conviction to the third division of the district court and be entitled to trial de novo in accordance with sections 8-8-3(a)(4) and 8-8-3.2. 
    With respect to violations of either municipal ordinances dealing with minimum housing or G.L. 1956,  45-24.3-1 et seq. dealing with housing maintenance and occupancy, the town council hereby confers upon said municipal court, in furtherance of the aforementioned jurisdiction, the power to proceed according to equity: 
(1)  To restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate or correct a violation; 
(2)  To order the repair, vacation or demolition of any dwelling existing in violation; or 
(3)  To otherwise compel compliance with all provisions of said ordinances and statutes. 
(4)  To order a dwelling into receivership and to order the removal of any cloud on the title to the building or property which shall be binding upon all those claiming by, through, under, or by virtue of any inferior liens or encumbrances pursuant to G.L.  34-44-1, et seq. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1; Ord. No. 2015-18 , 1-19-16) 
Sec. 11.5-8. - Fines, penalties, imprisonment. 
(a)  The municipal court may impose a sentence not to exceed 30 days in jail and impose a fine not in excess of $500.00, or both, and shall be empowered to punish persons for contempt. 
(b)  All fines and penalties imposed by the municipal court may be paid to the clerk of the court, the town clerk or the police department by mail or in person. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1; Ord. of 12-5-89; Ord. No. 96-06, 6-3-97) 
Sec. 11.5-9. - Complaints; warrants; writs. 
    It shall be lawful for the judge of said court to prescribe and vary the form of all complaints, warrants, writs or other process as to make the same consistent with the organization, style and jurisdiction of said court; and such complaints, warrants, writs and other process shall have the same effect, validity and extent and be served, obeyed, enforced and returned in the same manner and by the same officers as if issued from the district courts; and they may be served by any police officer or constable of the town who is authorized to serve process in civil or criminal cases. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Sec. 11.5-10. - Costs. 
(a)  Costs taxed by the municipal court shall be the same as those taxed by district courts, and the payment of said costs shall be a part of the sentence to the extent that they would be in district courts. 
(b)  All payments shall be deposited in the general treasury of the town. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Sec. 11.5-11. - Charter provisions. 
    The provisions of the town Charter shall apply to the municipal court to the extent that such provisions are not inconsistent with this chapter. To the extent that such provision or provisions are inconsistent, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Sec. 11.5-12. - Compensation of municipal judge and clerk. 
(a)  The compensation and/or benefits of the judge of the municipal court and/or the clerk of the municipal court, shall be set by the town council, through ordinance of the town council, as it shall deem appropriate and necessary. 
(b)  The compensation and/or benefits of the judge of the municipal court and/or the clerk of the municipal court may be increased and/or otherwise adjusted by ordinance of the town council, as it shall deem appropriate and necessary. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1; Ord. of 10-5-93; Res. No. 97-49, 2-18-97) 
Sec. 11.5-13. - Invalidity. 
    Should any part or parts of this chapter or their application to any particular circumstances be held invalid, the remaining provisions and their application shall not be affected thereby. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Sec. 11.5-14. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall take effect on its passage. 
(Res. of 6-7-88,  1) 
Chapter 12 - OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Airplane glue. 
(a)  Definitions , as used in this section: 
(1)  Device means instruments, apparatus and contrivances, and including their components, parts and accessories, intended for use in order to affect the structure or any function of the body of man. 
(2)  Substance means articles (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man. 
(b)  Parental consent to furnish. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, deliver, supply, lend or give any quantity of so-called toxic "airplane glue" to any minor unless supplied with written permission from a parent or guardian of said minor requesting such minor to be sold, furnished or otherwise supplied with said toxic "airplane glue" so-called. 
(c)  Possession with intent to inhale. It shall be unlawful to possess toxic "airplane glue" so-called, with intent to inhale or otherwise utilize the vapors thereto to produce a physiological effect upon the human body. 
(d)  Inhaling. It shall be unlawful to inhale or otherwise utilize the vapors of toxic "airplane glue" so-called with intent to produce a physiological effect upon the human body. 
(e)  Possessing devices. It shall be unlawful to possess any substance or device with intent to use, take, inhale or otherwise utilize or use such substance or device in a manner which shall affect the structure or any function of the body of man, and which because of toxicity or the potentiality for harmful effect, or the method of its use, or the collateral measures necessary to its use, is not safe except for the purposes intended for such substances or device. 
(Ord. of 1-31-68,  1-4) 
Sec. 12-2. - Disorderly and indecent conduct. 
    No person, acting alone or in concert with others, may engage in conduct which violates any of the following subsections: 
(a)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; or 
(b)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; or 
(c)  Any person who shall in a public place use "fighting words" or language or words which by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite outrage and immediate turmoil; or 
(d)  Any person who shall use violent and forceful behavior at any time in or near a public place, such that there is a clear and present danger that free movement of other persons will be arrested or restrained, or other persons will be incapacitated in the lawful exercise of business or amusement; or 
(e)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; or 
(f)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking, or engaging in any fight or brawl; or 
(g)  Any person who shall disturb the peace of others by violent, indecent, offensive or boisterous conduct or language, which said conduct or language was calculated to cause anguish or injury to another; or 
(h)  Any person who shall be found roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; or 
(i)  Any person who shall throw any stone, snowball, or any other missile upon or at any person, vehicle, building, tree, sign or other public or private property; or 
(j)  Any person who shall throw any stone, snowball, or other missile from any vehicle, either moving, stopped, or parked, upon or at any person, building, vehicle, tree, sign, or other public or private property; or 
(k)  Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(l)  Any person who shall expectorate, urinate, or defecate on any public street, alley, sidewalk or floor of any public building or a building where the public gathers or has access; or 
(m)  Any person who shall wantonly make a false alarm with reference to the request of fire fighting apparatus, or cries fire in any public place for the sole purpose of causing turmoil; or 
(n)  Any person who shall prowl or wander upon the private property of another, peeks in the door or window of any inhabited building or structure located thereon without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant thereof; or 
(o)  Any person who shall maliciously interrupt the speaker of any lawful assembly or impairs the lawful rights of others to participate effectively in such assembly or meeting when such conduct is calculated to provoke or tend to cause turmoil or disturbance; or 
(p)  Any person who shall act in a manner which tends to cause or provoke a disturbance near any public building wherein matters affecting the public are being considered or deliberated, designed or having the effect and said conduct interferes with the said public matters; or 
(q)  Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; or 
(r)  Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device, or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in said town, or who shall aid and abet therein; or 
(s)  Any person who shall display any deadly weapon in a public place in a manner which is calculated to alarm or frighten other persons present. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 10,  1; Ord. of 9-16-76) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, G.L. 1956,  11-45-1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-3. - Indecent bathing. 
    Any person who shall, unless properly clothed, bathe in sight of any public place, or any public highway, or any street, within the town, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 1,  1) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit indecent exposure while bathing, G.L 1956,  45-6-1. 
Sec. 12-4. - Public intoxication. 
    Any person who shall be found intoxicated to such an extent as to amount to a violation of decency in any highway, street, gangway, court, square, or other public place in this town, shall be fined for each and every offense not less than $2.00 nor more than $20.00, or be imprisoned not exceeding ten days and pay all costs of prosecution and conviction. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 10,  2) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit indecent intoxication, G.L. 1956,  45-6-3. 
Sec. 12-4.1. - Consumption and possession of alcohol in public; penalties for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages from any bottle, glass, or metal container, or any other container, on any public street, highway, park, recreation area, or other public place, including while in or upon a motor vehicle, which is either moving or stopped in the Town of West Warwick. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess [an] alcoholic beverage, other than in its original unopened condition, on any public street, highway, park, recreation area, or other public place, including while in or upon a motor vehicle, which is either moving or stopped in the Town of West Warwick. 
(c)  Violators of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or be imprisoned not exceeding ten days, and this section shall take effect upon passage. 
(Res. of 5-18-81; Res. of 10-6-81) 
Sec. 12-4.2. - Consumption and possession of alcohol in unlicensed victualling establishments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages from any type of a container while on or within the premises of a victualling house or restaurant that has not been issued a valid liquor license by the town council. 
(b)  Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00. 
(c)  This section shall take effect upon passage. 
(Res. of 8-4-87) 
Sec. 12-5. - Damaging property. 
    If any person shall wantonly or maliciously daub with paint, or otherwise injure, by scratching or marking, or writing with paint, blacking, red chalk, or in any manner deface any post, lamppost, signboard or sign, situate in or upon any street, highway, bridge, wharf or public place, or ground set apart for public purposes in this town, or any ornament or appurtenance of the same, or shall wilfully tear down, deface or destroy any notice of any public meeting, auction or other sale, or any other public notice, or who shall wilfully take down, extinguish or otherwise injure any public or private lamp or any private sign for the protection of travelers, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 16,  1) 
State Law reference- Damaging property of another, G.L. 1956,  11-44-1; damaging public property generally, G.L. 1956,  11-44-12 et seq. 
Sec. 12-5.1. - Vandalism, graffiti. 
(a)  Any person who shall wilfully and maliciously or mischievously injure or destroy or write upon, paint or otherwise deface the property of another in any manner, shall be sentenced to serve no more than 30 days in jail and fined no more than $300.00 or both. The police department of the town shall fully prosecute such crimes. 
(b)  Any person who shall wilfully and maliciously or mischievously cut, destroy or write upon, paint, deface or otherwise injure in any manner any public building or fence or other property, shall be sentenced to serve no more than 30 days in jail and fined no more than $300.00 or both. The police department shall fully prosecute such crimes. 
(c)  Violators of subsection (a) or (b) shall be subject to a mandatory minimum of ten hours of community service. 
(Ord. of 10-6-94) 
Editor's note- An ordinance of October 6, 1994, purported to amend the Code by adding thereto provisions designated as  15-24. In accord with the intent of the legislation, such provisions have been included herein as a new  12-5.1. 
Sec. 12-6. - Obstructing doorways, etc.; ringing doorbells. 
    Any person who shall be or remain upon any doorway, steps or other projection of any dwelling house within this town, without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof, nor [or] obstruct any passage to or from the same or any appurtenance thereof, or mischievously or maliciously knock at any door or ring any door bell, at any dwelling house, so as to alarm, annoy or disturb any person or persons therein, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 17,  1) 
Sec. 12-7. - Slaughterhouses. 
    From and after July 1 to September 1 all persons are restrained from erecting or using any slaughterhouse or other building for slaughtering cattle or animals of any kind, or for the purpose of curing hides, within 200 yards of any dwelling house or building used as such, to the annoyance of the inhabitants thereof. No hides of any kind shall be cured in any lot within said distance of 200 yards from any building used as a dwelling house. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 24,  1) 
Cross reference- Zoning regulations generally, app. A. 
Sec. 12-8. - Loitering. 
(a)  School buildings, grounds. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand, or remain idle either alone, and/or in consort with others in or upon any public school buildings or grounds within the Town of West Warwick without the express consent of the superintendent of schools, or those in authority under the control of the superintendent of schools. 
(b)  Town-owned property. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand, or remain idle either alone, and/or in consort with others, in or upon any town-owned property, buildings, or grounds within the Town of West Warwick, without the express consent of a duly authorized person. 
(c)  Causing obstructions. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians. 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto. 
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (c) herein, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of the section. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any person violating this section shall be fined not exceeding $100.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days. 
(Ord. of 2-24-75,  1, 2; Ord. of 9-16-76; Res. of 12-10-79,  1-3) 
Editor's note- A resolution adopted December 10, 1979,  1-3, not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been codified as being amendatory of  12-8 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 12-9. - Discharging firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm, BB gun or other contrivance arranged to discharge shot, bullets, arrows, darts or other missiles excepting in a regularly established shooting range; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. Any person violating this section shall be fined not exceeding $100.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days. 
(Res. of 2-4-80) 
Sec. 12-10. - Amplifiers and loudspeakers. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated a loudspeaker or any other sound amplifier within the limits of the town without a permit first being issued therefor by the town council; provided, however, that a sound amplification system may be operated within an enclosed building without obtaining a permit therefor. 
(b)  Each person seeking a permit pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph (a) of this section shall make application therefor to the town council by filing an application for permit executed in the name of the owner of the property where such amplification system will be located, describing the type of amplification system to be used, the time during which it is to be used and the purpose therefor, together with a list of the owners of all property located within 100 feet of the boundary lines of the property on which such amplification system will be used. Such application shall contain other and further data as may be requested by the town clerk. 
(c)  The town clerk shall give seven days' written notice to all persons owning property within 100 feet of the applicant's property of the time and place of the council hearing on such application. 
(d)  The council may grant such application upon such terms and conditions as it shall deem appropriate, but no such amplification system shall be operated after 11:00 p.m. in the evening. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, if the chief of police or other person in charge of any shift shall receive complaints from any five or more residents within the vicinity of the property for which a permit was granted that the level of amplification is objectionable, the police chief, or the person in charge of the shift, shall be entitled to withdraw such permit upon notice to the owner or his representative, and upon such withdrawal, all outdoor amplification shall cease. 
(f)  Any application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee, the amount of which shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. of 1-11-94,  1-1; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 11, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of  1-1 of said ordinance as  12-10 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference- Noise,  12-51 et seq. 
Sec. 12-11. - Neglected premises. 
(a)  Purpose. It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling a house or other building or premises, including vacant lots visible from any public place or private premises, to maintain such premises in reasonably clean and orderly manner and to a standard conforming to other orderly premises in that vicinity. 
(b)  Violation. It shall be a violation of this section to abandon, neglect or disregard the condition or appearance of any premises so as to permit it to accumulate litter, refuse, rubbish, trash as not otherwise provided by statute and/or ordinance, together with the growth of weeds and/or grass to a height of one foot or over (ornamental grasses excepted). 
(c)  Properties exempt. All properties within the town that are held in trust for public use, either for open space or active or passive recreation, either owned by the town or held privately, that are held in trust or in conservancy, are exempted from these provisions. All properties within the town that are subject to the regulations and provisions of the state department of environmental management or the Rhode Island Coastal Resource Management Council are exempt from these provisions. This section is subject to the minimum housing code. 
(Res. No. 96-140, 7-2-96) 
Sec. 12-12. - Smoking in public buildings, on public properties, and in vehicles owned by the town. 
(a)  Legislative intent. The use of tobacco for smoking purposes is being found to be increasingly dangerous, not only to the person smoking, but also to the nonsmoking person who is required to breath such contaminated air. The most pervasive intrusion of the nonsmoker's right to unpolluted air space is the uncontrolled smoking in public places. In acknowledging the importance of a healthy and safe environment for work and recreation and in recognizing the hazards associated with smoking and environmental tobacco smoke, the town intends, by the enactment of this section, to protect the health and atmospheric environment of the nonsmoker by regulating smoking in and on all town properties and in all vehicles owned by the town. 
(b)  Governing state law. Recognizing the dangers associated by smoking the state legislature has enacted statutes governing various aspects of this issue. The town, in addition to the establishment of ordinances as hereinafter set forth, incorporates those general laws as may be applicable, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Smoking in schools. Pursuant to R.I.G.L.  23-20.9-5 tobacco product usage is prohibited by any person utilizing school facilities. The term school facilities includes but is not limited to all school building and all facilities used by the school, whether owned, leased or rented including school fields and parking lots. 
(2)  Penalties. Pursuant to R.I.G.L.  23-20.6-2(c) any person in violation of this statute shall be deemed to be contributing to the maintenance of a public nuisance in a public place and shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10.00 not more than $500.00. 
(3)  Use of tobacco by minors. 
a.  Pursuant to R.I.G.L.  11-9-13 and 11-9-14. No person shall sell or deliver tobacco products to a person under 18 years of age and any violators thereof shall be fined in accordance with  11-9-13. 
b.  Pursuant to R.I.G.L.  11-9-14, no person under 16 years of age shall smoke or chew tobacco in any public street or place. Any person found in violation hereof shall be filed in accordance with  11-9-14. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this section the term "smoking" means and includes the inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of any lighted smoking equipment or paraphernalia for tobacco or any other weed or plant. For the purposes of this section, the term public buildings and other areas, does not include public sidewalks and streets, unless located next to or adjacent to a gas station nor shall it include any properties leased by the town as lessor. 
(d)  Smoking prohibited/public properties. 
(1)  a.  Smoking in any form is a public nuisance and dangerous to public health and shall not be permitted in any public buildings, public parks or any other indoor or outdoor recreational areas or facilities owned by the town or leased by the town as lessee and in all motor vehicles of any type or kind owned, rented, leased or used by the town or any of its departments, boards, commissions, semi-autonomous bodies, or other agencies of the town. This would exclude public sidewalks, streets and leased properties in which the town is the lessor. 
b.  The town shall designate a "smoking area" outside town owned buildings and facilities, in which areas smoking by non-minors shall be allowed. 
c.  Smoking shall be prohibited on public streets or sidewalks or other areas located next to or adjacent to a gas station. 
(2)  a.  The proprietor or other person in charge of a municipal areas listed above shall make reasonable efforts to prevent smoking in those areas in which smoking is not allowed and shall post "No Smoking and Warning" signs conspicuously in these areas. 
b.  The proprietor or other person in charge of a municipal areas listed above shall post signs in those areas in which smoking is allowed, as set forth in subsection (d)(1)c. above. 
(e)  Smoking/possession by minors prohibited. No person under 18 years of age shall possess, smoke or chew tobacco in any public street or place within the town. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of subsections (d) and (e) above, shall be fined a sum of $5.00 and be required to perform five hours of community service for a first offense and shall be charged a fine of $20.00 and be required to perform 20 hours of community service for a second offense. A third or any subsequent violation(s) shall result in the issuance of a ticket to the offending party, requiring a hearing before the municipal court for the town, or if under the age of 18, referral to the town juvenile hearing board. 
(Res. No. 97-211,  1-6, 8-5-97) 
Editor's note- Res. No. 97-211,  1-6, adopted Aug. 5, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as  12-12 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 12-13. - Fines and hearing procedurs for Charter violations. 
(a)  Purpose. On November 5, 1996, the electors for the town approved an amendment to the Home Rule Charter allowing for the implementation of fines for violations of the Charter. Pursuant to this approval, the town council wishes to establish an ordinance for the implementation of these fines and penalties and a mechanism for establishing a hearing procedure regarding same. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases and words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
    Employee. All officials and employees of the town appointed by the town council or by the town manager and confirmed by the town council, including but not limited to all department head positions as well as all elected officials and their agents. 
    Employer. Town of West Warwick, by and through its town council (sometimes referred to as "town council" or "employer"). 
(b)  Fine imposed. If an employee, as herein defined, violates any provisions of the Charter as presently in existence or which may be amended from time to time, then in such event, said employee may be fined an amount not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such violation. Said employee shall be entitled to a hearing before the town council to show cause why said fine should not be imposed. 
(c)  Hearing. Any employee who is charged with violation of any provision of the Charter shall be notified in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the town clerk, of the said violation and the fine imposed. Said written notice shall set forth the Charter violation. If the employee desires to exercise his or her right to a hearing before the town council, then said employee shall notify the town clerk, within ten days of receipt of the violation notice of his or her request for said hearing. The town clerk shall then schedule a hearing to be held no earlier than 20 days nor later than 30 days from the filing of the request for hearing and notice of said hearing date shall be provided to the employee. During the course of the public hearing the employee shall have the right to respond to the violation charge. After the public hearing, the town council by a majority vote in the affirmative may allow or rescind the fine imposed. This public hearing is subject to the Rhode Island General Laws, title 41, chapter 46. 
(d)  Payment of fine. 
(1)  If the employee elects not to exercise his or her option to be heard on the Charter violation, then he or she shall pay the fine as imposed within five days of receipt of notification of the violation charge and fine. 
(2)  If the employee elects to exercise his or her option to be heard on the Charter violation, and in the event that said fine is ratified by the town council, then said fine shall be paid within five days of the date of the hearing. 
(e)  Other remedies. This section is not intended to replace any judicial or civil proceedings which may be brought for any ethic or criminal violations against the employee by the state or any agency or quasi-governmental agency thereof and the provisions of this section are established to the extent permitted and not otherwise provided by applicable law. 
(Res. No. 97-67,  1-1-1-5, 3-4-97) 
Editor's note- Res. No. 97-67,  1-1-1-5, adopted Mar. 4, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as  12-13 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 12-14. - Discharge of water. 
(a)  Purpose. In view of the unsafe conditions and hazards, including icing and flooding, caused by the discharge of storm and surface water drainage, as well as other water runoff, onto the sidewalks and public streets of the Town of West Warwick, the town council for the Town of West Warwick has determined the necessity to establish an ordinance prohibiting the discharge of unpolluted water onto the public streets and sidewalks of the town. 
(b)  Discharge of water runoff prohibited. 
(1)  No property owner or agent of the owner, or any person occupying property, whether residential or business, within the Town of West Warwick, shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm and/or surface waters, including, but not limited to, roof runoff, subsurface drainage including basement drainage, cooling water, industrial process water, swimming pool water or other similar discharge, directly or indirectly onto any abutting property, whether public or private, and/or the sidewalks and streets of the town. 
(2)  Effective immediately with the passage of this section, all existing violations shall cease and where accessible the property owner or agent shall connect into the municipal drainage system for the town utilized for the purpose of collection of such water runoff. 
(3)  All connections to the municipal drainage system shall be borne by the property owner as approved by the Town of West Warwick Director of Public Services, pursuant to all ordinance and statutory requirements, and all costs incurred in such tie-in shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. 
(4)  Whenever weather conditions are such that a heavy flow of water from private properties onto public properties is unavoidable, this section shall be suspended until such time as the discharge of water can again be isolated to very specific properties and is not experienced by the public in general. 
(c)  Liability for damages. Each owner or agent of the owner shall be liable to the town for all losses to the town or for damages to person and property of others, as well as town property, caused by the owner's failure to meet the requirements set forth in this section. 
(d)  Notification. 
(1)  The town may, through the director of public services, notify such owner in writing that said owner is in violation of the unlawful discharge of unpolluted water and order such violation to immediately cease. 
(2)  In the event an owner or agent of an owner fails to cease the unlawful discharge of water after notice by the director of public services utilizing regular first class mail, the town, through the director of public services may assess a fine against such owner in an amount of $20.00, as may be amended from time to time by the town council. A second unlawful discharge of water will result in a $50.00 fine, and a third offense will result in a $100.00 fine. Each written violation notification shall constitute a separate violation and may be fined accordingly and shall be in addition to any other costs and expenses incurred by the town and to be borne by the owner. 
(3)  Any person who is aggrieved by a determination of director of public services may, by written notice to the clerk of the Town of West Warwick, with a copy to the director of public services, appeal said determination after written notification of such violation is received from the director of public services. The town council shall, as soon as practicable, grant a hearing and make a de novo determination. The town council shall use the same standards as required by the director of public services in determining the hazardous conditions and damages caused by the unlawful discharge of water. 
(4)  In the event the town incurs any costs and expenses as a result of the owner's failure to meet the requirements herein established, then the town, through the director of public services, may make any repairs to alleviate any hazards and damages caused by the unlawful discharge of water. The owner or agent shall be liable to the town for the costs of said repairs, and if not paid to the town upon request, the town may place a lien on the property for the costs of such repairs. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from placing additional liens on the property for the costs of repairs for any subsequent violations. 
(Res. No. 99-128,  1-4, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2017-14 , 5-30-17) 
Editor's note- Res. No. 99-128,  1-4, adopted May 11, 1999, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as a new  12-14 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 12-15. - Trespassing on utility poles. 
    No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public for business advertising purposes, to any lamppost, public utility post or shade tree, or upon any public property, or in any manner prohibited under G.L.  5-18-1, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(1)  Upon a finding by any building department inspector of the town that any notice, poster or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public for business advertising purposes within the town is in such violation of the requirements of this article, he or she shall give notice thereof to the owner or owners of the notice, poster or other paper or device, to comply with the requirements of this article within 24 hours after service of notice. Such notice shall contain a statement of the findings of the inspector as to violations and a description of the notice, poster or other paper or device as well as its location. Such notice may be given personally or by certified mail to the individuals listed on the notice, poster or other paper or device and service of such notice shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so addressed and deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and/or by posting a certified copy on the premises and/or by advertising in one or more newspapers. Nothing in this section shall prohibit town employees from removing the notice, poster or other paper or device. 
(2)  Enforcement authority. Any building inspector of the town is authorized to: 
a.  Issue a written citation, or summons to municipal court, if such officer witnesses a violation, or has probable cause to believe that a person has violated the provisions of this article. 
b.  Investigate any notice, poster or other paper or device, found thrown, deposited, or dumped on a public place, or at the owner or owner's written request on private property as well. 
c.  Issue a notice of violation and order the removal of said litter pursuant to procedures defined in this section. 
(3)  Upon failure of the owner or owners of such notice, poster or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public for business advertising purposes to remedy the conditions existing in violation of the requirements hereof within seven days after service of notice to do so as provided herein, then the building official or his/her designee may proceed to municipal court where, upon conviction, said owner or owners shall be fined in accordance with the ordinances of the town, and shall be required to pay the costs of remediation and cleaning incurred by the town. 
(4)  Right to appeal. Any person owning all or any interest in said property shall have the right to appeal the findings of violation within seven days of service of the notice thereof to the municipal court. Appeals from any decision of the municipal court may be appealed to the superior court within seven days. 
(Ord. No. 2007-16, 8-21-07) 
Secs. 12-16-12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 12-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to prohibit certain acts of commercial exploitation of human sexuality in commercial establishments within the town where alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises and to reduce the likelihood of criminal activity, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community which may occur when such commercial exploitation is permitted in such places. 
(Ord. of 6-15-93; Ord. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 12-22. - Findings. 
    The town council finds that there is an increasing commercial exploitation of human sexuality by owners and operators of commercial establishments within the town where alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises. Such exploitation takes place in the form of employing or permitting persons to perform or exhibit their nude or semi-nude bodies to other persons as an inducement to such other persons to purchase alcoholic beverages. The direct results of such exploitation are criminal activity, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community. In addition, such commercial exploitation of such nude and semi-nude acts is adverse to the public's interest in the quality of life, tone of commerce and total community environment in the town. 
(Ord. of 6-15-93; Ord. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 12-23. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the town at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof. 
(2)  To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the human female breast as described in subsection (a)(1). 
(3)  To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft. 
(4)  To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundary areas of the town, at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breast as described herein. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the town, at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft. 
(Ord. of 6-15-93; Ord. of 10-3-95) 
Secs. 12-24-12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2006-15, adopted Aug. 1, 2006, amended article III in its entirety, and is derived from Ord. of 10-3-95. The effective date of this article is Aug. 1, 2006. 
Cross reference- Amplifiers and loudspeakers,  12-10. 

Sec. 12-51. - Purpose. 
    The town council hereby finds that excessive and loud noises within the town poses a serious nuisance and disruption to the citizens of the town. The town council wishes to provide an environment free from excessive noise, which unnecessarily jeopardizes the health, welfare and quality of life in the town. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95; Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-52. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Sound level (noise level) in decibels means the level measured on the A-weighted scale as defined in the American National Standards S-1.4-1071. 
    Ambient noise means the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far. For the purpose of this article, ambient noise level is the average over five minutes excluding random or intermittent noises and the alleged offensive noise at the location and time of day at which a comparison with an alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
    Averaging may be done by instrumental analysis in accordance with American National Standards S.13-1971, or may be done manually as follows: 
(1)  Observe a sound level meter for five seconds and record the best estimate of central tendency of the indicator needle, and the highest and lowest indications. 
(2)  Repeat the observations as many times as necessary to provide that observations be made at the beginning and at the end of the five-minute averaging period and that there shall be at least as many additional observations as there are decibels between the lowest low indication and the highest high indication. 
(3)  Calculate the arithmetical average of the observed central tendency indications. 
    Decibel (d/BA) means the decibel is a unit of measure of sound (noise) level relative to a standard reference sound on a logarithmic scale. The decibel level of a given sound is determined as 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure in micronewtons per square meter of the sound being measured to the standard reference sound pressure of 20 micronewtons per square meter (0.0002 microbar). 
    Nonstationary sources means a machine or device capable of being moved from place to place for occasional or temporary use at a given location, including, but not limited to, power lawn mowers, chain saws, bulldozer and pile drivers. 
    Fixed source means a machine or device capable of creating a noise level at the property upon which it is regularly located, including but not limited to: Industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, air conditioning apparatus or refrigeration machines. 
    Emergency work means work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
    Person means a person, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private in nature. 
    Motor vehicles shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, minibikes and go-carts. 
    Sound amplification equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. "Sound amplifying equipment" shall not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. "Sound amplifying equipment" shall not include warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes. 
    Sound truck means any motor vehicle or any other vehicle regardless of motive of power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or therein, or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment. 
    Commercial purposes means the use, operation, or maintenance of any sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting patronage or customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition, or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating such sound equipment. 
    Noncommercial purpose means the use, operation, or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a "commercial purpose." "Noncommercial purpose" shall mean and include, but shall not be limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic, and charitable purposes. 
    Unnecessary, excessive, or offensive noise means any sound or noise conflicting with the criteria, standards, or levels set forth in this article for permissible noises. In the absence of specific maximum noise levels, a noise level which exceeds the ambient noise level by five dBA or more, when measured at the nearest property line or, in the case of multiple-family residential buildings, when measured anywhere in one dwelling unit with respect to a noise emanating from another dwelling unit or from common space in the same building, or a noise audible to a person of reasonably sensitive hearing at a distance of 200 feet from its source, shall be deemed a prima facie violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-53. - Radios, television sets, and similar devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential zone of the town to use or operate any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighborhood residents or of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device so as to exceed 50 dBA between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or so as to exceed 55 dBA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. measured at the property line of the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located, or at any hour when the same is audible to a person of reasonably sensitive hearing at a distance of 200 feet or the property line, whichever is closer, from its source, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-54. - Drums. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any drum or other instrument or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the town in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighborhood residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. The use of any drum or other instrument or device of any kind so as to exceed 50 dBA between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or so as to exceed 55 dBA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. measured at the property line of the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located or at any hour when the same is audible to a person of reasonably sensitive hearing at a distance of 200 feet or the property line, whichever is closer, from its source, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. This section shall not apply to any person who is participating in a school band or duly licensed to parade or who has been otherwise duly authorized to engage in such conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-55. - Schools, hospitals and churches. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create any unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise, as defined in this section on any street, sidewalk, or public place adjacent to, or at a distance of 200 feet or the property line from its source, whichever is closer, to any school, institution of learning, hospital or church while the same is in use, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such street, sidewalk, or public places indicating the presence of a school, hospital or church. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-56. - Machinery, equipment, fans, and air conditioning. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan and air conditioning apparatus, or similar mechanical device in any residential neighborhood so as to exceed 50 dBA between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or so as to exceed 55 dBA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m, or at any hour when the same is audible to a person of reasonably sensitive hearing at a distance of 200 feet from its, source, provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any leaf-blowing equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Saturdays, and between the hours of noon and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-57. - Construction of buildings and projects. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, or projects or to operate any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist, or any other construction type device between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to create that unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise as defined in this section unless beforehand a special permit therefore has been duly obtained from the director of public works. No special permit shall be required to perform emergency work as defined in section of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-58. - Vehicle repairs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential area of the town to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time of the day, on a Sunday or legal holiday so as to create unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise as defined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-59. - Amplified sound-Purpose of legislation. 
    The town council enacts this legislation for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety, and welfare of its citizenry. While recognizing that the use of sound amplifying equipment is protected by the constitutional rights of freedom of speech and assembly, the town council nevertheless feels obligated to reasonably regulate the use of sound amplifying equipment in order to protect the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from public nuisance of loud and unnecessary noise. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-60. - Same-Registration required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than personnel of law enforcement or governmental agencies, to install, use, or operate within the town a loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound truck for the purpose of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place, or public property without first filing a registration statement and obtaining approval therefore as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-61. - Same-Registration requirements and duties. 
(a)  Registration statements-Filing. Every user of sound amplifying equipment for commercial purposes shall file a registration statement with the police department not less than five days prior to the date on which the sound amplifying is intended to be used. Every user of sound amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes shall file a registration statement with the police department not less than 24 hours prior to the time when the sound amplifying equipment is intended to be used. Each registration statement shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and the user of the sound amplifying equipment; 
(2)  The date, time and place of the intended use of the equipment; 
(3)  The maximum sound producing power of the sound amplifying equipment, including the wattage to be used, the volume in decibels of sound which will be produced, and the approximate distance for which sound will be audible from the sound amplifying equipment; 
(4)  The license and motor number if a sound truck is to be used; 
(5)  A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used; and 
(6)  Whether the sound amplifying equipment will be used for commercial purposes. 
(b)  Registration statements-Approval. With respect to completed application for noncommercial purposes, the police department shall, forthwith, return to the applicant an approved certified copy of the registration statement. With respect to commercial purposes, the police department shall, within 48 hours of the filing of the application, return to the applicant an approved certified copy of the registration statement unless it finds that: 
(1)  The conditions of the motor vehicle movement are such that, in the opinion of the chief of police, the use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; 
(2)  The conditions of the pedestrian movement are such that, in the opinion of the chief of police, the use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety. 
(c)  Disapproval. In the event a registration statement for a commercial purpose is disapproved, the chief of police shall endorse upon the statement his specific reasons for disapproval and return it to the applicant, within 48 hours of the filing of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-62. - Same-Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by disapproval of a registration statement may appeal within ten days to the town manager, Town of West Warwick. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-63. - Same-Fees. 
    Prior to the issuance of the registration statement, a fee in the amount as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council shall be paid to the town, if the loudspeaker or sound amplifying system is to be used for commercial purposes. No fee shall be required for the operation of loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes for which a business license has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 12-64. - Same-Regulations. 
    The commercial and noncommercial use of sound amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The operation of sound amplifying equipment shall only occur between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. each day except on Sundays and legal holidays. No operation of sound amplifying equipment for commercial purposes shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays. The operation of sound amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes on Sundays and legal holidays shall only occur between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(2)  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound truck. 
(3)  No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated with an excess of 15 watts of power in the last stage of amplification. 
(4)  Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated within 200 feet of any churches, hospitals or schools while the same are in use provided that conspicuous signs are posted adjacent to such institutions indicating the presence of a church, hospital or school. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-65. - Violations-Penalty. 
    Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying neglecting, or refusing to comply with the provisions of this article, shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, for any one offense, except that any person electing to appear before the clerk of municipal court and admitting the violation charged, or in lieu of personally appearing before the clerk of the court, electing to admit the violation by mail to the clerk of court, shall be punished by a fine of $200.00, provided, however, that for a second violation and any subsequent violation a person electing to appear before the clerk of the municipal court and admitting the violation charged or, in lieu of personally appearing before the clerk of the court, electing to admit the violation by mail to the clerk of court shall be punished by a fine of $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-66. - Same-Public nuisance; injunctions. 
    The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-67. - General noise regulations; motor vehicles. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise as defined in this section. 
    There shall be no purposeful operator intent to create excessive engine noise, such as blatantly excessive engine revving (rapid throttle advance) and acceleration. 
    No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a motor vehicle or motorcycle. It shall be unlawful for any person to rebuild, repair, or test any engine, muffler, or exhaust system so as to create a noise disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 12-68. - Complaints. 
    Any person including a police officer, may be a complainant for the purpose of instituting action for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, 8-1-06) 
Chapter 12.5 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12.5-1. - Hours generally. 
(a)  Restricted. No persons shall be allowed in any public park or recreation area after dark or one-half hour after the completion of a scheduled activity unless such person has a written permit issued by the parks and recreation department. 
(b)  Violation; penalty. Any person violating the above rule may be penalized in accordance with section 1-10 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 12-11-90) 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory Ord. of December 11, 1990, has been codified herein by the editor as  12.5-1. 
Cross reference- Loitering,  12-8. 
Sec. 12.5-2. - Dogs prohibited in public park or recreation area. 
(a)  Restricted. No dogs are allowed in school yards or on school property or on any town owned recreational facility property except so-called service and/or therapy dogs. 
(b)  Violation; penalty. Any person violating the above rule shall be given a first and second notice of the violation of this section. Upon a third or subsequent violation such person may be penalized as follows, (1) a fine not to exceed $15.00 for said third offense, (2) a fine not to exceed $50.00 for a fourth offense and (3) a fine not to exceed $100.00 for a fifth and any subsequent offense as provided in R.I.G.L.  4-13-1(b)(20). The West Warwick Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction for the enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 6-6-17; Ord. No. 2017-20 , 8-1-17) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted July 6, 1993, amended this Code by the addition of a new  12.5-17. Said section has been redesignated as  12.5-2 for classification purposes at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 12.5-3. - Playground hours. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything contained within this chapter to the contrary, no person shall be allowed and no automobile may be parked in any public playground from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., including, but not limited to, weekdays, weekends and holidays. For the purposes of this section, the term "playground" shall be deemed to consist of the following locations, including any additional locations which may hereafter be maintained and utilized by the town as a playground: 
(1)  Crompton playground. 
(2)  Factory Street playground. 
(3)  Carlson Circle playground. 
(4)  Brookside playground. 
(5)  Natick playground. 
(b)  Any person violating this section may be penalized in accordance with section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95) 
Secs. 12.5-4-12.5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLAT TOP POND[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Codification of an ordinance of May 14, 1975, nonamendatory of the Code, as Art. II,  12.5-16, was at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference- Playgrounds, etc., under direction of playground and recreation department,  2-3; animals and fowl, ch. 4; consumption/possession of alcoholic beverages in parks/recreation areas,  12-4.1. 

Sec. 12.5-16. - Rules and regulations governing use of Flat Top Pond picnic area. 
    [The following regulations shall be observed in the Flat Top Pond picnic area:] 
(1)  No alcoholic beverages may be sold or consumed within the park. 
(2)  Smoking is prohibited in the wooded areas of the park. 
(3)  No person shall light a fire in the park, except in a place designed for the purpose by a special permit. 
(4)  All fires shall be extinguished completely before leaving. 
(5)  No person shall leave paper, glass or other refuse on the grounds or waters of the park, but will place such refuse in the receptacles provided. 
(6)  No person shall cut, remove or damage any tree, bush, plant, fence, berry, flower, building or other public property nor affix a sign in the park. 
(7)  No person shall hunt or trap, or carry a firearm, or have any device or animal used for hunting or trapping in the park; and no person shall injure or have in his possession any wild animal, bird, bird's egg or nest. 
(8)  No person shall allow any animal or fowl in the park, except when officially allowed. 
(9)  No person shall use profane or indecent language or in any way annoy another person, or commit any disorderly or indecent act within the park limits. 
(10)  No person shall bathe in the waters, except at times and at designated areas. 
(11)  No person shall be allowed and no automobile may be parked in the park from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., except when camping thereon by official permission. 
(12)  No minibikes are allowed in the park. 
    Any person violating any of the above rules shall be fined in accordance with section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-14-75; Ord. of 12-5-95) 
Secs. 12.5-17-12.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - McCARTHY FIELD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of May 2, 1995, amended the Code by adding thereto provisions relative to McCarthy Field. Designation of such provisions as Art. III,  12.5-31-12.5-40 was at the discretion of the editor. Such ordinance also carried the proviso that "wherever recreation department is indicated it shall mean the director or his or her designee." 

Sec. 12.5-31. - Application and use agreement required. 
    It is specifically intended that any person, persons, group, corporation or other entity ("user") who wishes to utilize the facilities of McCarthy Field or Amby Smith Field ("fields") for the purpose of an organized sporting event, including but not limited to its permanent structures and equipment located within the field area, shall file an application for said use and execute a use agreement. All applications and usage permits are issued based upon compliance with these rules and regulations which shall be made a part of said application and usage permits. Failure to comply with any of the following rules and regulations may result in an immediate suspension of said application or termination of the use agreement, as well as any other penalties as set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95; Ord. No. 2011-2, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 12.5-32. - Facility use and service fee. 
    A facility usage fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council is hereby established. An invoice shall be forwarded to the user reflecting the usage fees owed immediately following the last schedule event or game held at the field. Said invoice is due and payable immediately upon receipt. The usage fees as herein contained may be amended from time to time, as the town shall deem necessary and appropriate. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  1; Ord. No. 2011-2, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 12.5-33. - Motor vehicles. 
    Motor vehicles of any and all types and kinds, including but not limited to motorcycles and minibikes, shall not be allowed on any portion of the field area located at McCarthy Field. All motor vehicles must be parked in available parking lot(s). 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  2) 
Sec. 12.5-34. - Ground maintenance. 
(a)  All trash and litter must be collected and properly disposed of in trash barrels and any other proper trash receptacle (provided by the department of parks and recreation). Trash clean up shall include, but is not limited to, the bleacher and dugout areas. In the event the user fails to properly clean and dispose of trash after use of the field, then the user shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the town in connection with said cleanup. An invoice shall be submitted to the user of said field for the cost incurred regarding said cleanup, which shall be billed at an hourly per person rate to be set from time to time by resolution of the Town Council. Said invoice shall be due and payable immediately upon receipt. The head of the grounds crew for the department of parks and recreation shall have the sole responsibility for determining if cleanup is required following said usage. 
(b)  It shall be the sole responsibility of the user to fill in all holes ("stomp") and rake all holes at the pitcher's mound and home plate after every practice and game. 
(c)  Hitting baseballs or any other type of ball directly into the backstop fence or any fence in or near the field is strictly prohibited. 
(d)  Any and all batting practice is prohibited in the backstop area. 
(e)  If rain during a game causes said game to be canceled, then the user must cover the mound and home plate areas with a tarp, which is stored and located beside the first base dugout. 
(f)  If a game is played during rain, the user must cover the mound and home plate areas immediately upon completion of the game in the same manner as described in subsection (e). 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  3-8; Ord. No. 2018-7 , 3-20-18) 
Sec. 12.5-35. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    The consumption of alcoholic beverages on town property is prohibited. Accordingly, alcoholic beverages are not permitted, in any manner, in or on McCarthy Field or the town property owned adjacent thereto. Failure to comply with this provision will result in an immediate suspension and cancellation of the application, the use agreement as well as the event itself and, in addition, such violation may also result in a complaint being filed with proper town and state officials. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  9) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 2.5. 
Sec. 12.5-36. - Installation of equipment, decorations. 
(a)  Permission for installation and use of any equipment associated with the activity of the user must be obtained in advance through the department of parks and recreation. The user shall be solely responsible for setting up and removing all such equipment and shall indemnify the town against any loss or damage to said equipment or injuries sustained as a result of the use or installation of said equipment. 
(b)  Permission for the installation of any and all decorations of any type or kind, including signs, [banners,] etc., must be obtained in advance through the department of parks and recreation. The user shall be solely responsible for installation and removing said decorations and shall indemnify the town against any loss or damage to said decorations or injuries sustained as a result of the use or installation of said decorations. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  10, 11) 
Sec. 12.5-37. - Use of town equipment. 
    The user and participants shall be solely responsible for the care and use of the field and any and all equipment owned by the town located in or on the field. The user shall be held financially liable for any and all damages to the field area or damages and loss of equipment sustained by the town, which occurs in conjunction with the event held by the user, regardless of whether said damages were caused by the user, participants or viewers. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  12) 
Sec. 12.5-38. - Control of field. 
    Notwithstanding the rules and regulations set forth herein and compliance by the user, the town, by and through its parks and recreation department, retains control of the field and its facilities. During emergency situations or under conditions in which parks and recreation authorities deem necessary, the parks and recreation department retains the right to require the removal of the user, participants and/or viewers from the field area and town property. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  13) 
Sec. 12.5-39. - Indemnification, insurance. 
(a)  The user shall indemnify the town, its agents, employees and municipal departments from any and all liability resulting from damages and/or injuries sustained by the user, participants or viewers as incurred during activities associated with the user and the use of the field. 
(b)  The user shall provide proof of general liability insurance coverage in the aggregate amount of $1,000,000.00. The user shall submit to the town a certificate of insurance, indicating the town as named insured. Said insurance certificate must be submitted to the parks and recreation department at the time of application and at least one week prior to use of the field. No application or use agreement shall be approved without submission of the insurance certificate. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  14, 15) 
Sec. 12.5-40. - Violations. 
    In addition to those penalties as set forth herein, any violation of the rules and regulations set forth herein shall be subject to fines and penalties as set forth in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  16) 
Sec. 12.5-41. - Civic center fees. 
    The town council may set civic center fees from time to time by resolution to reflect the actual cost of service. 
(Res. No. 2000-24, 2-1-00; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-5-07) 
Sec. 12.5-42. - Riverpoint phase two fees. 
    The town council may set fees for the use of Riverpoint Phase Two Athletic Facility from time to time to reflect the cost of service. 
(Ord. No. 2011-2, 5-24-11) 
Chapter 13 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning generally, app. A. 
State Law reference- Planning boards, G.L. 1956,  45-22-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Drainage. 
(a)  All drainage locations used by the Town of West Warwick shall be recorded as easements and a map shall be kept current showing such easements. Since many of the older drainage ways and systems were undocumented, work will be initiated to review long-time drainage ways where the questions of proper easements are unknown. 
(b)  The Town of West Warwick, through its town engineer, will at least every two years inspect the town drainage system and its function. The town engineer will then issue his recommendations for maintenance and repair of the system. 
(c)  The tax assessor will review the valuation of each parcel with a recorded easement and adjust the valuations of the easement parcel where warranted. 
(d)  Over a period of time, the town will initiate steps to formalize any easements obtained by prescription including the preparation of an easement drawing with an associated description. Sufficient area will be included to allow for maintenance and repair of the drainage function. 
(e)  Existing conditions at the easement location will be appropriately documented; i.e., described and photographed. 
(f)  All newly established or documented easement drawings will be recorded in the Land Evidence Records. 
(g)  All existing natural watercourses are the responsibility of the property owners upon which it flows for maintenance activity allowed by the Rhode Island Freshwater Wetlands Laws and their enforcement regulations as developed by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management. However, where the Town of West Warwick has impacted the amount of flow within natural watercourses by discharging part of its drainage system into the natural flow, the town will assist in the maintenance of said flow. The town will attempt to establish access easements for all applicable properties to insure the flow can be maintained legally. 
(h)  Unless a recorded easement shows otherwise, the repair and the maintenance of the pipe and/or confining channel remain [the] responsibility of the property owner upon which it is located. 
(i)  The owner of a private parcel of land which has a connected catch basin, roof drain or cellar/foundation drain to the town's stormwater collection system is responsible for corrective measures when failures occur, to include the repairs required within the town's right-of-way. 
(j)  If corrective measures by the property owner require excavation in the street right-of-way, the property owner must comply with all permit requirements, restorations and inspections per applicable town ordinances. 
(k)  To comply with current town ordinances, any corrective measures must not to increase the volume of stormwater runoff being directed to the town's system. Added flow volumes will have to be retained on site by the property owner. Calculations on the ability of the town's collection system to accommodate the increase in flow must be provided. 
(l)  The town engineer will undertake a comprehensive notification initiative to advise the owners of the property upon which drainage ditches are located that it is the owners' responsibility to maintain said ditches unless written evidence exists placing that responsibility onto the town or if the issue is the maintenance of flow volume within the designated channel. 
(m)  To avoid future problems, all aspects of either subdivision and or individual site development drainage design need to be documented and recorded either by easement and or parcel deed restriction. 
(Res. No. 99-127, 5-11-99) 
Editor's note- Res. No. 99-127, adopted May 11, 1999, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as a new  13-1 was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 13-2-13-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 13-16. - Created; membership; terms. 
    There is hereby created a nonpartisan development commission to be known as the West Warwick Development Commission, consisting of seven members from the community. Initially, the members of the town council shall appoint two members for four years; two members for three years; two members for two years; and one member for one year. They shall serve until their successors have been appointed. Their successors shall be appointed to four-year terms from the expiration of the term of their respective predecessors in office by the town council. Vacancies in an unexpired term shall be filled by the town council for the remainder of such term. 
(Res. of 9-18-68,  1) 
Sec. 13-17. - Duties, cooperation with other agencies. 
(a)  The development commission shall promote, aid, and assist in the development, expansion and location of industry and business in the town, for the purpose of establishing an equitable balance between commercial and residential property. It may make surveys and compile statistics in furtherance of the purposes set forth herein. 
(b)  The commission shall perform other duties not inconsistent with the purposes of this article. 
(c)  It shall cooperate with the planning board, redevelopment agency, citizens' advisory committee, and all other departments of the town requiring its aid, counsel and advice. 
(d)  It shall have access to all available plans, records, surveys, and other information on file with any town department, and may call upon them for aid, advice and assistance. It may also act as a liaison between the town, state and federal agencies on such matters as may be authorized by the town council. 
(Res. of 9-18-68,  2, 3) 
Sec. 13-18. - Reports, recommendations. 
    The development commission shall make an annual report to the town council in February of each year. It may make such recommendations as it deems necessary and advisable for the best interests of the town. 
(Res. of 9-18-68,  4) 
Sec. 13-19. - Officers. 
    The development commission shall annually elect its own chairman, vice-chairman and secretary-treasurer from its members. 
(Res. of 9-18-68,  5) 
Sec. 13-20. - Bylaws. 
    The commission may adopt bylaws covering its procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, and shall submit copies of same to the town council. 
(Res. of 9-1-68,  6) 
Secs. 13-21-13-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-6, adopted September 21, 2010, amended the Code by repealing former art. III,  13-35-13-46, in its entirety. Former art. III pertained to floodplain management, and derived from an ordinance of January 10, 1978; and a resolution of March 25, 1986. 

Secs. 13-35-13-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREE ORDINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 99-175,  1-14, adopted July 6, 1999, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as a new art. IV,  13-61-13-74, was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 13-61. - Purpose. 
    This article regulates the protection, maintenance, removal and planting of trees in the public right-of-way, parks, and all public property within the Town of West Warwick and on private property endangering the public and/or public property. This article also establishes the West Warwick Tree Board which, together with the town tree warden, shall recommend for town council approval the establishment of regulations relating to the protection, maintenance, removal, and planting of trees in the above-mentioned public and private places. In addition, this article provides for the maintenance or removal of trees on private property when the public safety is endangered and prescribes penalties for violations of its provisions, as amended. The provisions of this article shall apply to all property within the Town of West Warwick. 
    This article will also serve to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of West Warwick by regulating tree management activities. The protection of this valuable natural resource will serve to enhance the community in the following ways: 
(1)  Aid in the prevention of air, noise and visual pollution. 
(2)  Aid in the stabilization of soil. 
(3)  Enhance property values. 
(4)  Provide glare and heat protection. 
(5)  Enhance the aesthetics and general quality of life of the town. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "West Warwick Tree Ordinance." 
(Res. No. 99-175,  1, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future and words in singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Applicant means a person who is applying for a license or permit required by this article. 
    Approval means written assent from the West Warwick Town Tree Warden pursuant to a duly executed application for approval made on a form promulgated by the Town of West Warwick. 
    D.B.H. means diameter at breast height, at four and one-half feet (one and thirty-seven hundredths meters) from the ground level. 
    Parks shall include any town public spaces designated for recreation and/or conservation. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind including public utility and town department. 
    Property line shall mean the boundary between private and town-owned land. 
    Property owner shall mean the person owning such property as shown by the records of the record of deeds of the Town of West Warwick. 
    Public place shall include any and all property owned by the town. 
    Public trees shall include all trees now or hereafter growing on any street, park, or any other public place. 
    Street or highway means the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
    Town tree warden means the municipal arborist, town tree warden, landscape architect, director, division of grounds maintenance services, supervisor [of] urban forestry operations or other qualified designated official of the town assigned to carry out the enforcement of this article. 
    Tree means any living, self-supporting woody plant that has a well-defined stem(s) with a caliper of at least one and one-half inches (three and eighty-one hundredths centimeters) at D.B.H. at four and one-half feet (one and thirty-seven hundredhts meters) from the ground level and capable of reaching a height greater than 16 feet. 
    Tree lawn means that part of a street or highway border area not covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
    Tree removal means removal in whole or part of any tree including any act that will cause a tree to die within a three-year period. 
    Tree well means an opening in the ground area surrounding the base of the tree trunk not covered by sidewalk and paving. Tree well openings shall have a minimum pit size of two times the width of the root ball and depth equal to the size of the root ball. Root barrier will be placed on two sides only: street side and sidewalk opposite of street. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  2, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-63. - Tree board. 
(a)  The West Warwick Tree Board, hereinafter referenced to as the "board," shall act in an advisory role to the tree warden over all forestry functions including the planting, care and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants on the properties for which it is responsible, as well as the necessary and proper care, management, improvement, maintenance and protection of the public parks and street trees under the town's jurisdiction. 
(b)  The duties of said "board" shall be interpreted to include, but not be limited to, an advisory role to the tree warden for the protection, maintenance, removal, and planting of trees on public property, and from time to time make such recommendations to the town tree warden as to changes in regulations concerning the tree program. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  3, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-64. - Town tree warden. 
(a)  Appointment and qualifications. The town tree warden shall be appointed pursuant to Section 2003(f) of the Town Charter and R.I.G.L.  2-14-2. Said person shall have training and experience in arboricultural and shall have passed the Rhode Island Arborist exam. 
(b)  Duties. 
(1)  The town tree warden shall affirm and endorse the purpose and intent of the West Warwick Tree Ordinance and shall cause the provisions of this article to be enforced. 
(2)  The town tree warden may, with the advice of the West Warwick Tree Board and the approval of the West Warwick Town Council, prepare and enact a systematized tree management and annual tree planting program for the Town of West Warwick, which may be prepared as an integral part of a master systematized tree management and tree planting plan. 
(3)  The town tree warden is further charged with keeping informed of environmental and technical changes that could affect the town's public and protected trees. 
(4)  It shall also be the duty of the tree warden, with assistance of the tree board, to implement such rules, regulations, and permit and penalty procedures as are deemed necessary to carry out the intent and enforcement of this article. 
(5)  The town tree warden shall communicate and work with all civic and public interest groups interested in or devoted to tree care preservation or planting. 
(c)  Authority. 
(1)  To regulate and enact the maintenance, removal, and planting of public and protected trees to insure public safety, preserving the aesthetics of public sites with regard to trees, and protecting the value and health of West Warwick's community forest as a whole. 
(2)  To consider the existing and future utility and environmental factors when recommending a specific species for each of the streets and other public sites and when issuing permits for tree work, removal, or planting. 
(3)  Be responsible to regularly updating the master systematized tree management and planting program. 
(4)  To review all requests for permits for any planting, removal, pruning, and/or trimming or cutting of trees in any public area, with the exception of an historic or protected tree. He shall also have the authority to grant or deny and to attach reasonable conditions to all permits with the exception of those specifically exempted herein. 
(5)  To enforce such rules, regulations and permit and penalty procedures as are deemed necessary to enforce the intent of this article. 
(d)  Authority to treat or remove trees endangering the public and/or public property. 
(1)  The town tree warden or his agents, after first giving notice to the property owner, and allowing the property owner the opportunity to correct the hazardous condition, may cause or order to be removed, trimmed, or treated any tree or part hereof on private grounds which is in an unsafe condition so that it poses an immediate threat to the public or public property. If the hazardous condition is not an immediate threat or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers or other public improvements or right-of-way, or is afflicted with an injurious fungus, insect, or other pest so as to constitute a threat to the health of the town's community forest, upon five days' written notice to the property owner, the tree warden may take any action necessary including, but not limited to, the removal of the tree. 
(2)  The town tree warden or his agents shall have the power to enter upon any private grounds in the town to treat or cause or order to be treated any tree infested by a parasite insect or pest when it shall be deemed necessary in by his opinion or the board's opinion to do so to prevent the breeding of any parasite or animal pest and to prevent danger therefrom to persons or property or to trees planted in the public streets or other public places. A five-day notice shall be given to the property owner prior to any action on the part of the town tree warden. 
(3)  The tree warden, upon noncompliance of the property owner, may lien the cost of any work on private property against said property. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  4, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-65. - Public danger of obstruction; trees pruned, removed. 
    It shall be the duty of person(s) owning or occupying real property bordering on any public street of thoroughfare, upon which property there may be trees, to prune in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs or obstruct the view of any street or intersection so as to pose a threat to pedestrian or vehicular safety. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be eight feet (three and five hundredths meters) over sidewalks, and 12 feet (four and fifty-seven hundredths meters) over all streets and thoroughfares and/or at the discretion of the town tree warden; 
(Res. No. 99-175,  5, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-66. - Protection of public trees. 
(a)  During development, redevelopment, razing or renovating, no trees shall be cut, damaged or removed except by specified permit. All trees removed, destroyed, or severely damaged shall be replaced as specified in the permit at the expense of the permit holder. The total caliper of all trees planted in the course of restoration shall in no event be less than the total DBH of all trees removed. Replacement shall be made with two and one-half to four-inch caliper trees and/or as directed by the town tree warden. If sufficient tree planting locations are unavailable within the contract area, the replacement trees shall be planted within the town as determined by the town tree board. 
(b)  All trees within immediate danger of being damaged of [by] any excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work shall be guarded through the length of the project with a good substantial fence, frame, or box not less than four feet (one and two-tenths meters) high and eight feet (two and four-tenths meters) square, or equivalent. All equipment, building materials, chemicals, dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier at all times. 
(c)  No person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve or transplant any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree; allow any gaseous, liquid, chemical, or solid substance that is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree without first obtaining a written permit from the town tree warden. 
(d)  No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain any stone, brick, sand, fill dirt, concrete, or other materials that may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the town tree board. 
(e)  No person shall preclude the percolation of water or nutrients and gaseous exchange vital to a tree's survival by the placing any impervious materials (asphalt, macadam, and concrete) within the confines of the tree well opening. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  6, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-67. - Planting of trees upon any public street or public place. 
(a)  Any person desiring to plant a tree upon any public street or public place must first obtain a permit from the town tree board on a form provided by the tree warden. Any permit shall be granted to a date certain and shall include consideration of appropriateness of species, location, size, and public safety. 
(b)  Should the planting(s) be performed by persons other than the town tree warden or his agents, the proposed method workmanship for planting as prescribed by the town tree warden shall be adhered to. 
(c)  A planting plan is required where more than six trees are to be planted. 
(1)  Any person desiring to plant more than six trees on public streets or on public places shall, in addition to applying for a permit, submit a plan or written statement in duplicate to the town tree board, who shall return one copy to the applicant and keep one copy on file with the town. The town tree warden shall consult with the West Warwick Tree Board prior to issuing a permit to plant. 
(2)  All planting plans shall show accurately: 
a.  The proposed park or public place site, or proposed street width, with any curbs, parking strips driveways, sidewalks and adjacent structures defined to scale. 
b.  Location of all utilities; 
c.  The proposed location of each proposed tree, together with the location of each existing tree within the proposed site in scaled relation to the other features of the plan; 
d.  The species of each and every tree proposed to be planted and of these already existing within the proposed site either indicated on the plan or referenced with a number with a key list. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  7, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-68. - Emergencies. 
    The requirements of this article may be waived by the town in the case of emergencies as declared by the town council, town manager or public works director, such as windstorms, ice storms, or other disasters so that they, in no way, shall hinder private or public work to restore order in the town. This work shall follow maintenance standards as outlined by the town tree board. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  8, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-69. - Moving large objects. 
    No person shall move any building or any other large object that may injure public or protected trees or parts thereof without first obtaining the written approval of the town tree board and abiding by their requirements. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  9, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-70. - Permits required. 
(a)  A permit shall be a written document that authorizes the bearer thereof to perform the proposed work as outlined on such permit. Only the town tree warden or his/her representative shall issue the permit. 
(b)  A permit shall be obtained by filling out an application. Upon approving the application, the town tree warden or his/her representative shall issue said permit. 
(c)  A permit shall be required for planting, spraying, pruning, cutting above ground, removing, or otherwise disturbing any public tree on any street, park or other public place. 
(d)  The town tree warden shall issue any permit provided for herein if the proposed method and workmanship shall be of a satisfactory nature and the project shall be consistent with this article. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall be completed in the time allowed in the permit and in the manner as therein described. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated. 
(e)  The town tree board shall be notified by the bearer of said permit upon satisfactory completion of designated work. 
(f)  Plantings: 
(1)  The application required herein shall state the number of trees to be set out or planted on public places, the location, grade, species, cultivar of variety of each tree, the method of planting, and such other information as the town tree warden shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(2)  The town tree warden shall have the right to make the final determination as to location, species, cultivar or variety of each tree and the method of planting before issuing said permit. 
(g)  Maintenance. The application required herein shall state the number and kinds of trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned, or otherwise preserved; the kind of treatment to be administered; the composition of the spray material to be applied; and such other information as the town tree warden shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(h)  Removal, replanting and replacement: 
(1)  Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree in connection with the paving of a sidewalk, or the widening of the portion of a street or highway, the town shall require the party responsible for the paving or widening to replant the tree or replace it as deemed necessary by the town tree board. This requirement will be satisfied if an equivalent number of trees of the same size and species as provided in the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice are planted within the town. This requirement shall include the Town of West Warwick. 
(2)  No person shall remove a public tree for the purpose of construction or any other reason without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the town tree warden. The town tree warden may require replacement of a removed tree as a condition to the issuance of a permit. Such replacement shall meet the standards of size, species and placement as provided for in a permit issued by the town tree warden. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  10, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-71. - Registration of tree experts. 
    To protect the public, the town shall require any person who removes or maintains trees on public property as a business to be: 
(1)  Properly licensed to perform such work. 
(2)  Certified by State of Rhode Island or any other agency that regulates arboricultural practices. 
(3)  Covered by workman's compensation to the extent required by Rhode Island Law and public liability and personal property insurance in minimum amounts hereinafter mentioned adequate to cover and save harmless the Town of West Warwick and its agents from all suits, claims, or actions of every class and nature for or on persons or property damage caused or claimed to be caused, directly or indirectly, by the conduct of the work contemplated, or by acts of strangers, or any conditions due to the elements or any defects or insufficiencies in any method, material, ways, machinery, equipment or apparatus used in connection with the work. 
(4)  [Covered by] public liability insurance with limits of not less than $500,000.00 shall be carried. 
(5)  Bonded. 
(6)  Insured (medical). 
(Res. No. 99-175,  11, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-72. - Interference with town tree warden. 
    No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the town tree warden or any of his assistants while engaged in carrying out the implementation of this article; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the town. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  12, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-73. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals of the tree warden's findings may be appealed to the town tree board. 
(b)  Any adjustment of the standards required by this article or an appeal of a decision of the town tree warden shall be taken to the town tree board. The tree board, upon receipt of such request on forms provided by the town tree warden, shall have the authority and duty to consider an act upon the request. This application shall clearly and in detail state what adjustments or requirements are being requested, reasons such adjustments or requirements are being requested, reasons such adjustments are warranted, and shall be accompanied with such supplementary data as is deemed necessary to substantiate the adjustment. The town tree board may approve, modify, or deny the requested adjustment, based upon protection of public interest, preservation of the intent of this article, and possible unreasonable and unnecessary hardships involved in the case. 
(c)  The board shall act on the application as expeditiously as possible and shall notify the applicant in writing within five days of the action taken. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  13, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-74. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article may be: 
(1)  Subject to court action; 
(2)  Fined as may be established by the town council from time to time, which fine shall not exceed the sum of $500.00; and/or 
(3)  Charged the replacement value of the trees as removed and/or damaged. 
(b)  In addition, the person shall replace the tree and/or repair damage with a size and species permitted by the town tree warden. 
(c)  Each tree affected by noncompliance with this article shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  Violation of the article shall be the basis of withholding a final inspection permit until such violation is corrected to the satisfaction of the town tree warden and/or tree board. 
(Res. No. 99-175,  14, 7-6-99) 
ARTICLE V. - POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-5, adopted June 19, 2012, amended art. V, in its entirety. At the editor's discretion those provisions were treated as repealing  13-75-13-82 and adding  13-75-13-92. Former art. V, pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 2009-3, adopted April 7, 2009. 

Sec. 13-75. - Purpose. 
(a)  Unmitigated storm water from areas altered by development may pose public health and safety threats. Potential contaminants in storm water runoff may include suspended solids, nitrogen, phosphorus, hydrocarbons, heavy metals, pathogenic organisms (bacteria and viruses), and road salts. 
(b)  This article establishes the administrative mechanisms necessary for the town to ensure proper storm water management of runoff from new development and redevelopment projects. The ordinance from which this article is derived is written to work in conjunction with the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management's "Rhode Island Stormwater Design & Installation Standards Manual (amended 2015), Rhode Island Community Non-Point Sources Pollution Management Guide (as amended), and Rhode Island Soil Erosion & Sediment Control Handbook (as amended)". 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 2018-18 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 13-76. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter [article], the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Applicant means any person proposing a development project in accordance with this article. The applicant must be the person who holds a valid purchase and sales agreement for the real property associated with said development project. 
    Authorized enforcement agent means the building official or other town official authorized to enforce standards in accordance with this article. 
    Best management practice means structural and nonstructural means applied to a development project with the intent of controlling storm water flow and quality. Best management practices include, but are not necessarily limited to, means of storm water management described in with the state storm water design and installation standards manual, as amended. Use and acceptability of best management practices is at the discretion of the town. 
    Development project means any construction, reconstruction, demolition, or removal of structures, roadways, parking, or other paved areas, utilities, or other similar facilities, including any action requiring a building permit by the town. 
    Low-impact development means a best management practice intended to maintain or replicate predevelopment hydrology through the use of site planning, source control, and small-scale structures integrated throughout the site to prevent, infiltrate and manage storm water as close to its source as possible. Low-impact development practices include, but are not necessarily limited to, those described in the state storm water design and installation standards manual, as amended. use and acceptability of low-impact development practices is at the discretion of the town. 
    Owner or operator means any person who holds legal title to any real property, development project or structural best management practice; or has possession or control of any real property, development project or structural best management practice through any agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of a holder of a legal title. 
    Person shall include an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation (including a quasi-governmental corporation), partnership, association, syndicate, municipality, municipal or state agency, fire district, club, non-profit agency or any subdivision, commission, department, bureau, agency or department of state or federal government (including any quasi-governmental corporation) or of any interstate body. 
    Storm water management plan means the document required under section 13-82 before any person may initiate a site work associated with a development project pursuant to the applicability of this article. 
    Storm water means the surface discharge of water associated with a precipitation event or snowmelt. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-77. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all development and redevelopment occurring within the town. No person shall engage in development projects without receiving approval from the building official, unless specifically exempted by section 13-78. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-78. - Exemptions. 
    The following development projects do not require written approval pursuant to this article: 
(1)  Construction, alteration, or use of any additions to existing single-family or two-family homes or related structures, when determined by the building official to be insignificant, and such construction, alteration and use does not exceed 1,000 square feet, does not occur within 100 feet of any watercourse or coastal feature, and the slopes at the site of land disturbance do not exceed ten percent. 
(2)  Accepted agricultural management practices such as seasonal tilling and harvest activities associated with property utilized for private or commercial agricultural or silvicultural purposes. 
(3)  An excavation which exhibits all of the following characteristics: 
a.  Is less than four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point as measured from the average elevation of the natural ground surface. 
b.  Does not result in a total displacement of more than 50 cubic yards of material on any lot, land, parcel or subdivision. 
c.  Has no slopes steeper than ten feet vertical in 100 feet horizontal (ten percent). 
d.  Has all disturbed surface areas promptly and effectively protected to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from occurring including seeding or sodding, and provided that all disturbed surface areas which will be exposed for a period of time in excess of 30 days shall be covered with a suitable temporary protective ground cover until permanent ground cover is in place. 
(4)  Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping purposes on existing developed land parcels or lots, provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The aggregate area of activity does not exceed 1,000 square feet. 
b.  The change of elevation does not exceed two feet at any point. 
c.  All bare surface area is promptly seeded, sodded, or otherwise effectively protected from erosive actions. 
d.  The grading does not involve a quantity of fill greater than 18 cubic yards; except where fill is excavated from another portion of the same parcel and the quantity does not exceed 50 cubic yards. 
(5)  Grading, filling, removal or excavation activities and operations undertaken by the town under the direction and supervision of the director of public works for work on streets, roads or rights-of-way dedicated to public use; provided, however, that adequate and acceptable erosion and sediment controls are incorporated in engineering plans and specifications and employed. Appropriate controls shall apply during construction as well as after the completion of such activities. 
(6)  Use of a home garden in association with residential use. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-79. - Variance. 
    The building official reviewing an application under this article may: 
(1)  Vary requirements of this article when strict implementation of the requirements will create an unnecessary hardship or are not feasible. 
(2)  Allow use of an innovative management practice where strict adherence to existing criteria would be costly or of negligible environmental benefit. 
(3)  Allow use of an innovative management practice where the innovative practice is expected to have an environmental benefit, which cannot be practicably realized using standardized management practices. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-80. - Submissions and approvals. 
(a)  In accordance with this article, all persons must obtain approval from the building official prior to engaging in any development project, unless exempted by section 13-78. To obtain approval applicants must demonstrate compliance with all policy, standards and requirements of this article to the satisfaction of the building official. Applicants may demonstrate compliance via submission of materials and documentation including but not limited to a storm water management plan, site plan and maintenance agreement in accordance with this article. Plans will be reviewed in conjunction with site plan reviewed by the building official. 
(b)  Pre-application meetings may be requested by the applicant and held at the discretion of the town for the purpose of informing the representatives of construction projects of any local requirements and any additional limitations that may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-81. - Technical standards. 
    All applicants are required to develop and submit a storm water management plan prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state. All storm water management plans must address storm water management on a site-by-site basis and all requirements of this article. All storm water management practices shall be consistent with the state storm water design and installation standards manual and the state soil erosion and sediment control handbook, as amended. 
(1)  Performance standards. Storm water management plans shall incorporate structural and nonstructural best management practices for water quality control, in accordance with the state storm water design and installation standards manual. Development in special resource protection waters or watersheds of impaired waters as defined pursuant to the state water quality regulations may be held to higher standards. As part of such higher standards, low-impact development shall be used as the primary method of storm water control to the maximum extent practicable to manage water quality and maintain groundwater recharge to predevelopment levels. 
(2)  Disallowed storm water best management practices. The placement of storm water structures within a floodplain shall be avoided. If there is no alternative, the applicant must show what effects, if any, the tailwaters created by the floodplain will have on the outflow and effective storage capacity of the storm water best management practice. 
(3)  Facilitation of maintenance. Facilities that require maintenance shall be designed to minimize the need for regular maintenance, facilitate required maintenance, and ensure accessibility of components that require maintenance. At a minimum, all storm water management plans must incorporate best management practices with appropriate maintenance design in accordance with the state storm water design and installation standards manual, as amended. 
(4)  Flood protection. Storm water management plans shall demonstrate that a proposed project provides for protection of life and property from flooding and flood flows. Water quantities must be controlled in accordance with the state storm water design and installation standards manual, as amended, or a municipally approved regional storm water management plan for the watershed in which the project site is located. Storm water management plans shall demonstrate incorporation of the following standards into the proposed project: 
a.  Control and maintenance of post-development peak discharge rates from the two-year, ten-year, 25-year, and 100-year storm events to predevelopment levels. 
b.  Downstream analysis of the 100-year storm event and control of the peak discharge rate for the 100-year storm to mitigate downstream impacts. 
c.  Discharge from any storm water facility must be conveyed through properly constructed conveyance system to provide for nonerosive flows during all storm events. The proposed storm water conveyance system consisting of open channels, pipes, and other conveyance devices shall at a minimum accommodate the runoff from a 25-year storm event. The storm water conveyance system must provide for nonerosive flows to receiving waters. 
(5)  Surface water and groundwater. Storm water management plans shall, in accordance with the state storm water design and installation standards manual, as amended, demonstrate that during development and post-development, all receiving waters will be recharged in a manner closely resembling predevelopment conditions and that the developed site will retain hydrological conditions that closely resemble of those prior to disturbance. The goal of the storm water design shall be that hydrologic conditions in each subwatershed match predevelopment conditions. 
    Where practicable, development and redevelopment projects should aim to reduce runoff volumes. This may include minimizing and eliminating impervious surface areas such as roads, parking, paving or other surfaces, encouraging infiltration of noncontaminated runoff, preventing channelization, encouraging sheet flow, and where appropriate, preserving, enhancing or establishing buffers along surface water bodies and tributaries. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-82. - Storm water management plans. 
(a)  The drainage plan, storm drainage calculations, runoff rates and system design shall be based on the application of the appropriate method as follows: 
The rational method: This method is the preferred method for small systems of three acres or less, when no wetlands, ponds or other storage depressions are present and where drainage is toward the point of analysis. 
TR-55: This is the preferred method for calculating runoff volumes, peak discharge rate and flood storage requirements for site development between one acre and 2,000 acres. 
TR-20: This is for large complex watersheds and systems beyond the scope of TR-55. 
The drainage plan and drainage calculations shall contain the following information: 
(1)  An estimate of the quantity of stormwater surface runoff presently flowing from the land proposed to be subdivided, and that which would be generated by the proposed subdivision, calculated on the basis of a 25-year frequency rainfall. 
(2)  An estimate of the quantity of stormwater surface runoff entering the subdivision naturally from upstream areas within the watershed under present conditions, calculated on the basis of a 25-year frequency rainfall. 
(3)  An analysis of the capability of existing watercourses, storm sewers, culverts and other drainage facilities within the land proposed to be subdivided to handle the runoff as calculated under (1) and (2) above, and proposals to handle such surface runoff. Culvert and storm sewers shall be designed for a 25-year frequency rainfall, with a minimum pipe size of 15 inches and a minimum pipe gradient of one percent. 
(4)  Proposals for disposal of surface runoff, downstream from the subdivision without damage to the land and improvements and to the receiving water body. 
(5)  The drainage plan shall further indicate how the following specific requirements will be met: 
a.  That each lot will be adequately drained; 
b.  That the natural drainage patents will be maintained whenever possible; 
c.  That all existing watercourses will be left open, unless approval to enclose is granted by the planning board; 
d.  That all new open watercourses will be seated, soldered or paved, depending on grades and soil types; 
e.  That a continuous drainage system will be installed and connected to a natural or man-made watercourse or to an existing pipe storm drainage system. Whenever feasible, such drainage system shall be designed as a nonstructural system consisting of swales, sheet flow and open drainage which attenuates nonpoint pollution and regulates the rate of flow. The ultimate destination of such continuous drainage shall be a permanent natural body of water or wetland. When the planning board determines that such ultimate destination is impractical, the board shall require the construction of a retention area capable of accommodating proposed stormwater volumes based on a two-year, 25-year and 100-year frequency rainfall. 
f.  When any part of the drainage system is proposed for location outside the public street right-of-way, provisions for future maintenance approved by the planning board and town engineering department will be provided; 
g.  That all necessary easements to off-street watercourses will be obtained by the subdivided; 
h.  Where volume velocity of the surface runoff is high, the flow therefore shall be controlled by rip-rap, sediment basins, flow spreaders or other applicable devices, best management practices and/or techniques recommended in the Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, the Rhode Island Community Nonpoint Source Pollution Management Guide and the Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook; 
i.  The siting of stormwater management structures, including dry and/or wet ponds and swales, shall be incorporated into the natural landscape to enhance functional values of the structures and provide visual amenity to the site; 
j.  How the existing storm drainage will be protected during construction. 
(6)  The proposed drainage system shall be designed to accommodate stormwater such the post construction conditions do not result in peak runoff increases in rate or volume from the preconstruction conditions. 
(7)  The plan should include an assessment of structural integrity to withstand discharge from two-year, 25-year and 100-year storm. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 2018-18 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 13-83. - Inspections for storm water best management practices. 
    The town shall have the right to inspect best management practices constructed after the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Inspections shall address whether best management practices have been installed in accordance with approved storm water management plans. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-84. - Operation and maintenance requirements for best management practices. 
(a)  Routine operation and maintenance and repair procedures. Routine maintenance shall be performed on a regular basis to ensure proper performance and may include such routine procedures as training of staff, periodic inspections, grass cutting elimination of mosquito breeding habitats, and pond maintenance in accordance with a storm water management plan approved pursuant to this article. Repair procedures may be required to correct a problem or malfunction of a best management practice and to restore the management practice's intended operation and safe condition. Repairs may include such procedures as structural repairs, removal of debris, sediment and trash removal, erosion repair, snow and ice removal, fence repair, mosquito extermination, and restoration of vegetated and nonvegetated linings. 
(b)  General operation and maintenance standards for storm water best management practices. Maintenance design and maintenance procedures for all best management practices shall be documented in storm water management plans in accordance with the state storm water design and installation standards manual, as amended; or manufacturer's specifications. A maintenance schedule for each type of best management practice must be included in the storm water management plan. These schedules shall list the frequency and type of maintenance operations necessary along with the legally responsible party's name, address, and telephone number. The owner, as well as all future owners, shall be required to implement the maintenance schedule of the best management practices. If the storm water facility is to be deeded to the town, the applicant must obtain a letter from the town acknowledging maintenance responsibility and intent of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-85. - Maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Maintenance agreements shall provide written, contractual documentation, which demonstrates compliance with this article and legal arrangements for the upkeep of storm water facilities to assure their proper function and safety in accordance with this article. 
(b)  After final construction is completed, the owner or responsible person shall maintain "as built" plans of storm water management practices located on site. The plans must show the final design specifications for all storm water management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. 
(c)  Maintenance agreements, which describe maintenance schedules and requirements, must be developed for each storm water management facility unless the facility is dedicated to and accepted by the town. Schedules shall be based on the complexity and frequency of maintenance needs and shall be subject to the approval of the town. At a minimum, maintenance frequency should be in accordance with the state storm water design and installation standards manual, as amended. 
(d)  Right of entry. Upon the presentation of credentials and other documents, as may be required by law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the property, the director of public works, building inspector, and other town representatives designated by the building inspector or director of public works may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may make or cause to be made such inspections as the town deems reasonably necessary. 
(e)  Record keeping for maintenance activities. Maintenance agreements shall include provisions for maintenance record keeping. All activities conducted in accordance with a maintenance agreement must be recorded in a work order and inspection log. Timely updates of the log shall be the responsibility of the storm water management facility owner or other responsible party pursuant to this article. Review of the maintenance and inspection log shall be completed by the town to determine the effectiveness of operation, maintenance and safety activities. Reviews shall occur as part of each on-site inspection. Additional reviews may be made as deemed appropriate by the town. 
(f)  Responsibility for maintenance to assure function and safety. Appropriate maintenance to assure function and safety of storm water management facilities shall be the responsibility the owner or may be assumed by another party via a written contractual arrangement in accordance with this article. 
(g)  Alterations to maintenance agreements. Any alterations in maintenance responsibility or alterations to maintenance agreements must be reviewed and approved by the planning board (as applicable) and building official or designee. If portions of the land serviced by a storm water management facility are to be sold, written contractual arrangements shall be made to pass all responsibility of the maintenance agreement to the purchaser and shall be subject to review and approval of the department of public works or designee. All alterations to maintenance agreements shall be made and recorded in accordance with this article. 
(h)  Recordation of maintenance agreements. All maintenance agreements and alterations to maintenance agreements shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the town. Copies of all maintenance agreements and alterations to maintenance agreements shall be included in storm water management plans. Recordation of maintenance agreements in accordance with this article shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-86. - Application fees. 
    The town shall be empowered to collect fees from permit applicants, which are commensurate with the cost of administering this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-87. - Notification of noncompliance. 
    If the authorized enforcement agent finds a violation of this article then a written notice from the authorized enforcement agent to compel correction shall be transmitted to the owner or operator. Such notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required and the time limit within which corrections shall be completed. Failure to comply with the required corrections within the specified time limit shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-88. - Appeal of notice of noncompliance. 
    Any person receiving a notice of noncompliance may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agent. The appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the receipt of the notice of noncompliance. The appeal shall be in writing and contain a detailed basis upon which the appeal was taken. The authorized enforcement agent shall then determine whether to accept the appeal or proceed to cause summons of the appellant in accordance with section 13-89. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-89. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-10. The authorized enforcement agent may, at the discretion of the court, undertake measures necessary to abate the violation and restore the property at the owner or operators expense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-90. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    Within 30 days after abatement of the violation by or under the direction of the authorized enforcement agent, the owner or operator will be notified by the authorized enforcement agent of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the authorized enforcement agent, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to the Town by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 31st day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-91. - Revocation or suspension of approval. 
    The approval of a storm water management plan under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by an authorized enforcement agent and all work on the development or redevelopment project halted for an indefinite time period after written notification is transmitted by the authorized enforcement agent to the owner or operator for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any condition of the approved plan, or specifications pertaining thereto. 
(2)  Violation of any provision of this article. 
(3)  The existence of any condition or the performance of any act constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangerment to human life or property of others, or contrary to the spirit or intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-92. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agent to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Secs. 13-93-13-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-5, adopted June 19, 2012, amended art. V by replacing  13-75-13-82 with  13-75-13-92. At the editor's discretion, art. VI,  13-83-13-88 was renumbered as  13-101-13-106 to prevent duplication of section numbers. 

Sec. 13-101. - Illicit discharge. 
    Discharge to the municipal storm sewer system of a non-storm water discharge is expressly prohibited from entering the municipal storm sewer system, unless the discharge has received all required federal, state and local permits including the Rhode Island Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (RIPDES) or is included in one of the following categories of discharges: discharges which result from the wash down of vehicles at retail dealers selling new and used automobiles where no detergents are used and individual residential car washing; external building wash down where no detergents are used; the use of water to control dust; fire fighting activities; fire hydrant flushing; natural springs; uncontaminated groundwater; dechlorinated pool discharges; air conditioning condensate; lawn watering; potable water sources including waterline flushing; irrigation drainage; pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled materials have been removed) and where detergents are not used; discharges from foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as solvents, or contaminated by contact with soils where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have occurred; uncontaminated utility vault dewatering; dechlorinated water line testing water; hydrostatic test water that does not contain any treatment chemicals and is not contaminated with process chemicals. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-102. - Right of entry. 
    To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the property, the director of public works and/or his/her designated representative may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the town deems reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-103. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in unauthorized discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the State from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within five working days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Nothing in this section shall preclude any owner/lessee from compliance with relevant provisions of the Rhode Island Clean Water Act, G.L. 46-12-1 et seq. or other applicable laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-104. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If an illicit discharge to the municipal storm sewer system is detected, the owner shall cease the discharge. If the discharge does not cease within seven calendar days, the owner may be fined $100.00 per calendar day that the violation goes un-repaired and the town shall have the rights to take the available appropriate remedies it deems necessary to correct the violations and to assess a lien on the subject property in an amount equal to the cost of the remedial actions. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement of common law liens on personal property. The lien shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the town and shall incur legal interest from the date of the recording. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this article, including revocation of the performance bond or assessment of a lien on the property. 
(b)  Any individual or other party is prohibited from discharging waste, including construction waste, building material, truck washout, chemicals, litter, sanitary wastes or other waste into the town right-of-way, storm drain, or other town property. If such a violation occurs the town may fine the violator $200.00 and required removal of the waste within ten calendar days at the violator's expense. The town may charge the violator any costs associated with removal or repair of damage resulting from the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-105. - Hearing. 
    Any owner or responsible party, receiving a written notice of violation, shall be given an opportunity for a hearing before the town zoning board of review to state their case. Application for said appeal shall be received by the zoning board of review prior to the date of compliance stipulated by the written notice of violation. If evidence indicates that a violation has not occurred, the zoning board of review shall revoke the notice of violation. 
    In exercising its powers in ruling, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or partly and may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer or agency from whom the appeal was taken. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 13-106. - Town municipal court. 
    The town municipal court shall have jurisdiction to enforce all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 2012-5, 6-19-12) 
Chapter 14 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Police department,  1301 et seq. 
Cross reference- Municipal court, ch. 11.5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - General duties of police. 
    It shall be the duty of every police officer of the town, so far as is in his power, to preserve the peace and good order of the same and to see that the ordinances are promptly enforced and at all times to give his aid and assistance to the person appointed to prosecute for violation of said ordinances in the due and proper enforcement of the same. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 29,  1) 
Cross reference- Enforcement of traffic regulations by police,  11-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Prosecution of violations. 
    Police constables are hereby empowered to make complaint for violation of any ordinances and to prosecute for the same, and such police constable shall not be required to give surety for costs; but in all cases where complaint shall be made by any person other than a police constable as aforesaid, such complaint [complainant] shall give security for costs. All penalties or fines shall be recovered for the use of the town unless otherwise herein specially provided. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 29,  2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Fee for license of police constable; term. 
    The fee for the license of police constable in the town shall be fixed at the rate as shall from time to time be determined by the town council, the same to be collected by the town clerk on the issuance of said commission. A police constable shall continue in office during the pleasure of the town council but in no event for a term of more than one current municipal year. 
(Ord. of 9-28-37; Res. of 4-26-79; Ord. No. 2018-2 , 2-27-18) 
Sec. 14-4. - Fee for license of constable with power to serve process; term. 
    The fee for the license of constable with power to serve civil process shall be fixed at the rate as shall from time to time be determined by the town council, the same to be collected by the town clerk on the issuance of said commission. A constable with power to serve civil process shall continue in office during the pleasure of the town council but in no event for a term of more than one current municipal year. 
(Ord. of 9-28-37; Ord. No. 2018-2 , 2-27-18) 
Sec. 14-5. - Badge for constables. 
    Every licensed police constable under section 14-3 shall obtain from the town clerk a metal badge with the word "Constable" marked on the badge which shall be issued on the payment of such amount as set forth by the town council from time to time by resolution, and such person who has obtained said license shall forthwith return the said badge when he ceases to be appointed, and failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(Res. of 11-10-64,  1; Ord. of 3-15-73) 
Sec. 14-6. - Fingerprinting fee. 
    The fee for fingerprinting, as part of a background check required for employment purposes, shall be set from time to time by town council resolution. Said fee will be collected by the police department and the funds shall be turned over to the finance director. Such funds will be reimbursed to the police department by the finance director on January 30th and June 25th of each year to cover the necessary expenses for F.B.I. checks and equipment maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, 11-19-02; Ord. No. 2007-6, 6-5-07) 
Secs. 14-7-14-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE DETECTIVE ACT 

Sec. 14-11. - Short title. 
    This article shall be cited as the "Private Detective Act." 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-12. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    Applicant means any person who has applied for permission to engage in any act or activity which is regulated under the provisions of this article. 
    License means any license required by this article. 
    License fee means any moneys required by law to be paid for the issuance or renewal of any license required by the regulations. 
    Local licensing authority means the town councils of license boards of the several towns, the mayor and city council, or the license bureau of a city. 
    Private detective shall mean a person who is hired for the purpose of conducting investigations involving: 
(1)  Inquiries into unsolved crimes; 
(2)  Clandestine surveillance; 
(3)  The search for missing persons; and 
(4)  The search for lost or stolen property. 
    Words in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-13. - License qualifications. 
    In order to be eligible for a license, an applicant must: 
(1)  Be a citizen of the United States or a resident alien; 
(2)  Not have been convicted in any jurisdiction of a felony; 
(3)  Not have had any previous private investigator license or registration revoked or application for such license or registration denied by the appropriate authority of any local licensing authority; 
(4)  Not have been declared by any court of competent jurisdiction incompetent by reason of mental defect or disease, unless said court has subsequently determined that his or her competency has been restored; 
(5)  Not suffer from habitual drunkenness or from narcotics addiction or dependence; 
(6)  Be of good moral character; 
(7)  Have such experience as has been gained through: 
a.  At least five years' experience as an investigator or as a police officer with a state, county or municipal police department or with an investigative agency of the United States of America or of any state, county or municipality; or 
b.  Has received a degree in criminal justice from an accredited college or university; or 
c.  Has been employed by a private detective as an investigator for at least five years; or 
d.  Has substantively equivalent training or experience. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-14. - License application. 
    Any person who was engaged as a private detective prior to January 1, 1988, and who continues to be so engaged as of January 1, 1988, may apply for a private detective license with the local licensing authority where his or her principal place of business is located. Persons presently licensed shall be granted private detective licenses from the town council upon application and verification that he/she has not been convicted in any jurisdiction of a felony. This initial application will be treated as a renewal of a license. Subsequent applications for renewal of his/her license shall be governed by section 14-18 of this article. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-15. - Investigation and action on application. 
    After an examination of the application and such further inquiry and investigation as is deemed proper and necessary as to the good character, competency and integrity of the applicant and the persons named in the application, the town council shall, as soon as practicable, issue a license in a form prescribed by it to the applicant or notify the applicant of a denial of the license application. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-16. - Grounds for denial of application for license or renewal of license. 
    The town council shall deny the application for a renewal of license if it finds that the applicant: 
(1)  Has violated any provisions of this article or rules and regulations promulgated hereunder; or 
(2)  In the case of the applicant, commits any act which would disqualify him under section 14-20, or where such applicant has failed to meet the qualifications of this article; 
(3)  Practices fraud, deceit or misrepresentation; 
(4)  Makes a material misstatement in the application for or renewal of a license; or 
(5)  Demonstrates incompetence or untrust worthiness in actions affecting the conduct of the business required to be licensed under this article. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-17. - Procedure for approval or denial of application; hearings. 
    The town council, in approving or denying an application for a license or renewal thereof, shall be as follows: 
(1)  If the application is approved, the local licensing authority shall issue a license in the form as provided in this article; 
(2)  If the application is denied, the local licensing authority shall notify the applicant or licensee in writing of the same and shall state the reasons for its action; 
(3)  Within 15 days from the receipt of notice, the applicant or licensee may request a hearing in writing; 
(4)  If a request for a hearing is timely received, the local licensing authority shall set a date for the hearing and notify the parties of the time and place thereof; 
(5)  All hearings shall be held in accordance with the provisions of G.L. 1956,  42-35-1 et seq., as amended. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-18. - Renewal of licenses. 
(a)  Subject to the power of the town council to deny, revoke or suspend a license, any license shall be renewable by the town council for the next one-year period upon proper application for renewal [and] payment of license fees. An application for renewal of a license must be received by the town council on a form provided by it not less than 30 days prior to the expiration date of the license, and it shall promptly notify the licensee of his [its] intent to refuse to renew the license. The licensee may, within 15 days after receipt of such notice of intent to refuse to renew a license, request a hearing on such refusal in the manner prescribed by this article. A licensee shall be permitted to continue to engage in business while its renewal application is pending. Upon renewal of any license, the town council shall issue a renewal license. 
(b)  All licenses shall expire annually on March 30. (For the calendar year of 1988 only, said licenses shall be renewed on June 7, 1988. All fees for this year shall be prorated). 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-19. - Registration and license fees. 
(a)  The registration and license fee for a private detective shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(b)  No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be assigned or transferred, either by operation of law or otherwise. 
(c)  With good cause, the town council may extend the period of time for filing the application required by this section. 
(Res. of 3-15-88; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 14-20. - Grounds for suspension and revocation of licenses. 
    A license may be suspended or revoked if the licensee: 
(1)  Violates any provisions of this article or rules and regulations promulgated hereunder; 
(2)  Practices fraud, deceit or misrepresentation; 
(3)  Makes a material misstatement in the application for or renewal of the license; 
(4)  In the case of the licensee, commits any act which would disqualify the qualifying agent. 
    After the licensee has exhausted the right of appeal, or, if the licensee does not seek a hearing, the licensee shall immediately cease to operate the business for the time period provided in the order of suspension or permanently, in the case of revocation, and shall notify all of its clients of such revocation or suspension and shall maintain a copy of such notices in its business records. 
    Under circumstances in which the town council determines that the public health, welfare or safety may be jeopardized by the termination of a licensee's services, the town council may, upon its own motion or upon application by the licensee or any party affected by such termination, extend the time for the termination of the licensee's operations, subject to such reasonable, necessary and proper conditions or restrictions as it deems appropriate. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-21. - Surrender of license. 
    Each license shall be surrendered to the town council within 72 hours after it has been revoked or not renewed after the licensee ceases to do business pursuant to an order of suspension. If, however, the town council or a court of competent jurisdiction has pending before it any matter relating to the renewal, revocation or transfer of a license, the licensee shall not be required to surrender the license until the matter has been adjudicated and all appeals have been exhausted; provided that a stay has been obtained in accordance with the provisions of this article pertaining to a judicial review. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-22. - Change in status of licensee. 
    The licensee shall notify the town council in writing within five days of any material change in the information previously furnished or required to be furnished to the town council or [of] any occurrence which could reasonably be expected to affect the licensee's privilege to a license under this article. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-23. - Uniform and equipment. 
(a)  No individual licensed by, registered by or subject to the provisions of this act shall wear or display any insignia, patch or pattern which shall indicate or tend to indicate that he is a law enforcement officer of the federal government, a state or any political subdivision thereof or which contains or includes the word "police" or the equivalent thereof, or is similar in working to any law enforcement agency in this state. All badges, shields and any other devices shall not indicate or tend to indicate that it [they] represents that of any law enforcement officers of the federal government, a state or any other political subdivision thereof. All such wording must be approved by the chief of police. 
(b)  No person, while performing any activities licensed by this article, shall have or utilize any vehicle or equipment displaying the words "police," "law enforcement officer" or the equivalent thereof or have any sign, shield, marking, accessory or insignia that may indicate that such vehicle is a vehicle of a public law enforcement agency. All such wording must indicate "private detective" or "private investigating agency" and be approved by the town council. 
(c)  No licensee shall, by the use of any letterhead, advertisement or other printed matter, or in any manner whatever, represent that he is an instrumentality or agency of the federal government or of the State of Rhode Island or a political subdivision thereof. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-24. - Bonding requirements. 
    Any licensee or private detective shall deliver to the town council or their designee a bond with a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Rhode Island conditioned for the benefit of any person injured by a willful, malicious or wrongful act of the licensee which, in the case of an individual, shall be $5,000.00. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-25. - Prohibited activities. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly commit any of the following: 
(1)  Provide any service required to be licensed under this article without possessing a valid license. 
(2)  Employ any individual to perform the duties of an unarmed employee or armed employee who has not first complied with all the provisions of this article and the regulations in all respects. 
(3)  Falsely represent that a person is the holder of a valid license. 
(4)  Possess a license or identification card issued to another person. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-26. - Identification cards required. 
    The town council shall prescribe the form of identification cards which may be carried by persons licensed under this article. Every person licensed hereunder shall be given a permanent license number and shall be issued an identification card which shall be approximately 21/2 inches wide and 31/2 inches long and shall bear thereon the number assigned to the licensee, the full name, date of birth, residence address, brief description of the licensee, his fingerprints and photograph, and a space upon which the licensee shall write his usual signature with pen and ink or a facsimile of such signature. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-27. - Licensee business procedures. 
    Any licensee shall, on notice from the town council, discontinue any advertising or the use of any advertisement, seal or card which, in the opinion of the local licensing authority, may tend to mislead the public. Failure to comply with any such order of the town council shall be cause for revocation of the license. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-28. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a final decision on the order of the town council made after a hearing or rehearing, whether or not a petition for a hearing was filed, may obtain judicial review thereof by appeal to the superior court in accordance with G.L. 1956,  42-35-1 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  Filing of an appeal shall not stay the enforcement of the decision on the order of the town council unless the stay is obtained from the court upon application in accordance with the rules of court or from the superintendent upon such terms and conditions as he deems proper. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-29. - Obligation to report criminal violations. 
    All felonies which are discovered by persons licensed and registered under this article shall be reported immediately to the Rhode Island State Police, private investigative unit, or to the local police department where the crime occurred. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-30. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall include the activities of any person employed by any federal or state agency or any city or town as an investigator. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a detective's license in order to interview parties and/or witnesses in legal matters. 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Sec. 14-31. - Form of identification card. 
    The following is a reproduction of the identification card approved by the town council: 
(Res. of 3-15-88) 
Secs. 14-32-14-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUVENILE HEARING BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- A Res. of March 1, 1988, (No. 88-127), amended the Code by adding the following provisions; since the resolution did not state the manner of inclusion, however, the provisions have been codified as Art. III,  14-40-14-45, by the editor. 
Cross reference- Offenses-miscellaneous, ch. 12. 
Note- Special acts- Enacting an ordinance to establish a juvenile hearing board, art. 36. 

Sec. 14-40. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established within the town a juvenile hearing board with the powers set forth in this article for the purpose of hearing all cases referred to such board by the juvenile division of the police department, with respect to persons resident in the town under the age of 18 who are charged with violating the criminal laws of the State of Rhode Island or the Town of West Warwick. 
(Res. of 3-1-88) 
Sec. 14-41. - Referral. 
    Persons who are residents of the town who are under the age of 18 may be referred to the juvenile hearing board established herein if the offense is one which, if committed by an adult, would be a misdemeanor; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply in the case of any person who: 
(1)  Was charged with the crime of assault or battery; or 
(2)  Shall have been twice previously referred to the juvenile hearing board or have been once previously referred and refused or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or make the restriction recommended; and/or 
(3)  At the time of the commission of such juvenile offense, shall be within the custody and control of the family court. 
    The juvenile division of the West Warwick Police Department may offer referral to the juvenile hearing board [of] any other juvenile offender where, in the opinion of the juvenile division, such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile concerned and the community at large. No referral to the juvenile hearing board shall be made by the juvenile division until such person, together with his legal guardians, shall have in writing waived such person's right to a hearing in the family court with respect to the offense charged, have agreed to guilt and shall have agreed to abide by the decision of the juvenile hearing board. 
(Res. of 3-1-88) 
Sec. 14-42. - Composition; terms; compensation. 
    The membership of the juvenile hearing board shall consist of five persons over the age of 18 years to be appointed by the town council, all of whom shall have been a resident for at least three years within the town, and none of whom shall be attorneys admitted to practice before the supreme court of the State of Rhode Island. The town council shall appoint one member whose term shall expire on December 1, 1988, and, thereafter, until his/her successor is appointed and qualified; two members whose term shall expire on December 1, 1989, and, thereafter, until their successors are appointed and qualified; two members whose terms shall expire on December 1, 1990, and, thereafter, until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
    During the month of November, 1988, and annually thereafter, the town council shall appoint a member to succeed the member or members whose terms will then next expire to serve for a term of three years, commencing on December 1 and, thereafter, until their successors are appointed and qualified. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the office of a member by death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled in like manner as the original appointment but only for the remainder of the term of the former member. No member of the juvenile hearing board shall be entitled to receive any compensation by reason of his or her service on the board. 
(Res. of 3-1-88) 
Sec. 14-42.1. - Alternate members. 
    In addition to the five standing members, the town council shall annually appoint two alternates to be designated as the first and second alternate members. These alternate members shall meet the same qualifications as a regular member. These alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member of the board is unable to serve at a hearing and the second alternate shall vote if two members of the board are unable to serve at a hearing. In the absence of the first alternate member, the second alternate member shall serve in the position of the first alternate. The alternate members shall exercise the same duties and functions of a regular member when serving on the board and may be removed from the office by the town council in the same manner as a regular member. 
(Res. No. 97-150, 6-3-97) 
Sec. 14-43. - Duties. 
    The juvenile hearing board shall hear all cases referred to it by the juvenile division and shall recommend sanctions (other than incarceration) and shall direct restitution for any injuries and/or damages, where appropriate, resulting from the commission of such offense. In any such proceeding, the juvenile hearing board, prior to imposing sanctions, shall request the juvenile offender and his/her parents to agree to the sanctions imposed and the amount of restitution and the manner of making the same. In ordering restitution, the juvenile hearing board shall take into account the juvenile offender's ability to pay and the amount of actual damage caused as a result of the commission of such offense. 
(Res. of 3-1-88) 
Sec. 14-44. - Meetings; officers. 
    The juvenile hearing board shall meet not less than once each month. It shall give notice of the date and time of the meetings to the juvenile division and the juvenile offender and his/her parents not less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing. Any juvenile offender may be represented by counsel and present evidence in his/her behalf. A majority of the members of the juvenile hearing board shall constitute a quorum, and its proceedings shall be closed to the public. 
    The juvenile hearing board shall elect one from its members as its chairman and one as its vice-chairman. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall be the presiding officer. A majority of the members present shall be required to take any action. The juvenile hearing board shall have the power from time to time to draft rules governing its proceedings or to amend or repeal any rules theretofore adopted. 
(Res. of 3-1-88) 
Sec. 14-45. - Effective date. 
    This article shall apply to all juveniles alleged to have committed an offense after the date of the enactment of this article. 
(Res. of 3-1-88) 
Secs. 14-46-14-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SECURITY ALARM REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-50. - Purpose. 
    The West Warwick Town Council has determined that false or needless alarms in the Town of West Warwick cause or may cause a drain on the resources of the West Warwick Police and Fire Departments. In order to reduce the drain, the council has drafted and passed the following sections. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Alarm system: Equipment or devices located on real property within the Town of West Warwick, which equipment or devices are arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention to which police or fire are expected to respond. In this chapter, the term "alarm system" shall include, but shall not be limited to, the terms "automatic holdup alarm systems," "burglar alarm systems," "holdup alarm systems," "manual holdup alarm systems," "audible alarm systems" and "fire alarm systems". 
    Direct connect system: All alarm systems which have the capability of transmitting to any agency maintained by the town, such as the police station and/or fire Department, whether through telephone lines or signal system. Such term shall include the following systems: 
(1)  Answering service: Refers to a telephone answering service providing, among its services, the service of receiving, on a continuous basis, through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter immediately relaying the message by live voice to the police department and/or fire department. 
(2)  Remote signaling system: An alarm signaling system which, when activated by an alarm device, transmits a signal, including, but not limited to, an audible signal, from the alarm signaling device to the police department and/or fire department or other central location where appropriate action is taken to investigate and respond to the signal. 
(3)  Central station: Refers to an office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits and where guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals which are then reported to the police and/or fire departments. 
(4)  Direct connect: Refers to an alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at any agency maintained by the town, such as the police station and/or fire department. 
(5)  Direct line: A telephone line leading directly from a central station to the communication center of the police department and/or fire department that is for use only to report emergency signals on a person-to-person basis. 
    False or nuisance alarm: The activation of any alarm system, as defined herein, to which the police and/or fire departments respond which is not caused by: 
(1)  Fire, a criminal act or other emergency. 
(2)  An act of nature, such as an earthquake, tornado or hurricane. 
(3)  Circumstances occurring off the protected property and not within the control of the subscriber, his alarm company or his answering service, including, but not limited to, electrical power failure. 
(4)  A person motivated solely by criminal, malicious or mischievous intent. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2018-6 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 14-52. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
(a)  The police chief may promulgate rules and regulations to implement this chapter. 
(b)  The fire chief may promulgate rules and regulations relating to fire alarms to implement this chapter. Said regulations relating to fire alarms shall be consistent with any regulations adopted by the police chief to implement this chapter. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-53. - Registration required. 
(a)  Any alarm system which is in use prior to the passage of this chapter must be registered with the police department and/or fire department within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter. 
(b)  Registration with the police department and fire department shall be required prior to the installation of any new alarm system. 
(c)  Registration applications shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The name, home address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm company which services and maintains the alarm system, if the alarm is not serviced or maintained by the applicant; and/or 
(3)  The name, address and telephone numbers of at least two emergency contact people who can gain entrance to the property and turn off the alarm system, which information shall be updated yearly. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-54. - Connection of alarm systems to municipal circuits. 
    All costs and expenses relating to the connection of a private alarm system to the municipal fire alarm system and/or police department of the Town of West Warwick shall be the responsibility of the developer or the owner and not the Town of West Warwick. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-55. - Direct connect alarm systems. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used and alarm system which is equipped with an electrical or mechanical device or attachment to a telephone that directly connects with the emergency number within the fire department and/or police department unless the following requirements are met: 
(1)  All existing direct connect alarm systems shall use a special unlisted telephone line within 90 days of the effective date of this article. Failure of any person to comply with this requirement shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00 per day for each day of noncompliance; 
(2)  Prior to the connection of any new direct connection alarm systems to the special telephone line, and alarm user's permit must be obtained from the Town of West Warwick at the fire department headquarters. The alarm user's permit fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. All permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. The permit shall be located physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection. 
(3)  A fire alarm system permit shall be obtained prior to the installation of any fire alarm system required under the State Fire Code. No permit shall be issued until all requirements of R.I.G.L.  23-28.25-3 have been met. 
(4)  Failure to obtain a user's permit will result in a fine in the amount of $75.00. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used and alarm system which is equipped with an electrical or mechanical device or attachment to a telephone that automatically dials the emergency number within the fire department and/or police department. 
(c)  Permit application. 
(1)  Application shall be made by a subscriber to the police chief or fire chief, as appropriate, on a form approved by them. 
(2)  The police chief or fire chief shall issue a permit if the application is complete and signed, all fees are paid and the chief determines that the alarm system to be installed meets the requirement of this chapter, any rules and regulations as may be promulgated by either of both departments and state law. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2018-6 , 6-5-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-6 , adopted June 5, 2018, changed the title of  14-55 from "automatic dialing devices/direct" to the present title. 
Sec. 14-56. - Audible alarm systems. 
    No installed audible alarm system shall sound an alarm for longer than 15 minutes. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-57. - Fees and fines. 
(a)  There shall be an annual fee in the amount as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council for monitoring and alarm system (direct connect alarm system) interconnected to the police department and/or the fire department. 
(b)  The town shall not impose a fee for answering and alarm. 
(c)  The town shall give written notification to the alarm owner and impose a fine in the amount $75.00 for each offense of any of the following nuisance alarm violations: 
(1)  Failure to register the alarm system; 
(2)  Failure to obtain the necessary permit for a direct connect alarm system; 
(3)  An audible alarm, which does not have an automatic reset system, which turns the signal off after sounding for 15 minutes, as further described hereinafter. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 2018-6 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 14-58. - False alarms. 
(a)  More than four false alarms in a calendar year from any alarm system for which an alarm users permit has been obtained may constitute grounds for revocation of such permit, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  After the fire department and/or police department has recorded four false alarms in a year, it shall notify the permit holder in writing of such fact and require that the permit holder report to the fire department and/or police department within 15 days his effort to eliminate the false alarms. If the permit holder fails to submit a report within 15 days, after reasonable extension for good cause, the fire department and/or police department may revoke the user's permit and under such circumstances the user shall not be entitled to a hearing or appeal under this section. 
(c)  If the alarm user submits an unsatisfactory report, or has one or more false alarms during the same calendar year after submitting a satisfactory report, the fire department and/or police department may revoke or suspend the alarm user's permit. 
(d)  The fine for false alarms over and above for false alarms per year shall be $75.00 for each false alarm. 
(e)  An alarm system user, whose permit has been revoked, may apply for a new permit. The chief of the fire department and/or police department may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions upon issuing a new permit to an alarm user, with respect to the particular system for which the permit was revoked. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2018-6 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 14-59. - Notification and appeal of false alarm charges. 
(a)  The police chief, or in cases involving fire alarms, the fire chief, shall notify the subscriber by certified mail of any fine. Within 15 days of the mailing of such notice, the subscriber may file a written appeal of said charge with the police chief or if applicable the fire chief. Said notice of appeal shall contain information to show that the alarm giving rise to the fine was not a false alarm within the meaning of this chapter. Said notice of appeal shall also contain a return address to which the police chief, or in cases involving fire alarms, the fire chief shall send notice of his or her decision. 
(b)  The police chief or, in cases involving fire alarms, the fire chief shall consider the information filed by the subscriber, reaffirm or rescind the false alarm charge and, within 15 days of his or her receipt of said appeal, notify the subscriber of his decision by certified mail. Such decision shall be final and shall not be subject to further appeal. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-60. - Key box system. 
    When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secure openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or fire fighting purposes, a key box system shall be installed in an accessible location. The key box shall be a type approved by the chief of police or fire chief and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the chiefs of police and fire. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-61. - Maintenance of system. 
    Each subscriber is required to maintain all components of his alarm system in good working order at all times to ensure that the sensory mechanism is adjusted to suppress false indications or holdups or intrusions or fire or smoke conditions so that the alarm system will not be activated by impulses due to short flashes of light, wind, noises, vehicular noise or other forces unrelated to genuine alarms. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-62. - Termination of direct connect system. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalty set out in this chapter, if a subscriber and/or alarm business fails to comply with any requirements of this chapter or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, the police chief and/or fire chief may order the subscriber to disconnect the alarm system from the police department and/or fire department, as the case may be, and to remove any equipment or indicators connected in the police department and/or fire department and shall indicate in said order that failure to obey shall result in disconnection by the town. If the subscriber fails to obey the order within three days from the receipt of the order, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, the town shall disconnect the alarm system and remove any equipment or indicators at the expense of the violator. 
(b)  Notification and appeal termination of service: 
(1)  The police chief and/or fire chief shall notify the subscriber and/or alarm company of the disconnect order by certified mail. Within three days of the receipt of said notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, the subscriber and/or alarm company may file a written appeal of said disconnect order with the municipal court. Said notice of appeal shall include an address to which the municipal court shall mail a notice of hearing and all other correspondence directed to the appealing subscriber and/or alarm company. The municipal court shall immediately notify the police chief and/or fire chief of the receipt of any such appeal. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a timely appeal of a disconnect order, the municipal court shall schedule a hearing of said appeal to be heard by the municipal court. The municipal court shall set said hearing for a date not more than 15 days after the receipt of the appeal. Not less than seven days before said hearing date, the municipal court shall, by certified mail, send written notice of the date, time and place of said hearing to the subscriber and/or alarm company taking the appeal. 
(3)  At said hearing, the appealing subscriber and/or alarm company and the police chief and/or fire chief, or his, her or their designee, shall present facts and arguments relevant to the issuance and validity of the disconnect order. 
(4)  Solely on the basis of the hearing record, the municipal court shall render a decision and shall, by certified mail, send written notice of said decision to the subscriber and/or alarm company within ten days of the close of the hearing. 
(5)  The filing of a notice of appeal of a disconnect order shall stay any such order until a hearing has been held and a decision rendered thereon; provided, however, that if the police chief and/or fire chief finds that the public health, safety or welfare imperatively requires emergency action and states that finding and the factual basis therefor in his, her or their written disconnect order, the filing of a notice of appeal shall not affect a stay of the order, and the terms of subsection (d) below shall operate as if no appeal has been filed, pending a hearing and decision thereon. At the time the police chief and/or fire chief sends a written notice of an emergency disconnect order to a subscriber and/or alarm company, he or she shall send a copy of said order to the municipal court. Within five days of the receipt of a written notice of appeal of such an emergency disconnection order, the municipal court shall conduct a hearing thereon, giving the appealing subscriber and/or alarm company written and whatever other notice the municipal court deems necessary of the date, time and place of the hearing. Said hearing shall be conducted in the same manner described herein above. The municipal court shall, by certified mail, send to the subscriber and/or alarm business written notice of his decision of said appeal within three business days of the close of the hearing. 
(6)  The municipal court may designate one or more town supervisory employees to perform the duties ascribed to him in this chapter; provided, however, that he or she shall not, in any case, appoint an officer, employee or other member of the police or fire department to perform any of such duties. 
(c)  Each notice of a disconnect order shall refer to and provide instructions concerning the subscriber's and/or alarm company's right to appeal. 
(d)  Fines. In addition to any other penalty set out in this chapter, failure of any subscriber and/or alarm company to comply with the requirements of a written notice or order by the police chief or fire chief of a violation of any provision hereof within three days of receipt of such notice or order, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays, shall also constitute an offense punishable by a fine which shall be set and may be amended form time to time by the town council. Such notice shall continue in force and effect until full compliance with the requirement stated herein, and each and every failure to comply with such notice within 24 hours after the three days allowed for compliance shall constitute a separate offense; provided, however, that if a subscriber and/or alarm company files a timely notice of appeal of any such notice or order, then the provisions of this subsection shall take effect only after a written notice of affirmation of said order or notice is received by said subscriber and/or alarm company. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-63. - Compilation of record. 
    The police chief and fire chief shall jointly compile a continuous record of all false alarms and of all written notices and orders given to subscribers and alarm companies. Such record shall indicate the number and frequency of false alarms and shall separately state the number of false alarms received from residences and from businesses. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-64. - Town liability. 
    The Town of West Warwick shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of automatic protection devices and signal lines of the systems; for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a source, for any failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation, operation, disconnection or removal of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals or the relaying of such signals or messages. 
(Res. No. 99-126, 5-11-99) 
Chapter 15 - RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USERS OF THE REGIONAL WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY SEWER USE ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- A Res. of April 10, 1990, repealed ch. 15, arts. I-IV, in its entirety and added a new ch. 15,  15-1-15-23, pertaining to similar subject matter. Former ch. 15 derived from Comp. Ords., ch. 32,  1-7; a Res. of September 29, 1983; a Res. of September 23, 1986; and a Res. of January 20, 1987. Res. No. 97-06, adopted Jan. 7, 1997, amended ch. 15 in its entirety to read as herein set out. 
Charter reference- Sewer commission, pt. I,  1701 et seq.; sewerage system, pt. II, art. 2. 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 5; deposits in sewers,  8-9; housing, ch. 9; streets and sidewalks, ch. 16; zoning, app. A. 

Sec. 15-1. - Purpose. 
    The town council hereby finds that it is necessary to establish adequate and uniform regulations governing: 
(1)  The construction and alteration of sewer lines servicing the West Warwick Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility; 
(2)  The constituents and concentration of pollutants of all wastewater discharged into the West Warwick Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 15-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
    Authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the town. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure of five days, at 20C expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter). 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer. 
    Categorical standards shall mean national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standards. 
    Collection system means the equipment, structures, and processes used for the collection, transportation, and pumping of sewage. 
    Compatible pollutant means the constituents of BOD, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, and such additional pollutants identified in the applicable RIPDES permit where the POTW is designed to treat such pollutants to the degree required by the RIPDES permit. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, during which the only pollutant added to the water is heat. 
    Domestic wastes means liquid wastes (i) from the noncommercial preparation, cooking, and handling of food or (ii) containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions. It shall not contain groundwater, storm water, surface water, or cooling water or industrial wastewater. 
    Dwelling unit shall mean a house, an apartment a group of rooms, or a single room occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters. Separate living quarters are those in which the occupants have either: 
(1)  Direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall; or 
(2)  Complete kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
    Equivalent dwelling unit shall mean the number of units for a commercial and industrial user and is calculated by dividing the annual wastewater flow by 22,000 cubic feet, rounded down to a whole number. 
    Floatable oil shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated prior to entry into the sewage facilities and does not interfere with the sewage facilities. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of food. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as defined in this section. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction or pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
    Industrial user or user means a source of indirect discharge. 
    Industrial wastewater means the liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business establishments, as distinct from domestic wastes. 
    Infectious waste means waste which contains pathogens with sufficient virulence and quantity so that exposure to the waste by a susceptible host could result in disease. Under this definition, the normal microflors of the body are not classified as infectious. 
Categories of waste designated as infectious are as follows: 
a.  Human blood, body fluids, and blood products means all waste human blood, blood products (such as serum, plasma, and other blood components) and body fluids (such as suction fluid and wound drainage) which exist in nonabsorbed liquid form in more than trace quantities. 
b.  Contaminated sharps consists of discarded sharps, e.g., hypodermic needles, syringes, pasteur pipettes, broken glass and scalpel blades which may have come into contact with infectious agents during use in patient care or in medical research or have been removed from their original sterile container. 
c.  Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, and bedding refers to carcasses, body parts, and bedding of animals that were exposed to pathogens in research and in the production of biologicals or in vivo production of pharmaceuticals. 
d.  Discarded cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biological constitute infectious wastes because pathogenic organisms are present at high concentration in these materials. Included in this category are pathological laboratories and pharmaceutical companies, wastes from the production of biological and discarded live and attenuated vaccines. Also, culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures shall be designated as infectious waste. 
e.  Pathological waste consists of tissues, organs, body parts, removed during surgery and autopsy. 
    Infectious waste treatment means any method, technique, or process designed to eliminate the infectious hazard, i.e., to change the biological character or composition of waste so as to remove any disease-causing potential and to render such waste noninfectious by killing the infectious agents present in the waste. 
    Intercepting sewer means a sewer which receives sewage flow from a number of main sewers and conducts such flow to a point for treatment. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's RIPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA) the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Individual sewage disposal system (ISDS) means a system approved by Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management which provides sanitary sewage disposal by means other than discharge into a public sewer. 
    Lateral sewer means a sewer that discharges into a main or other sewer and has no other common sewer tributary. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production of wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (k) and (l)(iii) of 40 CFR 403 but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Ordinance shall mean the sewer use ordinance of the town, this chapter. 
    Owner shall mean any person who alone or jointly (a) has a legal title to any premises, or (b) has control of any premises, such as an agreement to purchase, agent, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee or guardian of the estate of a holder of a legal title. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into a waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's RIPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Person shall include an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation (including a quasi-government corporation) partnership, association, syndicate, municipality, municipal or state agency, fire district, club, nonprofit agency or any subdivision, commission, department, bureau, agency or department of state of federal government (including quasi-government corporation) or of any interstate body. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in grammoles per liter. 
    Polluted water means water containing man-made or man-induced alterations to its chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity. 
    POTW means publicly owned treatment works of the town. 
    Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a water pollution control facility. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or geological processes, except as prohibited by Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment standards means all applicable federal rules and regulations implementing section 403 of the Act, as well as any nonconflicting state or local standards. In cases of conflicting standards or regulations, the more stringent thereof shall be applied. 
    Privately-owned wastewater treatment facility shall mean a pump station, collection system and/or wastewater treatment facility owned by a user or an individual or association that is connected to a publicly owned wastewater treatment or collection system. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Rhode Island Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (RIPDES) means the Rhode Island system for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing discharge permits and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements pursuant to title 46, chapter 12 of the General Laws of Rhode Island and the Clean Water Act. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septage waste means the wastewater from a domestic individual sewage disposal system. 
    Service connection shall mean the building sewer pipe from the building up to and including the "Y" connection to the main public sewer line. 
    Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
    Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer commission shall be construed to mean the town council acting as sewer commission as constituted and created by Article XVII of the Charter, which sewer commission shall be vested with the powers and authorities granted pursuant to the Charter and Public Laws 1920, Chapter 2005, as may be amended from time to time, including but not limited to the power and authority to plan, acquire, construct, operate, maintain, extend and improve a sewerage disposal system for the town or any part or parts thereof. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU) means any industrial user of the town wastewater treatment system whose flow exceeds: 
(1)  An average of 25,000 gallons per day of process wastewater to the wastewater treatment system (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling or boiler blowdown wastewater), or 
(2)  Five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the wastewater treatment system, or 
(3)  Has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the treatment plant or for violating any pretreatment standard or 
(4)  A federal EPA categorical industry, or 
(5)  Industries discharging prohibited pollutants but who are not subject to federal EPA categorical standards or 
(6)  Industries with sanitary or non-toxic discharges using solvents, toxic chemicals and/or hazardous chemicals that could potentially be discharged into the sewers. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or if quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or immediately following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of water pollution control of the town or his duly appointed deputy agent or representative. 
    Total suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, wastewater, or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Town means the Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island, or duly appointed representatives thereof. 
    Toxic shall mean any substance listed as toxic under section 307(a)(1) of the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., listed under the Hazardous Substances Right-to-Know Act, R.I.G.L.  28-21-1 et seq., and as may otherwise be designated by the town. 
    Unpolluted water is water not containing any pollutants limited or prohibited by the effluent standards in effect, or water whose discharge will not cause any violation of receiving water quality standards. 
    User means any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the town's wastewater treatment system. 
    User classification means a classification of user based on the 1972 (or subsequent) edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) manual prepared by the office of management and budget. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to enter the town's wastewater treatment system. 
    Wastewater treatment system or wastewater treatment facility means any devices, facilities, structures, equipment or works owned or used by the town for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of industrial and domestic wastes, or necessary to recycle or reuse water at the most economical cost over the estimated life of the system, including intercepting sewer, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances, extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any work, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues from such treatment. 
    Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation; 40 CFR 403, and, 40 CFR 408. 
(Res. of 4-10-10; Ord. of 10-2-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08; Ord. No. 2009-7, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 15-3. - Prohibitions and limitations on wastewater discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
    Prohibitions on wastewater discharges. No person shall discharge or deposit or cause or allow to be discharged or deposited into the wastewater treatment system any wastewater which contains the following: 
(1)  Oil and grease. 
a.  Oil and grease concentrations of 100 mg/l or amounts from industrial facilities violating federal pretreatment standards. 
b.  Wastewater from industrial facilities containing floatable fats or oil, wax, grease, petroleum oil, cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin that may cause interference or pass-through. 
(2)  Explosive mixtures. Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewerage facilities or to the operation of the system. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the sewer system, be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (L.E.L.) of the meter. Also prohibited is the discharge of wastewater, which alone or by interaction with other wastewater, has a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140F (60C) using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, petroleum products, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides. 
(3)  Noxious material. Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gasses, which either singly or collectively interact with other wastes which are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, including wastewater which results in the presence of toxic substances, gasses, vapors or fumes within the wastewater treatment system in a quantity sufficient to cause worker health, safety or accessibility problems. 
(4)  Improperly shredded garbage. Garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in dimension. 
(5)  Radioactive wastes. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use and which will or may cause damage hazards to the wastewater treatment system or personnel operating the system. 
(6)  Solid or viscous wastes. Solid or viscous which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or otherwise interfere with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment system. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, grease, uncomminuted garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, and similar substances. 
(7)  Excessive discharge rate. Wastewaters at a flow rate or containing such concentrations or quantities that exceeds for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation and that would cause a treatment process upset at the wastewater treatment facility and subsequent loss of treatment efficiency. 
(8)  Toxic substance. Any toxic substances in amounts exceeding standards promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act, and chemical elements or compounds, phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, or any other substances which are not susceptible to treatment or which may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency of the treatment system, or that will pass through the system. 
This also includes any wastewater having a lethal concentration of 50 percent (LC 50 ) as determined by a toxicity test of 96 hours or less using 100 percent of the industrial user's discharge and aquatic test species chosen by the superintendent. 
(9)  Unpolluted waters. Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, water from cooling systems or of storm water or groundwater origin, which, in the opinion of the Superintendent, will significantly increase the hydraulic load on the collection system. This includes, but is not limited to, storm water, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pools drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water and unpolluted wastewater. 
(10)  Discolored material. Wastes with objectional color not removable by the treatment process. 
(11)  Corrosive wastes. Any waste which will cause corrosion or deterioration of the treatment system. All nondomestic wastes discharged to the public sewer system must have a pH value in the range of 6.0 to 10.0 standard units. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, acids, bases, hydroxides, peroxides, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds, and substances which will react with water to form corrosive products. 
(12)  Untreatable wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment system employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater treatment system effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(13)  High temperature liquids. Any liquid or vapor having temperature higher than 150F (65C) or which, either singly or in combination with other discharges would cause a temperature at the introduction into the treatment plan which exceeds 104F (40C). 
(14)  Viscous wastes. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperature between 32F and 150F (0C and 65C). 
(15)  Hazardous waste. Any material identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR, Part 261. 
(16)  Infectious waste. Any infectious or medical waste except such waste which receives infectious waste pretreatment and meets the approval of the superintendent. 
(17)  BOD, suspended solids, total nitrogen and total phosphorus, and flow. Industrial surcharge requirements will be in effect for BOD and TSS greater than 250 mg/l for each parameter. Total nitrogen in excess of 40 mg/l and total phosphorus in excess of 7 mg/l will also be subject to industrial surcharges. Industries exceeding these limitations shall be considered "significant", and shall require permitting. Flow reflects each industry's average daily discharge. In the event that loadings to the treatment facility approach capacity, the town reserves the right to place more stringent limitations on these parameters. 
(18)  Miscellaneous pollutants limitations. 
a.  All permitted industrial facilities shall discharge miscellaneous pollutants only in accordance with the limitations stated in their permits. 
b.  Facilities subject to these regulations to which permits have not yet been issued, shall have in these permits, permit limitations for miscellaneous pollutants. Permits issued may set limitations that shall not exceed: 
Parameter Concentration Cadmium 0.02 mg/l Chromium 0.70 mg/l Copper 0.80 mg/l Lead 0.15 mg/l Mercury 1.0 g/l Nickel 1.0 mg/l Zinc 0.60 mg/l Cyanide 0.19 mg/l Phenol 1.0 mg/l Silver 0.24 mg/l BOD 2000 mg/l TSS 2000 mg/l  
g/l = micrograms per liter 
mg/l = milligrams per liter 
More stringent limitations and additional parameters may be required based upon the specific industrial user. 
(b)  Dilution. No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with this chapter, the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the town or state. 
(c)  Action of superintendent. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (a), and which in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, receiving water, or which otherwise creates a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing sewer charges under the provisions of this chapter. 
    If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows for any user, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, laws, and regulations. All users which in the determination of the superintendent require pretreatment shall be subject to all applicable requirements of the town regional wastewater treatment facility industrial pretreatment program. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Ord. of 10-2-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 15-4. - Sewer connection and wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  General requirements. The following general requirements shall be applicable for all existing and proposed users of the wastewater treatment facility: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect, or permit the connection of, or authorize the connection of any service line to the wastewater treatment system without obtaining tie-in approval and a wastewater discharge permit from the town prior to making such connection. 
(2)  No building permit for the construction or alteration of any building or structure which requires a sewer connection shall be issued, unless the owner of the property on which such building or structure is to be situated has obtained a wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until the applicant has presented proof satisfactory to the superintendent that the applicant has either made application for a building permit or notified the building inspector's office of the proposed change in use or occupancy, in accordance with the town's zoning ordinance. 
(4)  The application shall be referred to the superintendent of the water pollution control facility. 
(5)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued on a first come, first served basis. 
(6)  Any service line which was connected without a town wastewater discharge permit, or which was connected as a result of any false statement, misrepresentation or nondisclosure on the application therefore or which was connected through any means which circumvented the limitations created by this article shall be disconnected from the sanitary sewer system. 
(7)  Any user violating any provision of this subsection (a) shall be fined in accordance with section 15-23. 
(b)  Classes of permits; applications. There shall be three classes of sewer permits: 
(1)  For significant industrial users. 
(2)  For domestic, commercial and industrial sources not classified as significant industrial users. 
(3)  For commercial users or establishments which do not discharge domestic wastes. This includes, but is not limited to the following establishments: restaurants, food service industries, photographic processors, laundromats and linen services, laboratory services, emergency care walk-in services, mortuaries and motor vehicle maintenance and/or washing facilities. 
(4)  The superintendent may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(5)  Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal, state and local pretreatment standards or other requirements. 
(c)  Permit applications. Prior to connecting and/or contributing to the wastewater treatment system, all users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit. 
(1)  Significant industrial user. Users classified as significant industrial users shall be required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit. All industrial users shall be required to obtain, complete and file with the town an industrial wastewater discharge permit application and questionnaire. 
Proposed new industrial users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the wastewater treatment system. 
An industrial user connected to or contributing to the wastewater treatment system without applying for or possessing an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be subject to enforcement procedures as deemed appropriate by the town. 
The town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the town may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions produced herein. 
(2)  Domestic commercial, and industrial users not classified as significant industrial users. Domestic users, commercial users, and industrial users not classified as significant, required to obtain a permit, shall complete and file with the town an application in the form prescribed by the town. 
A drainlayer licensed in the town or a state-licensed master plumber shall complete and file an application in the name of the owner, obtain the owner's signature thereon, pay the application and inspection fee, and submit a location plan. The location plan shall show the lot lines and dimensions, location of water pipes, gas lines, buried cable, location of permanent buildings and location of building sewers, storm drains and the water authority meter number and initial reading. The plans must be approved and stamped by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor. 
(3)  Commercial users or establishments discharging non-domestic wastes. Users discharging non-domestic wastes shall be required to obtain a permit, and shall complete and file with the town a commercial user pretreatment application in the form prescribed by the town. Such users shall install pretreatment apparatus if required by the superintendent. Such apparatus shall include but not be limited to grease traps, oil separators, silver reclamation units, lint screens and grit separators. 
Grease, oil and solids interceptors. An interceptor (trap) shall be required to receive the drainage from fixtures and equipment discharging excessive amounts of grease, oil or sand. This applies to establishments such as restaurants, clubs, hotel kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, car washes, and any establishment which, in the opinion of the superintendent, is necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients. All costs incurred in obtaining, installing and maintaining the interceptor and appurtenances shall be borne by the establishment. Interceptors shall be of type and capacity approved by the Plumbing and Drainage Institute and shall conform with the Building Officials Code Administrators Basic National Plumbing Code, Article 10, Section P-1002. All interceptors shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The establishment must clean the interceptor a minimum of twice per year. Maintenance records must be kept for a minimum of three years, and made available to wastewater treatment personnel. Interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
All such pretreatment apparatus shall be approved by the superintendent prior to installation. All cost incurred in obtaining, installing and maintaining the pretreatment apparatus and appurtenances shall be borne by the establishment. All pretreatment apparatus shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The establishment must clean the pretreatment apparatus a minimum of twice per year. Maintenance records must be kept for a minimum of three years, and made available to wastewater treatment personnel. Collected materials shall not be introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
All establishments regulated by this section must obtain and complete a grease and solids interceptor application with the town prior to installation and permit issuance. Such permits shall be renewable on an annual basis. 
(4)  Privately-owned wastewater treatment facilities. Privately-owned and operated pump stations and collection systems connected to the regional wastewater treatment system must adhere to the following: 
a.  Owners of privately-owned wastewater treatment facilities shall maintain the system in good working order. Proper operation and maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, effective performance based on facility design, adequate operator staffing and training, and adequate laboratory and process controls, including quality assurance procedures as determined to be appropriate by the town and backup or auxiliary facilities or similar systems to assure compliance or effective performance. Proper operation and maintenance must include emergency procedures and reporting requirements in case of power outages, natural disaster, labor shortage (whether the result of intentional work stoppages or epidemic), equipment failure, acts of terrorism/vandalism or sanitary sewer overflow. Reporting requirements shall include verbal notification to the director and the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM) as soon as possible, but not exceeding 24 hours of discovery of the event; and a written report must be submitted to the director and RDEM not more than five business days of the event's ending. 
b.  The owner shall submit, for review and approval by the superintendent, an operations and maintenance manual describing standards and procedures by which the wastewater treatment facilities, pump station(s) and/or collection system(s) will be staffed, operated and maintained during normal and emergency conditions. Should development of the plan include the practice of engineering, the plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer (registered in the state). 
1.  Owners of existing privately owned pump stations shall submit an operations and maintenance manual within one year of passage of this article and pay all associated fees as presented in section 15-21 and exhibit A (exhibit A is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the town clerk). 
2.  For newly constructed privately owned pump stations, the operations and maintenance manual must be submitted prior to the director issuing a sewer permit. The fee shall be submitted at the time of the submittal as presented in section 15-21 and exhibit A. 
3.  The contents of the operations and maintenance manual shall be as outlined in the "Standard Sanitary Sewer Requirements of the Town of West Warwick". 
c.  Provide all required easements that will allow the town access to the site for unannounced periodic inspections. 
d.  The owner shall pay an annual permit fee for the operation of the facilities. The fee shall be adopted by the town from time to time. 
e.  The owner is required to conduct (at a minimum) monthly inspections of the pump station. The inspection reports shall be forwarded to the superintendent within three business days after the inspection. At a minimum, the inspection report shall provide the name of the individual or firm performing the inspection, hours of operation for each pump, generator run time, summary of alarms, any maintenance undertaken during that month, condition of the station, and recommendations. 
(d)  Fee. A permit and inspection fee per unit for a domestic or commercial building sewer permit must be paid to the town at the time the application is filed. The fee provides for site inspections and is specified in section 15-21. 
The permit and inspection fee for an industrial building sewer permit must be paid to the town at the time of the application. The fee provides for site inspections, and is specified in section 15-21. 
The permit application fee for an establishment requiring a grease, oil or solids interceptor (trap), silver recovery system, etc. must be paid to the town at the time of the application. The application fee is specified in section 15-21. 
(e)  Owner's cost. The owner is to bear cost, expense of installation and connection. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(f)  Permit conditions. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, and fees established by the town. The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. Limits shall be derived from federal categorical standards, and/or calculated local limit values using EPA approved methodology; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspections and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the town, and affording town access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the town of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of accidental discharges as per subsection 15-5(f); 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the town to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(g)  Permit duration and modification. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit renewal a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of a permit may be subject to modification by the town during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in section 15-3 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective dates of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(h)  Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. 
(i)  All applicable fees charged by the sewer commission shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a sewer permit. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08; Ord. No. 2009-7, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 15-5. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users current discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the town a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standards, shall submit to the town a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the town of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed and sampled in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (i) or as specified in the user's permit. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standards. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (k) of this section. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. 
(1)  The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (a)(2)g. above: 
The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
The user shall submit a progress report to the town no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the town. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the town a report containing the information described in subsections (a)(2)d., e., and f. above. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit or production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (k) of this section. 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the town, but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (k) of this section. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the town using the procedures prescribed in subsection (i) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the town of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the town (401-822-9228) of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the town, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (1) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the town as may be required by the town. 
(h)  Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the town within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the town within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(i)  Analytical requirements. 
(1)  All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
Except as indicated below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the town may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum number of grab samples which are representative of the effluent being discharged, as determined by the superintendent. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(j)  Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the town. 
(k)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 15-6. - Town's responsibility. 
(a)  The town shall be responsible for all repair and maintenance of all main sewer lines up to the Y connection for a building service connection. 
(b)  The property owner shall be responsible for the repair and maintenance of the building service connection pipe, up to and including the Y connection. 
(c)  Owners share the responsibility equally for a common chimney. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 15-7. - Plugging of discontinued sewer connection. 
(a)  Plugging required. Upon the permanent discontinuance of the use of the town's sewer system at any premises, including discontinuance caused by the abandonment of any premises, the tearing down of any building or any other cause, the property owner shall cause the connection to the sewer main of the town to be plugged in a manner which will be strong enough to prevent any leakage of any fluids. All such plugging shall be subject to inspection and approval by the town provided that no permit fee, inspection fee or other fee shall be charged for such inspection. If the owner of the property fails to plug the sewer connection in a satisfactory manner within 30 days of the time the owner is notified in writing by the town to plug the sewer service line, the town shall proceed to plug the service line and bill the owner for the costs. The cost may be collected by the town and a civil action filed in court. The collection of the costs in a civil action shall not prevent the filing of an action for a fine for the violation of this article. 
(b)  Violation. Any user violating the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 15-23. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 15-8. - Construction of sewers and connections. 
(a)  Applicability. All construction procedures, materials and specifications shall conform with the "Standard Sanitary Sewer Requirements of the Town of West Warwick" and all applicable federal, state, and town building and plumbing codes. Any deviations from these prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(b)  Authorization. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent. 
Any person applying for a new connection of large volume or unusual character of pollutants or any persons proposing a substantial change in volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the superintendent. 
(c)  Drainlaying permit. Building sewers and connections shall be made only by drainlayers licensed to perform such work in the town, and/or master plumber licensed by the state. Notice must be left at the office of the superintendent at least 48 hours before work is begun on a drain, and no material shall be used or work covered until inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector, the superintendent or his agent. Such information as the town has with regards to the position of junctions or branches will be furnished to drainlayers but at their risk as to the accuracy of the same. 
Drainlayers shall complete and file application for drains in the name of the owner, obtain the owner's signature thereon, pay application and inspection fee, and complete the location plan required by subsection (d) of this section. 
Drainlayers who are not licensed master plumbers within the state must complete the requirements for qualifying as a licensed drainlayer in the town as specified in section 5-3 of this Code, specifically a blanket bond in the sum of $10,000.00 and three certified reference letters. 
Licenses for drainlayers who are not a licensed master plumber within the state shall be renewed the last day of December each year. The annual fee for the license is stated in section 15-21. 
(d)  Location plans. Accompanying each application for permit shall be a location plan showing the lot lines and dimensions, location of water pipes, gas lines, buried cable, location of permanent buildings and location of building sewers, storm drains and the water authority meter number and initial reading. The plans must be approved and stamped by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor. 
(e)  Costs. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner, including but not limited to, costs of extending the public sewer system to the nearest town main to service private facilities. The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(f)  Private sewer exceptions. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building. The lot owner of a rear lot shall obtain and file in the town records a sewer easement from the front lot owner for the use of the sewer in this event. 
(g)  Use of old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(h)  Size, slope, alignment, etc. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the town including the sanitary sewer standards. All connections are to be made gastight and watertight. 
(i)  Elevation. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(j)  Connection of roof downspouts, areaway drains, etc. No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other surfaces runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(k)  Pipe size. Unless expected below, all lateral sewer pipes shall have a minimum diameter of eight inches. 
(1)  Sewer pipes for house connections from the sewer main to the property line shall have a minimum diameter of six inches. 
(2)  Sewer pipes for single-family dwelling house from the property line to the building shall have a minimum diameter of four inches. 
(l)  Lint traps. Commercial laundries shall be equipped with an interceptor having a wire basket or similar device, removable for cleaning, that will prevent passage into the drainage system of solids one-half inch (13 mm) or larger in size, string, rags, buttons, or other materials detrimental to the public sewage system. 
(m)  Clean-outs. Clean-outs shall be installed at the property line, at every fitting over 221/2 degrees and at 75-foot intervals up to 150 feet. Service connections which are longer than 150 feet shall have sanitary manholes installed at a location(s) as directed by the superintendent. 
(n)  Backflow valves. One backflow valve per unit shall be installed prior to connection to the town's sewer system for all residential and multi-unit dwellings. The quantity of backflow valves necessary for commercial and industrial establishments must be submitted and approved by the superintendent prior to installation. 
(o)  Notification of readiness for inspection and connection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent 24 hours prior to the applicant requiring inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent. 
(p)  Testing. The superintendent shall apply appropriate tests to the pipes, and the drainlayer and contractor, at their own expense, shall furnish all necessary tools, labor, materials, and assistance for such tests and shall remove or repair any defective materials when so ordered by the superintendent. 
(q)  Guarding of excavation, restoration of streets and sidewalks. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town. 
(r)  Crossing roads, driveways, etc. The contractor shall not block any driveway, street, road or railroad at any time without permission of the superintendent, director of public works or other controlling agencies. Every effort shall be made to permit the movement of vehicular traffic at all times. Whenever it becomes necessary to cross or interfere with roads, walks or drives, whether public or private, the contractor shall maintain, at his own expense, and subject to the approval of the superintendent, safe bridges or other means of egress. 
(s)  Excavation and repaving. No person shall open any road, street or highway in the town for the purpose of installing sewer lines without first receiving a permit and complying with all of the criteria required by sections 16-60 through 16-72 of this Code. Failure to comply with these regulations shall be deemed a violation of this Code. Any person or persons in violation of this section shall be liable for a fine as specified in section 16-62. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 15-9. - Septage waste. 
(a)  The contents of tank truck or tank wagon, licensed by the state department of environmental management, may be discharged into the sewer system of the town subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  Every person desiring to discharge the contents of any such tank truck or tank wagon into the sewer system shall first obtain a permit from the superintendent of the treatment facility. 
(2)  Such a permit shall be issued annually; provided, however, that the superintendent of the treatment facility may at any time suspend or revoke any such permit because of the violation by the holder thereof of the rules and regulations herein prescribed, or for other just cause or complaint. 
(3)  The fee for such a permit is stated in section 15-21. 
(4)  Such contents shall be discharged into the sewer system only at such a point designated by the superintendent. 
(5)  Such contents shall be discharged into the sewer system only during the hours designated by the superintendent. 
(6)  Such contents shall not contain any articles or substances which may tend to injure any part of the sewer system. 
(7)  No person shall discharge into the sewer system contents removed from any privy vaults, septage tanks or cesspools located outside the regional wastewater service area as defined in the facility plan as approved by the state department of environmental management in 1980 or subsequent approved editions. 
(8)  Every tank truck or wagon whose contents shall be discharged into the sewer system shall be equipped with a proper mud valve or similar device, satisfactory to the superintendent to ensure the clean and complete discharge of such contents into such container or receptacle as may be provided by the superintendent. 
(9)  The contents of hand tubs or barrels shall not be discharged into the sewer system. 
(10)  The disposal of industrial waste from haulers is prohibited. 
(11)  Waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. The form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, volume and characteristics of waste. 
(12)  A fee shall be charged for the discharge of waste materials into the sewer system: The fee is stated in section 15-21. 
(13)  Violators of this section shall be subject to the conditions of section 15-15, and assessed a penalty in accordance with subsection 15-23(d). 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 15-10. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Authority. In accordance with federal regulation 40 CFR 403 and the state pretreatment regulations, the town shall operate, maintain and enforce a pretreatment program. The purpose of the program shall be to implement national pretreatment standards or locally, generating site specific limits, in order to control pollutants which pass through or interfere with the treatment processes of the town regional wastewater treatment facility, or which may contaminate sewage sludge and/or compost. 
(b)  Pretreatment. Industry shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with pretreatment requirements and/or limitations mandated by the town. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the town shall submit detailed plans, showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures to the town for their review and comment prior to the construction of the facilities. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the town prior to implementation. 
(c)  Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. Pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities for any waters or wastes shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Res. of 4-10-90) 
Sec. 15-11. - Industrial monitoring. 
    The owner or operator of any premises of facility discharging industrial wastes into the system shall install at his own cost and expense, suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate the accurate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes. Such equipment shall be maintained in proper working order and kept safe accessible at all times. 
    The monitoring equipment shall be located and maintained on industrial user's premises outside of the building. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the town may allow such facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, with the approval of the highway commissioner, and located so that it will not be obstructed by public utilities, landscaping, or parking vehicles. In the event that such an arrangement is not possible, the town may allow monitoring equipment to be located inside the building, provided the location is approved by the town. 
    When more than one user can discharge into a common sewer, the town shall require installation of separate monitoring equipment for each user. When there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the town may require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each separate discharge. 
    Whether constructed on public property, the monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the town requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 15-12. - Sampling and analysis. 
(a)  Compliance determination. Compliance determinations shall be conducted by the use of grab samples, time composited samples, or both, as determined necessary by the town. Composite samples may be taken over a 24-hour period, or over a longer or shorter time span, as determined necessary by the town to meet the needs of specific circumstances. 
(b)  Analysis of industrial wastewaters. Laboratory analysis of industrial wastewater samples shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136 or equivalent methods approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(c)  Control manholes. When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters, and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with the standard sanitary sewer requirements of the town. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 15-13. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article and for the purpose of inspecting and copying the user's discharge records. The town shall also have the authority to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the town employees and the town shall indemnify the company the loss or damage to its property by town employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection 15-12(c). 
(c)  The superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 15-14. - Protection from damage. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the sewage facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 15-15. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  General. Any owner, person, user or significant industrial user found in violation of any part of this chapter, discharge permit, compliance schedule or order, or any order of the town shall be subject to enforcement procedures. Such procedures shall include but are not limited to: revocation of permit, suspension of discharge, show cause hearing, sewer commission order, legal action and/or penalty costs. 
(b)  Compliance schedule. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate the ordinance or a permit or order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate pretreatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including installation of pretreatment technology, addition self-monitoring and management practices. 
(c)  Permit revocation. 
(1)  Enforcement costs. The permittee agrees to reimburse the town for the cost of enforcing the permit, including reasonable attorney's fees, if violation of the permit is found by a hearing officer during the course of a show cause hearing or if such decision is appealed, then in court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Damage to facilities. The permittee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the town from and against any liability, loss, cost, expense or actual damage (including reasonable attorney's and accountants' fees incurred in defending or prosecuting any claim for any such liability, loss, cost, expense or damage) suffered by the town and caused by discharges from the permittee, either singly or by interaction with other wastes. 
(3)  Other violations. Violation of any of the following conditions may result in the revocation of a wastewater discharge permit. 
a.  Failure to accurately and fully report the wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics of its discharge. 
b.  Failure to report significant changes in wastewater volume, constituents, or characteristics. 
c.  Failure to allow town personnel statutorily authorized access for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
d.  Failure to pay any and all costs. 
e.  Violation of any condition of a permit or this chapter. 
f.  Failure to correct violations that have already resulted in the suspension of the permit. 
g.  Failure to adhere to compliance schedule or order. 
(d)  Suspension of discharge. The town may suspend the wastewater service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the town, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare or persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the town to violate any condition of its RIPDES permit. 
Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the town shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The town shall reinstate the wastewater discharge and/or the wastewater service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any further occurrence shall be submitted to the town within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(e)  Show cause hearing. 
(1)  If a violation is not corrected within the time frame mandated by the town, the superintendent may order any person who causes or allow an unauthorized discharge to show cause before the town council, acting as a sewer commission, why service should not be terminated. A notice shall be served on the offending party, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the town council, acting as a sewer commission, regarding the violation and directing the offending party to show cause before said authority why an order should not be made directing the termination of service. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(2)  The town council, acting as sewer commission, shall conduct the hearing and shall: 
a.  Issue notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relating to any matter involved in such hearings; 
b.  Take the evidence and proceed to conduct the hearing as it may deem just and proper and in accordance with the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island; 
c.  Review the evidence and hearing testimony, including transcription and other evidence. 
(3)  At any public hearing, testimony taken before the hearing authority or any person designated by it, must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any part of the hearing upon payment of the usual charges. 
(4)  After the town council, acting as a sewer commission, had reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the party responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are properly operated, and such further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate. 
(5)  An order issued by the commission or any action taken thereon, shall not be construed to limit or restrict the right of the aggrieved party to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief from any decision, fine or penalty issued by the town council acting as sewer commission, which appeal or relief sought shall be taken within ten business days of the issuance of the order. 
(f)  Legal action. Any discharge in violation of the substantive provisions of this chapter or an order of the town council, acting as a sewer commission, shall be considered a public nuisance. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the town collection system contrary to the substantive provision of this chapter or any order of the town council, the town solicitor shall commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the superior court of this county. 
(g)  Reporting of violators. The town council, acting as the sewer commission, will publish an annual list of violators in the local edition of the Providence Journal and the Kent County Daily Times. 
(h)  Penalty costs. Any person who is found to have violated an order of the town council, acting as a sewer commission, or who has failed to comply with any provision of a discharge permit issued by the town, or provision of this chapter, and the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder, shall be fined in accordance with subsection 15-23(d). In addition, the town may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued by the town. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 15-16. - Industrial user surcharge. 
(a)  Charges for the treatment of industrial wastes shall be based on the "average cost pricing" system as recommended in Federal Guidelines "Equitable Recovery of Industrial Waste Treatment Costs in Municipal Systems", published by the Environmental Protection Agency in October, 1971. The annual cost to industry shall be computed according to the formula: 
C;sub \sub; = V o V;sub \sub; + B o (B x -2.085V;sub \sub;) + S o (S x -2.085(V;sub \sub;) + N o (N x -.333V;sub \sub;) + P o (P x -.0584V;sub \sub;) + v f V;sub \sub; + b f B;sub \sub; + S f S;sub \sub; + D(EDUs) + M 
Where, 
C;sub \sub; = Total charge to industrial user, $ 
V o = Average unit cost (operation and maintenance) of transport and treatment, chargeable to volume, $/1,000 gallons. 
B o = Average cost (operation and maintenance) of treatment, chargeable to BOD, $/pound. 
S o = Average unit cost (operations and maintenance) of transport and treatment chargeable to TSS, $/1,000 gallons. 
N o = Average cost (operation and maintenance) of treatment, chargeable to Total Nitrogen, $/pound. 
P o = Average cost (operation and maintenance) of treatment, chargeable to Total Phosphorus, $/pound. 
V;sub \sub; = Volume of wastewater from industrial user, 1,000 gallons/yr. 
B;sub \sub; = Concentration of BOD, mg/l 
B x = Weight of BOD, pounds 
S;sub \sub; = Concentration of TSS, mg/l 
S x = Weight of TSS, pounds 
N x = Weight of Total Nitrogen, pounds 
P x = Weight of Total Phosphorus, pounds 
V f = Average unit cost (fixed) of transport and treatment, chargeable to volume, $1,000 gallons. 
b f = Average unit cost (fixed) of treatment chargeable to BOD, $/pound. 
S f = Average unit cost (fixed) of treatment, chargeable to S.S., $/pounds. 
D = Debt Service Repayment 
M = Pretreatment Administration 
v o = Charge per 1,000 gallons (changes annually) 
b o = Charge per pound (changes annually) 
s o = Charge per pound (changes annually) 
v f = $0.0877/1,000 gallons 
b f = $0.91/100 pounds 
s f = $1.14/100 pounds 
v f , b f , and s f , were assessed based upon the Industrial cost recovery formula established by EPA and the remaining industries subject these fees are The Original Bradford Soap and Riverpoint Lace Works. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2006-10, 5-2-06, eff. 5-27-06; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 15-17. - Annual sewage system user charges. 
(a)  The following annual charges for use of the sewerage system of the town are hereby established, to be paid by every person, firm or corporation whose particular sewer enters into said system. 
(1)  The cost of operation and maintenance of the complete sewer system shall be financed solely from sewer customer charges. 
(2)  A sewer charge shall be levied to each customer upon connection to the public sewage system. The service charge shall be based upon the quantity of water used at the premises of the customer as measured by the water meter in use thereat, except as otherwise hereinafter provided. 
(3)  For domestic and commercial users, the rates and charges for each billing period shall be determined by each user's annual water use. The rates shall be established from time to time by town council resolution. The council, acting as a sewer commission, may establish a minimum amount per billing period which all customers must pay for which a maximum contribution of wastewater is allowed. 
(4)  For industrial users exceeding conventional domestic BOD and total suspended solids total nitrogen and total phosphorus concentrations as defined in subsection 15-3(a)(17), the rates and charges for each billing period shall be determined by each user's water use in combination with a surcharge for BOD, TSS, total nitrogen and total phosphorus concentrations which exceed conventional domestic values. The rates shall be established from time to time by town council resolution. The council, acting as a sewer commission, may establish a minimum amount per billing period which all customers must pay for which a maximum contribution of wastewater is allowed. 
(5)  In the event a lot, parcel of land, building or premises discharging sanitary commercial or industrial sewage or other liquids into the town sewage system either directly or indirectly, is not a user of water in the whole supplied by public or private water utility, then, in each such case the consumption shall be set at 10,000 cubic feet per year unless a meter is installed and readings are provided to and verified by the town. The superintendent must be notified if and when a property is connected to a well. 
(6)  In the event two or more lots, parcels of real estate, residences, dwelling units or buildings discharging sanitary sewage water or other liquids into the sanitary sewage system of the town are users of water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then, in each case for billing purposes, the minimum charge for the sewer rates and charges shall be multiplied by the number of lots, parcels or real estate, residences, dwelling units or buildings serves through the single water meter. 
(7)  Charges for the sewage disposal service shall be billed and collected by the town council, acting as a sewer commission. 
(8)  Outside meters. In the event water is used for purposes which do not enter the town sewage system, including but not limited to water used in pools and sprinkler systems, the owner of such premises may, at his own expense, install such meter as shall be approved by the superintendent for the measurement of water so used in order that a proper allowance may be made, and the sewage service charge reduced accordingly. The superintendent may set policies and procedures for documentation of outside water usage. 
(9)  The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants occupying the property serviced, but such billing shall in no way relieve the owner or owners from liability in the event payment is not made as herein required. The owners of property served which are occupied by tenants shall have the right to examine the collection records of the town for the purpose of determining whether such rates and charges have been paid by such tenants, provided that such examination shall be made at the office in which the records are kept and during the regular business hours of such office. 
(10)  Each charge or service fee levied pursuant to this chapter is hereby made a lien upon the corresponding lot, land or premises served by the connection to the sanitary sewage system of the town. Failure to pay said charge or service fee within the prescribed period time, such charge or fee shall then be collected as other town taxes are collected. The official record of the town shall constitute notice of penalty and of said lien as herein provided. 
(11)  All money collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in a sewage enterprise fund and expenditures from which are to be made only for maintenance, operation, administration, treatment, debt service and other related sewage system expenses. 
(12)  The town, in addition to the other remedies provided by this chapter may institute legal proceedings to collect overdue sewer service charges. Penalties may be added to the original sewer bill for late payment which penalties shall be set by the town council by resolution. 
(13)  Said sewer use charges may be paid in four installments of 25 percent due on or before the 15th day of July and the remaining installments as follows: 
Twenty-five percent on or before October 15th, 25 percent on or before January 15th, and 25 percent on or before April 15th. 
If the total sewer use bill is less than $100.00, it must be paid in full on or before July 15th. Each installment of sewer use, if paid on or before the last day of each installment period successively and in order, shall be free from any charge for interest. If the installment or any succeeding installment of sewer use is not paid by the last day of the perspective installment period or periods as they occur, then the whole tax or remaining unpaid balance of the tax, as the case may be, shall immediately become due and payable and shall carry until collected a penalty at the rate of 18 percent per annum. Unpaid accounts shall be charged and collected in accordance with Rhode Island General Laws. 
Sewer use charges for industrial users may be billed bi-annually or more frequently, with charges due and payable within 30 days of billing. Interest on and collection of delinquent accounts shall be the same as for non-industrials users and in accordance with Rhode Island General Laws. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Ord. of 12-11-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Res. No. 97-68, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 15-18. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Industrial user confidentiality requests will be honored in accordance with Rule 16 of the Rhode Island pretreatment regulations R.I.G.L. 46-12-19. In addition, the user must be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production that are protected as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  Any information submitted to the town pursuant to Rule 16 of the Rhode Island Pretreatment Regulations and authorized by R.I.G.L. 46-12-19 et seq. may be claimed as confidential by the submittee. This claim must be asserted at the time of submission in the manner described below. If no claim is made at the time of submission, the town or authorized federal agency may make the information available to the public without further notice. Effluent data, however, shall at all times be available to the public without restriction. 
(c)  A business confidentiality claim may be asserted by attaching or placing on this information, a cover sheet, or a stamped or typed legend upon each page, or other suitable form of notice employing language such as "trade secret," "proprietary" or "company confidential." Allegedly confidential portions of otherwise nonconfidential documents should clearly be identified as such, and may be submitted separately to facilitate identification and handling by the town. If confidential treatment is desired only until a certain date or until the occurrence of a certain event, this should be stated on the notice as well. 
(d)  Information covered by such claims will be disclosed only on the extent, and by means of the procedures, set forth in the federal EPA Regulations at 40 CFR 2. 
(e)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(f)  In addition to the provisions of G.L. 1956,  42-12-19, all records maintained by or submitted to the town are also governed by G.L. 1956,  38-2-1 et seq., entitled "Access to public records". 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 15-19. - Saving clause. 
    If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court or competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and articles shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97) 
Sec. 15-20. - Conflict. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Ord. of 10-2-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97) 
_____
Sec. 15-21. - Summary of fees. 
(a)  The fees included in prior sections of this ordinance are presented in exhibit A, which is not set out herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the town clerk. These fees may be revised from time to time by resolution of the town council, acting as a sewer commission. The following are the categories listed in exhibit A. 
Purpose Fee Drainlaying Permit application and annual fee $$ Insurance requirements:  Property damage and bodily injury liability $$ for each occurrence 
$$ aggregate  Drainlayer's bond $$ Septage haulers Annual fee $$ Disposal fee $$ per hundred gallons Rhode Island uniform septage disposal fee $$ per hundred gallons (or fee as set by RIDEM) Recreational vehicle disposal fee $$ per hundred gallons Connection to town sewer system Domestic users  Permit application fee $$ per unit  Connection costs To be paid by owner Commercial users  Permit application fee $$ per unit  Connection costs To be paid by owner Significant industrial users  Permit application fee $$ per unit  Connection costs To be paid by owner Privately-owned pump stations  Permit application fee $$  Annual inspection fee $$ Sewer extension  Permit application fee $$ Inspection fee  Sewers installed within the regional wastewater service area $$ per linear foot Repairs to service connections  Permit application fee $$ Pretreatment Program Charges Significant industrial users  Annual permit fee   Classes 1 through 3 $$   Class 4 $$ 
To be billed with use charges Any and all commercial users  Pretreatment application $$ Grease interceptor  Permit application fee $$  Annual inspection fee $$  Installation costs To be paid by owner Gas stations (grit traps)  Permit application fee $$  Annual inspection fee $$  Installation costs To be paid by owner Photo finishing (See Commercial Application)  Annual inspection fee $$ Laundromats/cleaners  Annual inspection fee $$ Silver users  Annual program administration charge (with provision of certification and waste manifests) $$ 
Failure to provide certification by the program deadline will result in assessment of the annual program inspection fee of $$ Annual use charges Domestic and commercial users $$ per hundred cubic feet based on 80% of the actual water meter reading, set annually by Resolution of the West Warwick Sewer Commission Industrial users $$ per hundred cubic feet based on actual metered water or wastewater flows; also $$ per pound of BOD over the design strength of 250 mg/l and $$ per pound of total suspended solids over the design strength of 250 mg/l, $$ per pound of total nitrogen over the design strength of 40 mg/l, and $$ per pound of total phosphorus over the design strength of 7 mg/l, set annually by resolution of the town sewer commission Bonds repayment $$ per dwelling unit (or EDU) Quaker pump station upgrade fee  Facilities larger than a duplex $$ per gallon of wastewater to be discharged to this pump station (based on average daily flow) Brookfield pump station upgrade fee $$ per residential unit connecting to the sewer system upstream of this pump station Out of town connections  Lien processing fee $$  Line recording fee As set by city or town where facility is located Dye tests $$ 
(reimbursable if testing determines property is not connected to the sewer system) Charges for copies Costs for copies of documents deemed public records shall be as set forth by G.L.  38-2-4, as may be amended Checks written/insufficient funds $$ processing fee following a second unsuccessful attempt to re-deposit the check Sewer assessment fees  Residential 
Single-family units and condominium units Assessment of $$ payable over 20 years and a rate of 7% interest on the entire unpaid balance charged yearly after the first year  Multi-family units (up to and including 2-5 units) $$ per unit  Multi-family units (additional units over 5) $$ per additional unit Commercial $$ per thousand for the first one hundred thousand dollars of assessed value and, thereafter, at a rate of $$ per thousand on the remaining assessed value, as established by the assessor of the town or the community where the property is located, at a rate of 7% interest for a period of 20 years, and which assessment amount shall be based on the date of assessment Compost Residential use (small amounts) No charge to residents of the town and regional participating communities. Charges and quantities subject to approval of superintendent Non-residential use Minimum charge $$ per cubic yard, freight on board at wastewater treatment facility  
(Res. of 4-10-90; Ord. of 10-5-93; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Res. No. 97-338,  1-1, 12-2-97; Res. No. 99-124, 4-20-99; Res. No. 2000-92,  1-1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 2000-17,  1-1, 11-14-00; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2005-20, 12-6-05, eff. 12-28-05; Ord. No. 2006-10, 5-2-06, eff. 5-27-06; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08; Ord. No. 2009-7, 6-16-09) 
_____
Sec. 15-22. - Collection of delinquent sewer charges and fees. 
    The town council, acting as a sewer commission, may develop a policy and establish procedures for the collection sewer charges as necessary to ensure timely receipt of said charges. Any such policy and procedures, and any revisions thereto, shall be subject to approval by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2003-1, 2-4-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-1, adopted Feb. 4, 2003, renumbered the former  15-22-15-26 as 15-23-15-27 and enacted a new  15-22 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
Sec. 15-23. - Summary of penalties. 
(a)  Any user or person violating any provision of the general requirements for sewer connection and wastewater discharge permits, subsection 15-4(a), shall be fined up to $500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during on or which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  Any user or person violating any provision of section 15-7 shall be fined up to $500.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during on or which a violation occurs or continues. 
(c)  Any user or person violating any provision of subsection 15-8(s) shall be fined not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment of not more than 30 days. Each day of violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Any person who is found to have violated an order of the town council or who fails to comply with any provision of a discharge permit issued by the town, or provision of this chapter, and the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder, shall be fined up to $25,000.00 per day for each offense, for each and every day during which a violation occurs. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the town may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rule and regulation issued hereunder, or a discharge permit issued by the town. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2003-1, 2-4-03) 
Note- See the editor's note to  15-22. 
Sec. 15-24. - Authority and applicability. 
    All rules, regulations and requirements stated in this chapter shall be complied with by all users of the town's sewer system, regardless of whether or not the user is located in the town. The town has this authority, as stated in Rhode Island General Law, Chapter 45-6-2.3, amended 1987. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2003-1, 2-4-03) 
Note- See the editor's note to  15-22. 
Sec. 15-25. - Approvals of sewer connections for outside town. 
    Granted for one year by sewer commission; extension. Whenever the town council, acting as a sewer commissioner, grants a permit for property located outside the town, said permit shall expire one year from the date of the granting of said permit, unless the applicant exercises commences construction or requests the town council, acting as a sewer commission, to extend the time for performance for an additional one-year period. The granting of said extension is entirely at the discretion of the town council, and the council may require the applicant to demonstrate, through testimony or other evidence, that the effect of the extension of the permit has not substantially changed since the original application. 
(Res. of 4-10-90; Res. No. 97-06, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2003-1, 2-4-03) 
Note- See the editor's note to  15-22. 
Sec. 15-26. - Sewer use board of review. 
(a)  Established; terms; vacancies. There shall be a sewer use board of review consisting of three members appointed by the town council. Each to serve a three-year term, no more than two of whom shall be members of the same political party at any one time, and all of whom shall be electors and residents of the town. The terms of the members of said board shall be arranged in such manner that the term of one member shall expire each year. All members of said board in office at the time of the taking effect of this section shall continue to serve until the expiration of their respective terms, and all members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified or until they shall cease to have qualifications for office set forth in this section. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for appointments to the board in this section. 
(b)  Procedure. The sewer use board of review shall enact such rules and regulations as are necessary to provide for the receiving, considering and disposition of appeals. Any such rules shall be subject to approval by town council. The rules and regulations, may be amended from time to time as, in the opinion of the town council, acting as sewer commission, be necessary. It is the intent that the procedure before the board shall be informal and of a nature calculated to affect justice in as simple a manner as possible, provided that the requirements of this section are observed. 
(c)  Appeals; records; payment required. The sewer use board of review shall hear and consider the appeals of any person or business concerning the amount of the sewer usage fee. The superintendent of sewers or his/her designee shall attend all hearings of the board to explain the sewer usage billing, but shall have no vote. The clerk of the board shall keep an accurate record of its proceedings which shall be available for public inspection. The board shall meet at such times as may be necessary to hear appeals. No appeal shall be considered unless it is made in writing and is received by the board no later than three months from the date that the sewer usage fee is due and payable unless for cause shown by an applicant in the satisfaction of the board the appeal period should be extended. No appeal shall be considered by the board unless the sewer usage fee that is due and payable has been paid under protest. 
(d)  Correction; final action. If it appears that the sewer usage fee has been inaccurately or inequitably computed, then the board may recommend to the town council a correction of the fee. The town council, by resolution can take final action as to any such recommended correction and/or refund. Upon such final council action, the finance director shall be authorized to make any such refunds. 
(e)  Nonlimitation of appeal. The taking of an appeal to the sewer use board of review or any action thereon shall not be construed to limit or restrict the right of any taxpayer to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief from any sewer usage fee determined by the tax collector or subsequently heard by the board of review. 
(Ord. of 10-3-89,  1-5; Res. No. 97-68, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2003-1, 2-4-03; Ord. No. 2008-2, 2-5-08) 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory Ord. of October 3, 1989,  1-5, was codified herein by the editor as  15-25 and was subsequently renumbered as  15-26 by Ord. No. 2003-1, adopted Feb. 4, 2003. 
Charter reference- Department of finance,  701 et seq.; sewer commission,  1701 et seq. 
Sec. 15-27. - Amendment to rules and regulations. 
    This chapter may be amended from time to time as, in the opinion of the town council, acting as sewer commission, may be necessary and appropriate. The town council, acting as sewer commission, shall amend the sewer use ordinance by giving notice of such amendment in accordance with applicable Rhode Island General Laws. 
(Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-21-0; Ord. No. 2003-1, 2-4-03) 
Note- See the editor's note to  15-22. 
Sec. 15-28. - Drain layer license. 
    Drain layer license. Every person making application for a license to carry on the business of laying drains out of buildings as a licensed drain layer shall pay the wastewater treatment facility the license fee as shall from time to time be set by resolution of the town council before a license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2018-8 , 3-20-18) 
Chapter 15.5 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 92-2,  1, adopted March 3, 1992, repealed ch. 15.5 in its entirety. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions codified herein as a new ch. 15.5. Said provisions have been rearranged for the purposes of classification at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 5; Pawtuxet River protection,  8-30 et seq.; planning and development, ch. 13; development commission,  13-16 et seq.; floodplain management,  13-35 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, ch. 16; subdivisions, ch. 17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15.5-1. - Purpose. 
    The town council hereby finds that excessive quantities of soil are eroding from certain areas that are undergoing development from non agricultural uses such as housing developments, industrial areas, recreational facilities and roads. This erosion makes necessary costly repairs to gullies, washed out fills, roads and embankments. The resulting sediment clogs the storm sewers, road ditches and muddies streams, leaves deposits of silt in ponds and reservoirs and is considered a major water pollutant. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from occurring as a result of nonagricultural development with the town by requiring proper provisions for water disposal, and the protection of soil surfaces during and after construction, in order to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the town. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Sec. 15.5-2. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to any situation involving any disturbance to the terrain, topsoil or vegetative ground cover upon any property within the town after determination of applicability by the building official or his/her designee based upon criteria outlined in section 15.5-4 below. Compliance with the requirements as described herein shall not be construed to relieve the owner/applicant of any obligations to obtain necessary state or federal permits. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92; Ord. No. 2018-11 , 4-24-18) 
Sec. 15.5-3. - Plan approvals. 
    All plan approvals under this chapter shall be made by the building inspector. The building inspector, with the town council's approval, may designate such authority to another town official or agency. The building inspector and/or his/her designee shall have attended a soil erosion and sediment control training session sponsored by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation. Service and Conservation Districts or shall be a professional engineer with any emphasis in the field of civil engineering. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92; Ord. No. 2018-11 , 4-24-18; Ord. No. 2018-18 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 15.5-4. - Determination of applicability. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any existing vegetation, grades and contours of the land in a manner which may increase the potential for soil erosion without first applying for a determination of applicability from the building official or his/her designee. Upon determination of applicability, the owner/applicant shall submit a soil erosion and sediment control plan for approval by the building official or his/her designee, as provided in section 15.5-5. The application for determination of applicability shall describe the location, nature, character, and time schedule of the proposed land disturbing activity in sufficient detail to allow the building official or his/her designee to determine the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from the proposed project. In determining the applicability of the soil erosion and sediment control ordinance to a particular land disturbing activity, the building official or his/her designee shall consider site topography, drainage patterns, soils, proximity to watercourses, and other such information as deemed appropriate by the building official or his/her designee. A particular land disturbing activity shall not be subject to the requirements of this chapter if the building official or his/her designee finds that erosion resulting from the land disturbing activity is insignificant and represents no threat to adjacent properties or to the quality of any coastal feature or watercourse as defined herein. The current "Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, R.I. Department of Environmental Management, and R.I. State Conservation Committee shall be consulted in making this determination. 
(b)  No determination of applicability shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Construction, alteration or use of any additions to existing single-family or duplex homes or related structures, provided the grounds coverage of such addition is less than 1,000 square feet, and such construction, alteration and use does not occur within 100 feet of any watercourse or coastal feature, and the slopes at the site of land disturbance do not exceed ten percent. 
(2)  Use of a home garden in association with onsite residential use. 
(3)  Accepted agricultural management practices such as seasonal tilling and harvest activities associated with property utilized for private and/or commercial agricultural or silvicultural purpose. 
(4)  Excavations for improvements other than those described in subsection (1) above which exhibit all of the following characteristics: 
a.  Does not result in a total displacement of more than 50 cubic yards of material; 
b.  Has no slopes steeper than ten feet vertical in 100 feet horizontal or approximately ten percent; and 
c.  Has all disturbed surface areas promptly and effectively protected to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation. 
(5)  Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping purposes on existing developed land parcels or lots, provided that all bare surface is immediately seeded, sodded or otherwise protected from erosion actions and all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The aggregate of areas of such activity does not exceed 2,000 square feet; and 
b.  The change of elevation does not exceed two feet at any point; and 
c.  The grading does not involve a quantity of fill greater than 18 cubic yards; except where fill is excavated from another portion of the same parcel and the quantity does not exceed 50 cubic yards. 
(6)  Grading, filling, removal, or excavation activities and operations undertaken by the town under the direction and supervision of the director of public works for work on streets, roads, or rights-of-way dedicated to public use; provided, however, that adequate and acceptable erosion and sediment controls are incorporated by engineering plans and specifications and employed. Appropriate controls shall apply during construction as well as after the completion of these activities. All such work shall be undertaken in accordance with the performance principles provided for in article V, section 1(c) and such standards and definitions as may be adopted to implement said performance principles. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Sec. 15.5-5. - Provisions of plan; procedures. 
(a)  Plan. 
(1)  To obtain approval for a land disturbing activity as found applicable by the building official or his/her designee under section 15.5-4, an applicant shall first file an erosion and sediment control plan signed by the owner of the property, or authorized agent, on which the work subject to approval is to be performed. The plan or drawings, as described in article II of this chapter, shall include proposed erosion and sediment control measures to be employed by the applicant or the applicant's agent. 
(2)  R.I. Freshwater Wetlands Permit. Where any portion of a proposed development required approval under the R.I. Freshwater Wetlands Act (G.L. 1956,  2-1-15 et seq.), as amended, and where the approval contains provisions for soil erosion and sediment controls, that approved plan shall be a component of the overall soil erosion and sediment control plan required hereunder for the development. 
(b)  Fees. The applicant shall pay all fees and costs of the site plan review by the state association of conservation districts. Also, the applicant shall pay such other fees as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. 
(c)  Plan review. 
(1)  Within five working days of the receipt of the completed plan, the building official and/or his/her designee shall send a copy of the plan to the review authorities which may include the public works department, the planning board, and planning department for the purpose of review and comment. The building official or his/her designee may also within the above time frame submit copies of the plan to other local departments or agencies, including the conservation district that services their county, in order to better achieve the purpose of this chapter. Failure of the aforementioned review authorities to respond within 21 days of their receipt of the plan shall be deemed as no objection to the plan as submitted. 
(2)  The time allowed for plan review shall be commensurate with the proposed development project, and shall be done simultaneously with other reviews. 
(d)  Plan approval. 
(1)  The building official or his/her designee shall take action in writing either approving or disapproving the plan with reasons stated within ten days after the building official has received the written opinion of the aforementioned review authorities. 
(2)  In approving a plan, the building official or his/her designee may attach such conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the aforementioned review authorities to further the purposes of this chapter. The conditions pertaining to erosion and sediment control measures and/or devices, may include, but are not limited to, the erection of walls, drains, dams and structures, planting vegetation, trees and shrubs, furnishings, necessary easements and specifying a method of performing various kinds of work, and the sequence or timing thereof. The owner/applicant shall notify the building inspector or his/her designee in advance of his or her intent to begin clearing and construction work described in the erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall have this erosion and sediment control plan on the site during grading and construction. 
(e)  Appeals. 
(1)  Administrative procedures. 
a.  If the ruling made by the building official or his/her designee is unsatisfactory to the applicant/owner, the applicant/owner may file a written appeal within 15 days from the date of such ruling. The appeal shall be to the zoning board of review which shall hear such appeal in the manner as appeals from decisions of the building inspector are heard. 
b.  Appeal procedures shall follow current requirements for appeal to the zoning board of review. 
c.  During the period in which the request for appeal is filed, and until such time as a final decision is rendered on the appeal, the decision of the building official or his/her designee shall remain in effect. 
(2)  Expert opinion. The building official or his/her designee, the zoning board of review, may seek technical assistance on any soil erosion and sediment control plan. The expert opinion must be made available in the office of the building official or his/her designee as a public record prior to the appeals hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 15.5-6. - Definitions. 
    [For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed, unless the context otherwise requires:] 
    Applicant: Any person, corporation, or public or private organization proposing a development which would involve disturbance to the natural terrain as herein defined. 
    Cut: An excavation. The difference between a point on the original ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also, the material removed in excavation. 
    Development project: Any construction, reconstruction, demolition, or removal of structures, roadways, parking, or other paved areas, utilities, or other similar facilities, including any action requiring a building permit by the town. 
    Erosion: The removal of mineral and/or organic matter by the action of wind, water, and/or gravity. 
    Excavate: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Fill: Any act by which earth, sand, or other material is placed or removed to a new location aboveground. The fill is also the difference in elevation between a point of undisturbed ground and a designated point of higher elevation of the final grade. 
    Land disturbing activity: Any physical land development activity which includes such actions as clearance of vegetation, moving or filling of land, removal or excavation of soil or mineral resources, or similar activities. 
    Sediment: Solid material, both mineral and/or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been removed from its site of origin by wind, water, and/or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Soil erosion and sediment control plan: The (approved) document required before any person may cause disturbance to the natural terrain within the town as herein regulated. Also, herein referred to as erosion and sediment control plan, approved plan. 
    Runoff: The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after a fall of rain or snow and including seepage flows that do not enter the soil but run off the surface of the land. Also, that portion of water that is not absorbed by the soil, but runs off the land surface. 
    Watercourses: The term watercourse shall be held to mean any tidewater or coastal wetland at its mean high water level, and any freshwater wetland at its seasonal high water level, including but not limited to, any river, stream, brook, pond, lake, swamp, marsh bog, fen, wet meadow, or any other standing or flowing body of water. The edge of the watercourse as herein defined shall be used for delineation purposes. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Sec. 15.5-7. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this chapter or any rule or determination made hereunder, or application hereof to any person, agency, or circumstances is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter and its application to any person, agency, or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Secs. 15.5-8-15.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN 

Sec. 15.5-21. - Plan preparation. 
    The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, or registered landscape architect. Five copies of the plan shall be stamped, signed and submitted to the building official or his/her designee. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92; Ord. No. 2018-18 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 15.5-22. - Plan contents. 
    The erosion and sediment control plan shall include sufficient information about the proposed activities and land parcel(s) to form a clear basis for discussion and review and to assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter. The plan shall be consistent with the data collection, data analysis, and plan preparation guidelines in the current "Rhode Island Stormwater Design & Installation Standards Manual" "Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, R.I. Department of Environmental Management, R.I. State Conservation Committee and at a minimum, shall contain: 
(1)  A narrative describing the proposed land disturbing activity and the erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management measures to be installed to control erosion that could result from the proposed activity. Supporting documentation, such as a drainage area, existing site, and soil maps shall be provided as required by the building official or his/her designee. 
(2)  Construction drawings illustrating in detail existing and proposed contours, drainage features, and vegetation; limits of clearing and grading, the location of soil erosion and sediment control and stormwater management measures, detailed drawings of measures; stock piles and borrow areas; sequence and staging of land disturbing activities; and other such information needed for construction. 
(3)  Other information or construction plans and details as deemed necessary by the building official or his/her designee for thorough review of the plan prior to action being taken as prescribed in this chapter. Withholding or delay of such information maybe reasons for the building official or his/her designee to judge the application as incomplete and grounds for disapproval. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92; Ord. No. 2018-18 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 15.5-23. - Performance principles. 
    The contents of the erosion and sediment control plan shall clearly demonstrate how the principles, outlined below, have been met in the design and are to be accomplished by the proposed development project. 
(1)  The site selected shall show due regard for natural drainage characteristics and topography. 
(2)  To the extent possible, steep slopes shall be avoided. 
(3)  The grade of slopes created shall be minimized. 
(4)  Post development runoff rates should not exceed pre-development rates, consistent with the other stormwater requirements which may be in effect. Any increase in storm runoff shall be retained and recharged as close as feasible to its place of origin by means of detention ponds or basins, seepage areas, subsurface drains, porous paving, or similar technique. 
(5)  Original boundaries, alignment, and slopes of watercourses within the project locus shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. 
(6)  In general, drainage shall be directed away from structures intended for human occupancy, municipal or utility use, or similar structures. 
(7)  All drainage provisions shall be of such a design and capacity so as to adequately handle stormwater runoff, including runoff from tributary upstream areas which may be outside the locus of the project. 
(8)  Drainage facilities shall be installed as early as feasible during construction, prior to site clearance, if possible. 
(9)  Fill located adjacent to watercourses shall be suitably protected from erosion by means of rip-rap, gabions, retaining walls, vegetative stabilization, or similar measures. 
(10)  Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect bare areas and stockpiles from erosion during construction; the smallest areas feasible shall be exposed at any one time; disturbed areas shall be protected during the nongrowing months, November through March. 
(11)  Permanent vegetation shall be placed immediately following fine grade. 
(12)  Trees and other existing vegetation shall be retained whenever feasible; the area within the dripline shall be fenced or roped off to protect trees from construction equipment. 
(13)  All areas damaged during construction shall be resodded, reseeded, or otherwise restored. Monitoring and maintenance schedules, where required, shall be predetermined. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Secs. 15.5-24-15.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 15.5-31. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Before approving an erosion sediment control plan, the building official or his/her designee may require the applicant/owner to file a surety company performance bond, deposit of money, negotiable securities or other method of surety, as specified by the building official or his/her designee. When any land disturbing activity is to take place within 100 feet of any watercourse or within an identified flood hazard district, or on slopes in excess of ten percent, the filing of a performance bond shall be required. The amount of the bond, as determined by the public works department, or in its absence, the building official or his/her designee, shall be sufficient to cover the cost of implementing all erosion and sediment control measures as shown on the plan. 
(2)  The bond or negotiable security filed by the applicant shall be subject to approval of the form, content, amount, and manner of execution by the public works director and the town solicitor. 
(3)  A performance bond for an erosion sediment control plan for a subdivision may be included in the performance bond of the subdivision. The posting of the bond as part of the subdivision performance bond does not, however, relieve the owner of any requirement(s) of this chapter. 
(b)  Notice of default on performance secured by bond. 
(1)  Whenever the building official or his/her designee shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any term(s) or condition(s) of the bond or in the implementation of measures secured by the bond, written notice thereof shall be made to the applicant and to the surety of the bond by the town solicitor. The notice shall state the nature of default, work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the building official or his/her designee to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work. 
(2)  Failure of the applicant to acknowledge and comply with the provisions and deadlines outlined in such notice of default shall mean the institution, by the town solicitor, without further notice of proceedings whatsoever, of appropriate measures to utilize the performance bond to cause the required work to be completed by the town, by contract or by other appropriate means as determined by the town solicitor. 
(c)  Notice of default on performance secured by cash or negotiable securities deposit. If cash or negotiable securities deposit has been posted by the applicant, notice and procedure shall be the same as provided for in paragraph (b) of this section. 
(d)  Release from performance bond conditions. The performance bonding requirement shall remain in full force and effect for 12 months following completion of the project, or longer if deemed necessary by the building official or his/her designee. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Sec. 15.5-32. - Approval; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Every approval granted herein shall expire at the end of the time period set forth in the conditions. The developer shall fully perform and complete all of the work required within the specified time period. 
(b)  If the developer is unable to complete the work within the designated time period, he or she shall, at least 30 days prior to the expiration date, submit a written request for an extension of time to the building official or his/her designee, setting forth the reasons underlying the requested time extension. If the extension is warranted, the building official or his/her designee may grant an extension of time up to a maximum of one year from the date of the original deadline. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Sec. 15.5-33. - Maintenance of measures. 
    Maintenance of all erosion-sediment control devices under this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner. The erosion-sediment control devices shall be maintained in good condition and working order on a continuing basis. Watercourses originating and located completely on private property shall be the responsibility of the owner to their point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within the property. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Sec. 15.5-34. - Liability of applicant. 
    Neither approval of an erosion and sediment control plan nor compliance with any conditions of this chapter shall relieve the owner/applicant from any responsibility for damage to persons or property, nor impose any liability upon the town for damages to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Secs. 15.5-35-15.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTIONS AND NOTIFICATION 

Sec. 15.5-41. - Periodic inspections. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official or his/her designee. All work shall be subject to periodic inspections by the building official or his/her designee. All work shall be performed in accordance with an inspection and construction control schedule approved by the building official or his/her designee, who shall maintain a permanent file on all of his or her inspections. Upon completion of the work, the developer or owner(s) shall notify the building official or his/her designee that all grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control measures and devices, and vegetation and ground cover planting has been completed in conformance with the approval, all attached plans, specifications, conditions, and other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Sec. 15.5-42. - Final inspection. 
    Upon notification of the completion by the owner, the building official or his/her designee shall make a final inspection of the site in question and shall prepare a final summary inspection report of its findings which shall be retained in the department of inspections and in the department of public works permanent inspection file. 
    The applicant/owner may request the release of his/her performance bond from the building official or his/her designee 12 months after the final site inspection has been completed and approved. In the instance where the performance bond has been posted with the recording of a final subdivision, the bond shall be released after the building official or his/her designee has been notified by the town planning director of successful completion of plat improvements by the applicant/owner. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Sec. 15.5-43. - Notification. 
    If, at any stage, the work-in-progress and/or completed under the terms of an approved erosion and sediment control plan does not conform to the plan, a written notice from the building official or his/her designee to comply shall be transmitted by certified mail to the owner. The notice shall set forth the nature of the temporary and permanent corrections required and the time limit within which corrections shall be completed as set forth in section 15.5-44(b). Failure to comply with the required corrections within the specified time limit shall be considered in violation of this chapter, in which case the performance bond or cash or negotiable securities deposit shall be subject to notice of default, in accordance with section 15.5-31(b) and (c) of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Sec. 15.5-44. - Penalties. 
(a)  Revocation or suspension of approval. The approval of an erosion and sediment control plan under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the building official and all work on the project halted for an indefinite time period by the building official after written notification is transmitted by the building official to the developer for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any condition of the approved plan, or specifications pertaining thereto; 
(2)  Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation related to the work or site of work; and 
(3)  The existence of any condition or the performance of any act constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangerment to human life or property of others, or contrary to the spirit or intent of this chapter. 
(b)  Other penalties. In addition thereto, whenever there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the town shall have the right to notify the applicant/owner that he has five days from the receipt of notice to temporarily correct the violations and 30 days from receipt of notice to permanently correct the violations. Should the applicant/owner fail to take the temporary corrective measures within the five-day period and the permanent corrective measures within the 30-day period, the town shall then have the right to take whatever actions it deems necessary to correct the violations and to assert a lien on the subject property in an amount equal to the costs of remedial actions. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement of common law liens on personal property. The lien shall be recorded with the records of land evidence of the municipality, and the lien shall incur legal interest from the date of recording. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including revocation of the performance bond or assessment of a lien on the property by the town. 
(Ord. of 3-3-92) 
Chapter 16 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Burning in streets,  7-18; depositing trash or debris on streets,  8-3; permit required for gasoline pumps near streets,  10-90; traffic regulations, ch. 11; routes where trucks prohibited,  11-34; parking on streets during snow removal,  11-52; consumption, possession of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles,  12-4.1; subdivisions generally, ch. 17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Street obstructions and obstructions generally. 
(a)  Obstructions generally. No person shall deposit, place or put or suffer to be deposited, placed or put by any person or persons in his employ any goods, wares, firewood, coal, kettles, or merchandise or other obstruction on any street, highway, or sidewalk, except for loading or shipping the same or actually removing the same into or out of some building or enclosure or for loading the same into or loading the same out of some vehicle. 
(b)  Depositing snow on highways, streets and sidewalks. No owner, lessee, or occupant of any premises or any person cleaning or removing snow there from, shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow from said premises upon any highway, street, sidewalk or other town property except with the permission of the director of public works. 
(Ord. of 6-8-37; Ord. No. 2003-5, 3-4-03) 
Cross reference- Vehicles obstructing traffic,  11-46; obstructing drains and soil pipes,  15-3. 
State Law reference- Removal of obstructions, G.L. 1956,  24-5-9. 
Sec. 16-2. - Trains blocking streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railway train or car to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. It shall be unlawful for any railway train or car to stop within an intersection or on a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  21) 
Sec. 16-3. - Safety precautions at excavations, obstructions. 
    Whenever any excavation is made or any obstruction exists in any street or highway, the person having charge of such excavation or causing such obstruction shall cause warning signs to be placed across such street or highway and whenever any trench or hole or excavation must of necessity remain after dark, the person making any such trench, hole or excavation or employing anyone so to do, shall cause a sufficient light to be placed over or near the same, sunset to sunrise, to give notice to all persons passing in or through such street or highway. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 31,  4) 
Cross reference- Excavations generally,  16-60 et seq. 
Sec. 16-4. - Congregating, obstructing traffic; loitering. 
    All persons who shall obstruct any street, bridge, lane, sidewalk, passageway or crosswalk in the town, by congregating or standing thereon or therein, crowding or otherwise obstructing the same, to the annoyance or disturbance of the peaceful inhabitants thereof or passengers in or through such street, bridge, lane, passageway, crosswalk or sidewalk, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 25,  1) 
Sec. 16-5. - Parades. 
    No parade or procession shall occupy or march on any street to the exclusion or interruption of other persons in their individual right and use thereof, except police and fire departments, the organized militia, the organized naval forces, the independent chartered military organizations, the military and naval forces of the United States, associations wholly composed of soldiers, sailors or marines honorably discharged from the service of the United States, veterans of the national guard or naval militia, and organizations of the order of the sons of veterans, unless written notice of the object, time and route of such procession or parade be given by the chief officer thereof not less than 24 hours previous to its forming or marching to the chief of police of the town, and said chief of police may designate how much of the street or streets in width and what portion thereof such procession or parade can occupy, with special reference to crowded thoroughfares on which such procession or parade may move, and when so designated, the chief officer of such procession or parade shall be responsible for obedience to the designation. The chief of police shall furnish such police escort as may be necessary to protect persons and property and maintain the public peace and order. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 37,  1) 
Sec. 16-6. - Ropes, wires, cords, etc., across public ways. 
    Every person who shall with malicious intent draw, stretch or place any rope, line, wire, cord or cordage of any description in or across any street, highway, sidewalk, or other public way in this town, so as to endanger or annoy the public travel thereon, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 17,  2) 
Sec. 16-7. - Driving on closed streets. 
    No person shall drive or cause to be driven any vehicle over that part of any street which is being mended, repaired or paved, or any part of such street that is wholly closed to travel. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 37,  1) 
Sec. 16-8. - Substances likely to injure persons, animals, vehicles. 
    No person shall put or place or cause to be put or placed in or upon any street or other public travelled place in this town any glass, crockery, scrap iron, nails, tacks or any other article liable to injure persons or animals, or damage vehicles travelling thereon. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 18,  1) 
Sec. 16-9. - Dirt, ashes on streets. 
    No person shall place or deposit on any of the public highways or streets of this town, any ashes or dirt, except the surveyor of highways in his district or under his direction; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent anyone from placing ashes or dirt on the sidewalks for the better protection and comfort of the citizens of said town. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 9,  1) 
Sec. 16-10. - Removal of snow from sidewalks. 
    The occupant or occupants or any person having the use of any building or lot of land whether said occupant or occupants are the owner or owners, tenant or tenants, lessee or lessees, sublessee or sublessees, bordering on any street, square or public place within the town where there is a sidewalk supported by a curb, shall within the first four hours of daylight after the ceasing to fall of any snow, cause the same to be removed therefrom and in default thereof, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code for each and every hour after expiration of said four hours that the snow shall remain on said sidewalk. The provisions of this section shall also apply to the falling of snow from any building. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 50,  1, 2) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for removal of snow, G.L. 1956,  24-5-14, 24-7-1. 
Sec. 16-11. - Removal of ice from sidewalks. 
    Whenever the sidewalk or any part thereof adjoining any building or lot of land on any street shall be encumbered with ice, it shall be the duty of the occupant or occupants or any person having the use of such building or lot of land, whether the same be the owner, or owners, tenant or tenants, lessee or lessees, sublessee or sublessees, to cause such sidewalk to be made safe and convenient, by removing the ice therefrom or by covering the same with sand or some other suitable substance, and in case such occupant or occupants or any person having the use of any building or lot of land adjoining the sidewalk or any part thereof, shall neglect so to do for a space of two hours during the daytime, he shall be guilty of a violation of this Code for each day thereafter that the same shall continue to be encumbered with ice. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 50,  3) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for removal of snow and ice, G.L. 1956,  24-5-14, 24-7-1. 
Sec. 16-12. - Animals, vehicles on sidewalks. 
    No person shall ride, drive or lead any animal or animals, except dogs, or move or operate any vehicle upon any sidewalk of any public street, except carriages for the conveyance of children, unless for the purpose of necessarily crossing the same, or allow any animal or animals, except dogs, belonging to him or under his care to stand on a sidewalk. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 50,  4) 
Sec. 16-13. - Distributing advertising. 
    No person shall scatter or distribute or cause to be scattered or distributed any handbill, circular, program or advertising slip in or upon any street or sidewalk in the town, except by permission of the chief of police. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 50,  5) 
Sec. 16-14. - Bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, or roller blades town property. 
(a)  Prohibited areas. The riding or use of skateboards, roller skates, roller blades and bicycles is prohibited in the following locations: 
(1)  The Gazebo at Majestic Park; 
(2)  Phenix Square; and 
(3)  On parking lots or pedestrian areas of all town parks. 
(b)  Penalties. 
(1)  Adult. Any adult person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. for any one offense, except that any person electing to appear before the clerk of municipal court and admitting the violation charged, or in lieu of personally appearing before the clerk of the court, electing to admit the violation by mail to the clerk of the court, shall be punished by a fine of $500.00. However, for a second violation and any subsequent violation a person electing to appear before the clerk of the municipal court and admitting the violation charged or in lieu of personally appearing before the clerk of the court, electing to admit the violation by mail to the clerk of the court, shall be punished by a fine of $100.00. 
(2)  Juveniles. Any person under the age of 18 cited for this provision shall be summoned to the juvenile hearing board. The board, upon a finding of guilt, may impose community service for an amount of time that the board shall deem appropriate, not to exceed fifty (50) hours per offense. In certain cases, after review, in lieu of referral to the juvenile hearing board, cases may be also be referred to the family court. 
(Comp Ords., ch. 2,  1; Ord. No. 2005-19, 12-6-05, eff. 12-28-05; Ord. No. 2009-14, 11-17-09) 
Sec. 16-15. - Coasting, sledding. 
    No person shall slide or coast on any sled, machine or other vehicle whatever, for amusement in any public streets or ways in the town. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 5,  1) 
Sec. 16-16. - Loitering, climbing on bridges. 
    Whoever shall stand, loiter or remain on any public bridge in this town to the annoyance of passersby, or of persons residing or doing business in the vicinity of such bridge, or shall climb upon any part of the structure of such bridge, without lawful cause therefor, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 14,  1) 
Sec. 16-17. - Throwing balls, other missiles. 
    The playing of ball, practicing with balls or the throwing of balls, stones, or other missiles in the public streets and highways of this town is hereby prohibited. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 19,  1) 
Sec. 16-18. - Removing, injuring bounds, monuments. 
    Any person who shall wantonly break down, injure, remove, mar or destroy any monument or other memorial erected for the purpose of designating the boundaries of any street, or any tree, stake or other thing marked for that purpose, or break down, injure, remove, mar or destroy any milestone or mileboard erected upon a highway or turnpike, or wantonly deface or alter the inscription on any such stone, board or tree, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 21,  1) 
Sec. 16-19. - Noncompliant house numbering. 
    Any owner or occupant of a building who for more than one month after notice from the building inspector neglects or refuses to affix to or inscribe on such building the street number lawfully designated therefore, or who affixes or causes to be affixed to such building or inscribes or causes to be inscribed thereon, or retains thereon for more than one month after notice from said building inspector a street number other than the one so designated shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the general penalty, section 1-10. 
(Ord. of 8-28-78) 
Editor's note- An Ord. of August 28, 1978, did not specifically amend the Code; codification herein as  16-19 was, therefore, at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 16-20. - Public sidewalks-Good order and repair required. 
    All owners or agents of owners with property abutting and fronting upon any plaza, street, or alley within the Town of West Warwick are required to keep the public sidewalks immediately abutting their property in good order and repair. 
(Res. of 1-3-84) 
Sec. 16-21. - Same-Liability for damages due to failure to maintain. 
    Each such owner or agent specified in section 16-20 shall be liable to the town for all losses to the town or recoveries from the town for damages to the person or property of others caused by failure to repair and keep in good order and reasonably safe condition all such sidewalks abutting and fronting his property upon any plaza, street or alley within the town. 
(Res. of 1-3-84) 
Sec. 16-22. - Same-Notification of necessary repairs. 
(a)  The town may, through the director of public works, notify such owners in writing that repairs are necessary to put such sidewalks in good order and repair, and such owner shall, within ten days after receipt of notification and under the supervision of the director of public works, complete such repairs as specified in said notice. 
(b)  Any person who is aggrieved by a determination of the director of public works that repairs are necessary, may appeal said determination by written notification from the director. Said town council shall, as soon as practicable, grant a hearing and make a de novo determination as to the necessity for the repairs. The town council shall use the same standards the director of public works is required to use in determining the necessity for such repairs. 
(c)  The notice by the director of public works required in paragraph (a) shall be required in writing. The director of public works shall seek true and accurate records of all notices required by this section. 
(Res. of 1-3-84) 
Sec. 16-23. - Same-Liability for costs of town repairing. 
    If an owner or agent fails to make the repairs required by sections 16-20, 16-21 and 16-22, the town may repair the same and the owner or agent shall be liable to the town for the cost of repairs. 
(Res. of 1-3-84) 
Sec. 16-24. - Same-Permit required to repair. 
    A permit obtained from the public works department shall be required to make repairs pursuant to this section. However, there will be no charge for such a permit. 
(Res. of 1-3-84) 
Sec. 16-25. - Sidewalk and curbing replacement cost-sharing program. 
    The town may, depending on the availability of funding, provide financial assistance to residential property owners who perform repairs to abutting sidewalks and/or curbing within the town's right-of-way, up to a maximum amount of $1,000.00, per project. Sidewalk improvements in front of commercial or industrial properties, as well as improvements on private property shall not be eligible for assistance. The program shall be administered by the town engineer under the following parameters: 
(1)  The town shall provide interested property owners with a list of sidewalk/curbing contractors who have been pre-qualified to perform such work. The property owner shall be responsible for selecting and contacting the contractor of his choice from the list. Contractors may pre-qualify and be added to the list by providing the town with the following: 
a.  Sufficient proof of relevant experience in the construction of sidewalks and curbing for a minimum period of three years, and 
b.  A listing of at least three similar jobs completed within West Warwick or other communities, and 
c.  A general performance bond to the town in the amount of $5,000.00, as well as proof of current liability insurance coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, as well as worker's compensation insurance and all other required insurances. 
(2)  The property owner shall procure a cost estimate for the proposed improvements from the selected contractor, and shall provide same to the town for review. 
(3)  Provided that the cost estimate for the proposed improvements falls within the average value of sidewalk improvements as outlined in a. below, the property owner will be eligible for reimbursement of 50 percent of the cost, up to $1,000.00. The town shall notify the property owner in writing if he or she qualifies, and what the town's total contribution will be. 
a.  The estimated cost of sidewalk and curbing replacement, on a per foot basis, shall be determined by using actual unit prices for comparable work items from other sidewalk contracts, or by using estimated unit prices from current RIDOT contracts. 
b.  The estimated cost shall be updated on an annual basis as of the start of each new fiscal year (July 1). 
(4)  The property owner and/or contractor shall apply for a curbing and sidewalk permit from the town. In addition, the property owner shall sign and return the "sidewalk and curbing replacement cost-sharing program agreement," which shall be attached to the curbing and sidewalk permit application. 
(5)  Upon receipt of the permit from the town, the contractor shall proceed with the work in accordance with the permit. Upon completion of the work, the contractor shall provide the property owner with a written invoice for the total cost of the work. The property owner shall sign that invoice and forward the original to the town for review. 
(6)  The town shall, within ten days after an inspection, reimburse to the property owner the agreed upon amount of reimbursement. The town will not reimburse any additional costs without prior approval and with the previous mentioned limitation of $1,000.00. The property owner shall be solely responsible for payment of any justifiable costs above that amount. 
The town shall assume no responsibility or liability in relation to work reimbursed under this cost sharing program. Furthermore, the town shall not be responsible for any defects in the work, whether present upon completion or at a later date. The town does not guarantee the availability of funds for this program. In the event that funds are not available, interested property owners may request that their name be added to the cost-sharing program master list maintained by the engineering department; qualifying property owners will be eligible on a first-come first-served basis once funds become available. 
(Ord. No. 2004-15, 8-25-04) 
Secs. 16-26-16-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRIVEWAYS AND CURB CUTS 

Sec. 16-29. - Permit required to remove, change curb. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or change any curb now or hereafter existing within the town without first having obtained written permission from the town council. 
(Ord. of 4-8-41) 
Sec. 16-30. - When permits prohibited. 
    A permit will not be granted for curb cuts within 20 feet of the intersection of property lines at street corners, nor for curb cuts for a driveway wider than 25 feet, or steeper than a one to eight slope from the bottom of the present curb. 
(Ord. of 4-8-41) 
Sec. 16-31. - Island between driveways. 
    There shall be an island between two driveways leading to a single piece of property with not less than 16 feet of uncut curb, exclusive of the one to eight slope on either end. 
(Ord. of 4-8-41) 
Sec. 16-32. - Driveway proximity to property lines. 
    No driveway or driveways shall be located less than six feet from any property line. 
(Ord. of 4-8-41) 
Sec. 16-33. - Plan required; supervision. 
    A plat or plan showing the location of a driveway or driveways shall accompany all applications for permits to cut curbs on highways. All work shall be done under the supervision of the public works director (or on state roads the Rhode Island Department of Transportation). 
(Ord. of 4-8-41; Ord. No. 2018-18 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 16-34. - Waiver of restrictions on location and dimensions of driveways. 
(a)  The restrictions relating to the location and dimension of driveways as established in sections 16-20, 16-31 and 16-32 may be waived by the town engineer, upon application for such waiver by the property owners, when such a waiver of the restrictions is deemed by the town engineer to be in the interest of public safety and when one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The existing driveway is closer than six feet to the adjoining property line; 
(2)  The proposed plan provides for a reduction of the number of driveways entering from a parcel of land onto a public road; or 
(3)  The existing driveway is wider than the maximum 25 feet. 
(b)  In the event the town engineer shall deny the application for waiver, the property owner may appeal such decision to the town council. The town council may grant such waiver, after public hearing, upon receipt of information and proof submitted by the property owner, that such waiver would not adversely affect public safety and that one or more of the above-required conditions have been met. 
(Res. No. 98-11, 1-21-98) 
Sec. 16-35. - Curb cut permit fee. 
    A fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council shall be paid with the filing of an application for curb cut approval. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13) 
Secs. 16-36-16-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POLES AND WIRES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate poles and wires, G.L. 1956,  45-6-1. 

Sec. 16-44. - Permission required; agreement to comply. 
    No wire to be used for conducting currents of electricity shall be placed in, over or under any street, square, lane or highway in the town without permission of the town council, nor until the person placing or maintaining the same shall have filed with the town clerk a written agreement accepting and promising to abide by and perform all the conditions and provisions of all ordinances. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 20,  1) 
Sec. 16-45. - Application for permission. 
    Every application to the town council for permission to place and maintain poles and electric wires in, over or under any highway, shall state the intended location of such wires and poles and the purpose for which such wires are to be used and shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location of said wires and poles. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 20,  2) 
Sec. 16-46. - Installation, location of wires. 
    All wires, when placed above the surface of the ground, shall be located upon such portion of the highway and suspended from such supports and attachments as shall be approved by the town council or a committee thereof. Wires conducting currents for electric lighting and for the transmission of power and wires conducting telegraphic, telephonic and other low tension current, when such wires run parallel with each other, shall not be located on the same side of any street. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 20,  3) 
Sec. 16-47. - Multiple use of poles. 
    All persons and corporations maintaining wires within the town for conducting electric current shall permit any other person or corporation to suspend from such poles wires for conducting electric currents and also to place lamps on any poles whenever the town council shall so direct and upon such reasonable conditions, terms and remuneration as the town council may approve as prescribed. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 20,  4) 
Sec. 16-48. - Revocation of permission; removal of poles, wires. 
    Permission by the town council to erect or maintain poles or wires may be revoked in whole or in part at any time, and any of said poles or wires may be removed by said town, its officers, agents or servants, from time to time or at any time without notice. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 20,  5) 
Sec. 16-49. - Protection of town from liability. 
    Every person erecting, maintaining or using poles or wires for the transmission of electricity shall indemnify and save harmless the town, its officers, agents and servants, from and against all lawful claims and demands for injuries to persons or property occasioned by the existence of such poles or wires or the transmission of electric currents by means thereof. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 20,  6) 
Secs. 16-50-16-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May 3, 1994, amended this art. IV to read as herein set out. Formerly, art. IV consisted of  16-60-16-69, which pertained to excavations and derived from  3 of ch. 17 of Comp. Ords.;  1-4 of ch. 31 of Comp. Ords.; an ordinance adopted March 26, 1940; a resolution adopted April 19, 1980; and a resolution adopted August 4, 1980. 
Cross reference- Safety precautions required of excavations,  16-3. 

Sec. 16-60. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall take up any pavement or dig any trench or hole, or make any other excavation within the lines of any street or public highway in the town except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94) 
Sec. 16-61. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to take up any pavement or dig and trench or hole, or make any other excavation within the lines of any street or public highway in the town without first having obtained a permit therefore from the director of public works. State roads within the town will require a permit from the Rhode Island Department of Transportation. The fee shall be paid by the applicant for such permits and will be in the amount as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the town council. The permit fee includes administrative costs, inspections as necessary, and all other associated costs. Agencies and departments of the town will be exempt from all fees established by this article. There will be no fee for an existing property owner improving or installing curb or sidewalks. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94; Res. No. 2000-153, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2013-46, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 2018-18 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 16-62. - Penalty for excavation without permit. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall take up any pavement or dig any trench or hole, or any other excavation within the lines of any street or public highway in the town without having first obtained a permit therefor as provided in section 16-61 above shall be fined the sum of $1,500.00 per day until such permit is obtained. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94) 
Sec. 16-63. - Application required; agreement to comply and protect town. 
    Whenever the convenience of any person requires the taking up of any pavement, or the digging of any trench or hole, or the making of any other excavation within the lines of any street or public highway in the town, he shall make written application for a permit therefor to the director of public works or Rhode Island Department of Transportation, setting forth the location and nature of the work to be done. Said application shall contain an agreement to comply with the regulations of this article, and to hold the town harmless from any damage or loss sustained by said town on account of injuries or property damages suffered by persons using said highways due to the existence of such excavation or the failure of such applicant to comply with the regulations of this article. In addition, the applicant shall provide proof to the director of public works that it has complied with all rules and regulations as may be adopted by the department of environmental management, from time to time, regarding such excavation. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94; Ord. No. 2018-18 , 6-5-18) 
Sec. 16-64. - Bond required. 
(a)  Applicants other than utilities. The applicant for each permit hereunder shall file a bond with the town clerk running to the finance director conditioned upon the faithful performance of the above agreement, with two sureties satisfactory to the department of public works and the finance director, or in lieu thereof with a surety company authorized to do business in this state. The finance director for the town, in his/her sole discretion, in order to protect and promote the public health, safety and well-being of the town and its residents, shall determine and approve the amount of the bond to be required by the applicant. However, in all events any such bond shall be in a minimum penal sum of no less than $5,000.00. For road openings greater than 50 feet as outlined in section 16-70, the minimum bond requirement shall be $10,000.00. 
(b)  Regulated utilities. Any business or utility that is regulated by the state public utilities commission will be exempt from requirements to file bonds. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94; Res. No. 2000-153, 7-11-00) 
Sec. 16-65. - Insurance required. 
    The applicant for each permit hereunder shall provide proof of insurance to the director of public works, under the following categories, as applicable: 
(1)  General liability insurance. The applicant is to provide of general liability insurance coverage in a sum to be determined and approved by the director of public works for the town, but in no event in a sum less than $500,000.00, for which the town is to be named as an "additional insured" and "certificate holder." The applicant must also provide the town with details of the coverage provided. 
(2)  Professional liability insurance. Where applicable, the applicant is to provide proof of professional liability insurance coverage in the sum of $1,000,000.00, for professional services which may be rendered in connection with each excavation project, including but not limited to the professional services rendered by engineers and architects. 
(3)  Workers compensation insurance. The applicant must supply proof of workers compensation insurance coverage, which proof shall include the expiration date of such coverage. 
(4)  Hazardous/environmental insurance. In the event such excavation project is to include demolition and/or the use of explosives or other hazardous or dangerous materials or methods of excavation, then in such event, the applicant must provide proof of hazardous or environmental insurance coverage. Said coverage shall be in a sum which the director of public works for the town shall determine to be sufficient in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the town and its residents. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94; Res. No. 2000-153, 7-11-00) 
Sec. 16-66. - Issuance of permit; inspection of site before work. 
    Upon compliance with the above provisions, the applicant shall be granted a permit in writing by the director of public works to make excavations as set forth in his application and the director of public works may examine such street or highway before it is broken up. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94) 
Sec. 16-67. - Consent of director of public works. 
    Every person who shall dig, make or construct any ditch, drain, or watercourse in or across any public street, highway, lane or sidewalk or other public way within the town or shall cause or procure the same to be done excepting by order, consent or direction of the director of public works for such district, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and shall be subject to the fines as set forth in section 16-62 herein. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94) 
Sec. 16-68. - Repair of excavations. 
    Repair of excavations. Any person making an excavation that has been approved by the director of public works, shall, immediately upon closing of the excavation, repair the entire area of the excavation to the satisfaction of the director of public works. Any settlement of earth over an excavation in any street or public way occurring within one-year of the closing of the trench shall be repaired, within five days after written notice from the director of public works, to his satisfaction and at the expense of the person making the excavation. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94; Res. No. 2000-153, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-11, adopted September 4, 2012, amended  16-68 to read as set out herein. Previously  16-68 was titled repair of defectively filled excavations and excavations in general. 
Sec. 16-69. - Authority of director of public works to make regulations. 
    The director of public works may promulgate such regulations as are necessary regarding methods to be employed in making excavations and methods and materials to be employed in repairing excavations. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94) 
Sec. 16-70. - Road openings over 50 feet. 
(a)  All roads surrounding areas that were disturbed shall be repaired to as good or better condition as prior to the excavation. 
(b)  Any road opening over 50 feet in length shall require a permit application fee of $75.00 and an additional $32.00 per hour for inspection services. Anticipated inspection time will be pre-established and the applicant will provide a certified check to be deposited and used as a draw down to cover inspection costs. The unexpended balance will be returned to the applicant upon completion of the work. Any road opening over 50 feet in length shall also require curb-to-curb repaving under the direction of the public works director. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94; Res. No. 97-19, 1-21-97; Res. No. 2000-153, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-4-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-11, adopted September 4, 2012, amended  16-70 to read as set out herein. Previously  16-70 was titled road openings over 50 feet for other than public utilities-generally. 
Sec. 16-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2000-153, adopted July 11, 2000, repealed  16-71 which pertained to road openings over 50 feet-gas line involved, and derived from an ordinance adopted May 3, 1994. 
Sec. 16-72. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The town will submit to each of the public utilities in June of each year, a forecast of roads which the town intends to restore during the following calendar year. 
(b)  If a road is on the town's road restoration forecast set forth above and a utility plans to work on such road, and the town agrees, the utility will perform its work prior to the town's road restoration. In such event, the utility will not perform a permanent restoration and the utility will not make any payment to the town. 
(c)  The public utilities will submit to the town their listing of planned roadwork in the town within 60 days of receipt of the town's forecast of road restoration for the next year. 
(d)  There shall be a three-year moratorium on road openings for any newly restored paved roads, except in cases of emergencies, work that is mandated by the state or federal government and for the installation of new services; provided, however, that the town has given notice of the planned road restoration work pursuant to "a" above. 
(e)  Permanent restoration work performed by the public utility, with the exception of temporary patches, shall be guaranteed for a period of five years. Such guarantee shall not apply where the surrounding road conditions cause the restored area to deteriorate. 
(Res. No. 2000-153, 7-11-00) 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2000-153, adopted July 11, 2000, renumbered the former  16-72 as 16-73 and enacted a new  16-72 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
Sec. 16-73. - Emergencies. 
    In the event an emergency exists after normal business hours requiring an excavation as defined by this article, said excavation may be made; provided, however, that a permit is applied for as soon as possible and that all regulations regarding the making and repairing of excavations are complied with. 
(Ord. of 5-3-94; Res. No. 2000-153, 7-11-00) 
Note- See the editor's note to  16-72. 
Secs. 16-74-16-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ROAD NAMING AND NUMBERING SYSTEM 

Sec. 16-80. - Parties affected. 
    All primary buildings and roads within the boundaries of the town shall hereafter be identified according to the uniform road naming and numbering system as herein contained as adopted or amended by the town council of the town pursuant to their authority as outlined in the Charter, article IV, section 407. 
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06) 
Sec. 16-81. - Definitions. 
    Entrance: Shall mean the primary doorway or other principal entrance to a building accessible by the general public. 
    Primary building: Shall mean each building which fronts on a road; provided, however, it shall not include accessory structures located adjacent to a building. 
    Road: Any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, private way, or similar paved, gravel, or dirt thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06) 
Sec. 16-82. - Naming system. 
    All roads that serve two or more primary buildings shall be named regardless of whether the ownership is public or private. A road name assigned by the town shall not constitute or imply acceptance of the road as a public way. Request for separate or individual naming of a road must be presented in writing and reviewed by the technical review committee. 
    A uniform road naming system has been developed for all roads based upon the following process: 
(1)  There shall be no duplication of road names within the town. 
(2)  Road names shall not sound alike (e.g. Beach and Peach, Lynwood and Linwood). 
(3)  The use of directional words such as north, south, east, and west (West Pine St.) shall be discouraged (used only when absolutely necessary). 
(4)  Road names shall not be differentiated solely by their suffix (e.g. Pine Place, Pine Lane, and Pine Avenue). 
(5)  Each road shall have only one name along its entire length. 
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06) 
Sec. 16-83. - Road name type designations. 
    The owner/developer/applicant shall have regard to the roadway function, length, and configuration to determine the road type designation. 
Road Type Designation Criterion Street, avenue, road, boulevard, drive Applicable to all major thoroughfares or road of four or more blocks in length. Trail, way Applicable to roads which are winding or curved in nature. Terrace, gardens, grove, pathway, heights, walk Applicable to minor or short length roads of ten or less primary buildings. Lane Applicable to all narrow roads generally used for service or private roads (e.g. a driveway used to access one or more primary buildings not fronting a road). Crescent Applicable to roads forming a crescent. Circle Applicable to roads that are circular in nature. Square Applicable to roads that form part of a square. Court, place Applicable to roads that form a Cul-de-Sac Hill Applicable to roads that have a noticeable slope throughout the majority of its length.  
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06) 
Sec. 16-84. - General numbering system. 
    All roads shall be numbered; odd numbers shall be assigned to the right side of the road and even numbers to the left side of the road. 
    The following criteria shall govern the numbering system: All number origins shall begin from the intersection of the primary or secondary through or cross road. For dead-end roads, numbering shall originate at the intersection of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead-end. 
    Apartment house. A residential building with more than three units in which the rooms are arranged and rented as apartments. Apartment houses shall be numbered as follows: the Apartment House shall be given one road number, and each individual apartment shall be given an apartment number. For example, 21 Elm Street, Apartment 1; 21 Elm Street, Apartment 2; etc. 
    Residential condominium complex townhouse style. A building or buildings with individually owned units. Each condominium road shall be given a street name, and each condominium within the complex shall be given its own street number. For example, 62 Elm Street. 
    Residential condominium complex apartment style. A building or buildings with individually owned units. Each condominium road shall be given a street name. Apartment style condominiums shall be numbered as follows: the condominium building shall be given one road number, and each individual unit shall be given a number. For example, 21 Elm Street, Unit 1; 21 Elm Street, Unit 2; etc. 
    Commercial complex. A building or buildings used for commercial or industrial use. Each building shall be given its own road number and each unit within that building shall be given its own unit or suite number. For example, 111 Elm Street, Suite 1. Where there are multiple roads in a complex, each road shall be given a road name, and each building shall have its own road number. In the case of commercial condominiums, each unit in a building shall have its own unit number, and further subdivisions shall be given a letter. For example, 113 Elm Street, Unit 3; 113 Elm Street, Unit 3A; etc. 
    Combined commercial and apartment complex. A building or buildings used for commercial use in which there may also be apartments. Each building shall be given its own road number; each commercial unit shall be given its respective unit or suite number; and each apartment shall be given its respective apartment number. At no time shall any unit or apartment in the same building be given the same number. For example, 58 Elm Street, Unit 1; 58 Elm Street, Unit 2; 58 Elm St. Apartment 3; etc. 
    Duplex house. A dwelling consisting of two separate family units, which are separated by a one-hour rated construction. Each family unit shall be given its own road number. 
    Single-family dwelling. A detached one family house that shall be given its own road number. For example, 44 (Name) Street. 
    Single-family dwelling with in-law apartment. A primary residence with an accessory apartment. The primary residence shall be given a road number, and the accessory apartment shall use that road number. 
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06) 
Sec. 16-85. - Compliance. 
    All owners of primary buildings shall display and maintain the assigned numbers in the following manner: 
(1)  Number on the primary building. Where the primary building is within 50 feet of the edge of the road right-of-way, the assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the residence or structure near the front door or entry, clearly visible from the road, preferred location is on the (right or left) of the door knob side of the entrance door, no less than 36 inches and not higher than 72 inches and no further than 16 inches from the edge of the door unless otherwise approved. 
(2)  Number at the road line. Where the residence or structure is over 50 feet from the edge of the road right-of-way, the assigned number shall be displayed on a post, fence, wall, mail box or other structure at the property line next to the walk or access drive to the residence or structure. The post, fence, wall, mail box or other structure shall be no more than five feet from the edge of the road, numbers shall be mounted no less than 36 inches and not more than 72 inches from ground level. Numbers shall be posted on both sides of the marker used. All weeds and plantings kept clear and numbers clearly visible. 
(3)  Size and color of number. The numbering shall be a minimum of four inches in height and of a color that is a visible contrast to the surface upon which it is mounted. All displayed street numbers shall be in Arabic form (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9). 
Every person whose duty is to display the assigned number shall remove any different number that might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned in conformance with this ordinance. 
(4)  Interior location. All residents and other occupants are requested to post the assigned number and road name adjacent to their telephone for emergency reference. 
(5)  Compliance deadline. Compliance shall be required within 30 days of either the effective date or receipt of notification from the town regarding structure numbering. 
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06) 
Sec. 16-86. - Enforcement. 
    The town building official shall have the primary responsibility for the implementation and enforcement of this naming and numbering ordinance in conjunction with the E-911 coordinator/liaison who shall be the fire department director of communications. 
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06) 
Sec. 16-87. - Penalty. 
    Any property owner who fails to comply with any relevant provision of this ordinance within 30 days of the mailing date of the notification of road naming and numbering assignment shall be guilty of a violation with a penalty of not more than $50.00 for each day of noncompliance. 
    Any property owner who shall affix to or display upon a structure any number other than that assigned to it pursuant to this article shall be guilty of a violation with a penalty of not more than $100.00 for each day of noncompliance. 
    Property owners in noncompliance shall be notified by certified mail and given up to 30 days from the post date to comply with this article before penalty is enforced and begins to accrue. The penalty will continue to accrue until the violation ceases. 
    This section shall not apply to the display of "date of origin" numbers for historic buildings provided that they are displayed so as to not be confused with the display of the assigned road numbers. 
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06) 
Sec. 16-88. - New developments and subdivisions. 
    All new developments and subdivisions shall be named and numbered in accordance with the provisions of this article and as follows: 
(1)  New developments. Whenever any residence or primary building is constructed or developed, it shall be the duty of the new owner to procure an assigned number from the building department. This shall be done at the time of the issuance of the building permit. 
(2)  New subdivisions. Any prospective sub divider shall show a proposed road name and lot numbering system on the pre-application submission to the planning board. Approval by the planning board and the technical review committee shall constitute the assignment of road names and numbers to the lots in the subdivision. The technical review committee shall consist of the building official, fire chief, police chief, highway director, town engineer, town planner, town clerk and the E-911 coordinator/liaison. 
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06) 
Sec. 16-89. - Street signs. 
    The town shall institute a program for the installation and maintenance of road name signs in accordance with the names established by this article. 
    All road signs shall be installed and maintained by the town fire department, fire alarm division to the highest degree possible allowed by budget considerations. 
    The fire chief shall appoint a chief officer and his designee to assist the fire alarm division in the implementation of road sign installation. 
    The initial expense of street sign installation shall be the responsibility of the developer of the subdivision or development. The fire department shall provide each developer with a cost account for the installation of street signs, which shall include all expenses related to said installation. 
    The normal installation of street signs is attachment to utility poles, where a development does not have utility poles, such as the case with underground utility construction the street signs shall be installed by the developer at the direction and satisfaction of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06) 
Sec. 16-90. - Appeals. 
    Any property owner aggrieved by the implementation or administration of the provisions of this article may appeal in writing to the zoning board of review. All appeals shall be in written form to the zoning board of review, setting forth the basis for the appeal, and said board shall act upon the appeal within 60 days from date of receipt. 
(Ord. No. 2006-23, 10-17-06; Ord. 2008-15, 9-16-08) 
Chapter 17 - RELEASE AND REDUCTION OF CONSTRUCTION AND/OR IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2004-9, adopted July 8, 2004 repealed ch. 17 in its entirety and replaced it with provisions as herein set out. The former ch. 17 pertained to subdivision and land development and was derived from Ord. No. 95-02, adopted Feb. 7, 1995. Provisions pertaining to subdivision and land development are administered by the West Warwick Planning Board. See the Code Comparative Table for analysis of inclusion. 

Sec. 17-1. - Release and reduction of construction and/or improvement guarantees. 
    Upon receipt from the planning board of a recommendation in accordance with the provisions of section 20(C)(3) of the subdivision and land development rules and regulations of the town of West Warwick, the town council shall consider such recommendation and shall either: 
(1)  a.  Approve the recommendation to release the guarantee and authorize the finance director to return all improvement guarantees to the developer; 
b.  Approve the recommendation to reduce the amount of guarantee and authorize such reductions; or 
(2)  Reject such recommendation and refer the matter back to the planning board for further review and recommendation with the reasons for such rejection stated on the referral back to the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 2004-9, 7-8-04) 
Chapter 18 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-12 , adopted April 25, 2017, repealed the former Art. I,  18-1-18-9, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. of 10-10-58; Ord. of 5-18-65,  1-3; Res. of 10-22-79; Res. of 5-4-82; Res. of 4-5-88; Ord. of 10-6-92; Ord. of 10-4-94; Ord. of 9-5-95; Ord. No. 2003-11, adopted Sept. 16, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-5, adopted April 29, 2004; Ord. No. 2004-6, adopted April 29, 2004; Ord. No. 2016-11(Res.) , adopted Aug. 16, 2016. 

Sec. 18-1. - Elderly exemptions. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-13.1 the town council shall exempt from taxation the real property situated in each separate and distinct tax classification in said town, owned and occupied by any person over the age of 65 years, which exemption from the assessed valuation of the real property, in each separate and distinct tax classification shall be in an amount up to $10,000.00, and which exemption in each separate and distinct tax classification shall be in addition to any and all other exemptions from taxation to which said person may be otherwise entitled. Said exemption shall be applied uniformly in each separate and distinct tax classification and without regard to ability to pay; provided, however, that only one such exemption shall be granted to cotenants, joint tenants and tenants by the entirety, even though all of the cotenants, joint tenants and tenants by the entirety are 65 years of age or over. In the event of the death of an exempt person over the age of 65, leaving a widow or widower between, the ages of 62 and 65, the exemption shall continue for the benefit of that widow or widower as lone as the widow or widower shall remain unmarried. Said exemption shall apply to a life tenant who has the obligation for the payment of the tax on such real property. 
(b)  The exemption provided by subsection (a) hereof shall apply to all persons of the age of 65 or over, whether they are citizens or noncitizens of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12 , 4-25-17) 
Sec. 18-2. - Schedule of exemptions for certain taxpayers. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-16(b) the town enacts the following schedule of exemptions from the assessed valuation on real property located therein for any person who is 65 years or older or to any person who is totally and permanently disabled regardless of age, which said shall be applied for annually and which exemption schedule shall be based upon an annual gross household income as follows: 
(a)  An exemption of $375.00 for those having a gross annual income from all sources of $0.00 to $15,000.00. 
(b)  An exemption of $280.00 for those having a gross annual income from all sources of $15,001.00 to $20,000.00. 
(c)  An exemption of $235.00 for those having a gross annual income from all sources of $20,001.00 to $25,000.00. 
(d)  An exemption of $190.00 for those having a gross annual income from all sources of $25,001.00 to $30,000.00. 
(e)  An exemption of $100.00 for those having a gross annual income from all sources of $30,001.00 to $35,000.00. 
    Provided, however, that the exemption schedule shall apply only to single-family dwellings in which the person resides; provided further, the person acquired the property for actual consideration paid or inherited the property; provided further, the person has resided in the town for a period of three years, ending with the date of assessment for the year for which exemption is claimed; and provided further, that such exemption shall not be allowed unless the person entitled to it has presented to the assessors, on or before the last day on which sworn statements may be filed with the tax assessor for the year for which the foregoing is claimed, due evidence that he or she is so entitled, which evidence shall stand as long as his or her residence remains unchanged. In the case of married persons the age requirement will be met as soon as either the husband or wife reaches the age of 65 years, and in the event of the death of an exempt person over the age of 65 leaving a widow or widower between the ages of 62 and 65, the exemption shall continue for the benefit of that widow or widower as long as the widower shall remain unmarried. 
    Those persons granted tax relief under this provision will have the option of retaining their current tax freeze or abandoning it to seek relief under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12 , 4-25-17) 
Sec. 18-3. - Exemption for the visually impaired. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-12(a) the property of each person who has permanent impairment of both eyes as provided for in said statue shall receive an exemption which shall be equal to $335.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12 , 4-25-17) 
Sec. 18-4. - Veterans exemptions. 
(a)  Veterans' exemption. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-4(a)(1) and  44-3-4(a)(1)(xvf): 
(1)  The motor vehicle of each veteran who qualifies pursuant to the terms of said statue or the unmarried widow or widower of that person shall be exempt from the assessed value of the motor vehicle from taxation in the amount of $1,000.00, provided that said veteran, widow or widower owns no real property; 
(2)  The real property in each separate and distinct tax classification of each veteran who qualifies pursuant to the terms of said statue or the unmarried widow or widower of that person shall be exempt from the assessed value of the real property from taxation in an amount not to exceed $10,000.00. 
(b)  Disabled veterans exemption. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-4(a)(3)(viii) the real property of each totally disabled veteran shall be exempt in the amount of $200.00 off the tax bill. 
(c)  Totally disabled veterans' specially adopted housing exemption. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-4(b) in addition to any exemptions received pursuant to G.L.  44-3-4(a) the real property of any veteran qualified pursuant to said statute or the widow or widower of a deceased veteran who was determined under applicable federal law by the Veterans Administration of the United States to be totally disabled through service-connected disability and who, by reason of the disability, has received assistance in acquiring "specially adopted housing" under the laws administered by the Veterans Administration shall be exempt from the assessed value of the real property up to amount of $10,000.00, in each separate and distinct tax classification, provided that the real property is occupied as his or her domicile by the person and provided further, that if the property is designed for occupancy by more than one family, then only that value of so much of the house as is occupied by the person as his or her domicile is exempted, and provided further, that satisfactory evidence of receipt of the assistance is furnished to the tax assessor. 
(d)  Totally disabled veterans motor vehicle exemption. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-4(c) the motor vehicle of a totally disabled veteran, in addition to the exemptions provided in section 18-4(a) hereof, shall be exempt the amount of $2,000.00 from the assessed valuation of the motor vehicle. 
(e)  Exemption for former prisoners of war. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-4(e) in addition to other exemptions provided in this chapter 18 of the West Warwick Code of Ordinances the real and personal property in each separate and distinct tax classification of a veteran or unmarried widow or widower of a person who has been or shall be classified as, or determined to be, a prisoner of war by the Veterans Administration of the United States shall be exempt from the assessed value of the real and personal property up to the amount of $3,000.00. 
(f)  Totally disabled veterans' specially adapted housing exemption. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-4(i) in addition to any exemptions received pursuant to G.L.  44-3-4 the real property of any veteran qualified pursuant to said statue who was determined under applicable federal law by the Veterans Administration of the United States to be totally disabled through service-connected disability and who, who owns a specially adapted homestead that has been acquired or modified with the assistance of a special adaptive housing grant from the Veterans Administration and that meets Veterans Administration and Americans with disability act guidelines from adaptive housing or that has been acquired or modified using proceeds from the sale of any previous homestead that was acquired with the assistance of a special adaptive housing grant from the Veterans Administration, the person or the person's surviving spouse is exempt from all taxation on the homestead. 
(g)  Gold Star parents' exemption. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-5(a) the property of every person whose son or daughter has served with the Armed Forces of the United States of America and has lost his or her life as a result of his or her service with the Armed Forces of the United States of America, providing the death was determined to be in line of duty, shall be exempted from taxation the amount of $225.00 off the tax bill provided son or daughter was honorably discharged and provided further that there shall be but one exemption granted when both parents of the deceased son or daughter are living. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12 , 4-25-17) 
Sec. 18-5. - Special exemptions. 
(a)  Exemption of educational and religious property. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-3(a)(5), buildings for free public schools, buildings for religious worship, and the land upon which they stand and immediately surrounding them, to an extent not exceeding five acres, so far as the buildings and land are occupied and used exclusively for religious or educational purposes are hereby declared to be exempt from taxation 
    Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-3(a)(6), dwelling houses and the land on which they stand, not exceeding one acre in size, or the minimum lot size for the zone in which they are located, whichever is greater, owned by, or held in trust for, any religious organization and actually used by its officiating clergy are hereby declared to be exempt from taxation. 
(b)  Exemption of household and personal items. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-3(a)(17) the household furniture and family stores of a housekeeper in the whole, including clothing, bedding and other white goods, books and all other such tangible personal property items which are common to the normal household, shall be exempt from taxation. 
(c)  Station Fire Memorial Foundation exemption. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-3(a)(45) the real and personal property located within the Town of West Warwick at 211 Cowesett Avenue. Plat 29-Lot 25. which consists of approximately 28,750 square feet and is owned by the Station Fire Memorial Foundation of East Greenwich, a Rhode Island nonprofit corporation shall be exempt from taxation. 
(d)  Tides Family Services, Inc. exemption. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-3(a)(55), the real and personal property of Tides Family Services, Inc., is exempt. 
(e)  Arctic Playhouse exemption. Pursuant to the provisions of G.L.  44-3-3(a)(59) the real estate and personal property of Arctic Playhouse located at 1249 Main St., West Warwick, RI, Tax Assessor's Plat 5, Lot 620 is exempt, effective Dec. 31, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12 , 4-25-17; Ord. No. 2017-16 , 6-6-17) 
Secs. 18-6-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of November 1, 1994, amended the Code by adding thereto provisions designated as  1-1(a)-(f), relative to the board of assessment review. At the discretion of the editor, such provisions have been included herein as art. II,  18-21-18-26. 

Sec. 18-21. - Established; terms; vacancies. 
    There shall be a board of assessment review consisting of three members appointed by the town council, each to serve a three-year term, no more than two members of whom shall be members of the same political party at any one time, and all of whom shall be electors and residents of the town. The terms of the members of said board shall be arranged in such manner that the term of one member shall expire each year. All members of said board in office at the time of the taking effect of this section shall continue to serve until the expiration of their respective terms, and all members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified, or until they shall cease to have the qualifications for office set forth in this section. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for appointment to the board in this section. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  1-1(a)) 
Sec. 18-22. - Purpose. 
    The board of assessment review shall hear and consider the appeals of any property owner concerning the amount of his assessed valuation as determined by the tax assessor. The assessor shall attend all hearings of the board in order to explain his valuation, but shall have no vote. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  1-1(b)) 
Sec. 18-23. - Appeals, records; payment required. 
    The board shall keep an accurate record of its proceedings which shall be available for public inspection. The board shall meet on the first business day after the expiration of 20 days subsequent to the date on which taxes become due and payable, and at such times thereafter as may be necessary to hear appeals. No appeal shall be considered unless it is made in writing and is received by the board no later than three months from the date the tax becomes due and payable, without penalty of the tax. No appeal shall be considered by the board unless the tax due and payable has been paid under protest. If it shall appear that the valuation of any property has been incorrectly or inequitably assessed, the board shall have power to change the assessment and shall determine the correct valuation of such property. It shall be the duty of the director of finance to make payment of any refund that may be due to the property owner. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  1-1(c)) 
Sec. 18-24. - Procedures. 
    Upon receipt of an appeal received by the tax assessor pursuant to section 18-23, the tax assessor shall immediately set the matter down for hearing before the board. Said meeting shall be posted pursuant to laws governing open meetings and all board members shall be notified. The tax assessor shall notify the taxpayer of the date, time and place of the hearing, which notice shall be sent in writing, at least of two weeks prior to the date of hearing. The board shall make its decision within ten days of the date of hearing, at which time the taxpayer shall be notified in writing of said decision. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  1-1(d)) 
Sec. 18-25. - Correction; final action. 
    If the board determines that the assessment has been inaccurately or inequitably assessed, then the board has the power to change the assessment and determine the correct valuation of such property. The taxpayer, after being so notified, shall present his or her bill to the assessor for adjustment. Subsequent to any adjustments, the tax assessor shall submit a listing to the town council of all adjustments. It shall be the duty of the director of finance to make payment of any refund that may be due to the property owner. Should the board determine that the assessment was adequate and equitable, then the taxpayer shall have all other remedies available to him or her pursuant to Rhode Island General Laws. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  1-1(e)) 
Sec. 18-26. - Nonlimitation of appeal. 
    The taking of an appeal to the board of assessment review or any action thereon shall not be construed to limit or restrict the right of any taxpayer to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief from any assessed valuation determined by the tax assessor or subsequently by the board of assessment review. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95,  1-1(f)) 
Sec. 18-27. - Purpose. 
    In order to encourage the renovation, rehabilitation or construction of tax delinquent properties within the town, the town council, deems it to be in the best interest of the town to provide for the cancellation, in whole or in part, of delinquent real estate taxes as assessed on certain vacant and abandoned mill properties located within the town. Accordingly, acting pursuant to R.I.G.L.  44-7-14(4), the town council herewith approves the cancellation of delinquent taxes as hereinafter provided. 
(Res. No. 97-151, 6-3-97) 
Sec. 18-28. - Application for cancellation of taxes. 
(a)  A prospective purchaser of vacant and/or abandoned mill property may apply to the town planner for cancellation of delinquent taxes as assessed against said property. The town planner shall review each application on a case-by-case basis. The applicant must meet the criteria as established by the town planner for qualification under the provisions of this article, which criteria shall include, but is not limited to the establishment of a time-table for the completion of the rehabilitation and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  The town planner shall submit his recommendations to the town council for approval of the cancellation of the delinquent taxes. The review of applications for cancellation of taxes shall be made on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Pursuant to R.I.G.L.  44-7-15, any cancellation of tax approved by the town council shall be certified by the town council to the tax collector that the tax has been so cancelled. The tax collector shall, upon receipt of the certification, forthwith attached certification to the tax list and take appropriate steps to remove the tax from the tax list. 
(Res. No. 97-151, 6-3-97) 
Secs. 18-29, 18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX INCENTIVE PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 97-265, adopted Oct. 7, 1997, repealed  18-31-18-37, which derived from Ord. of 6-13-94,  18-10-18-16, and replaced them with similar provisions to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 18-31. - Alternative tax incentive plans. 
    The town council hereby establishes a tax incentive plan. Eligible businesses or property owners may elect to take advantage of this plan as follows: 
(1)  Incentives for decreased real estate taxes. 
a.  Industrial property owners: Tax incentives are available for all new construction, or the expansion of existing buildings in square feet and remodeling/modernizing of existing buildings which increases the property's assessed value. 
b.  Commercial property owners (for abandoned and blighted properties, and the West Warwick Business Park only): Tax incentives are available for new construction, substantial rehabilitation or reutilization of abandoned buildings within town defined blighted areas. 
1.  First year. The property owner shall pay the property tax based on the existing assessed value prior to new construction, expansion in square footage of existing structure, and/or remodeling or modernizing of the exterior or interior of the structure. 
2.  Second year. The property owner shall pay the property tax based on the prior assessed value plus 20 percent of the assessed value for the new construction, expansion in square footage of existing structure and/or remodeling or modernizing of the exterior or interior of the structure. 
3.  Third year. The property owner shall pay the property tax based on the prior assessed value plus 40 percent of the assessed value for the new construction, expansion in square footage of existing structure and/or remodeling or modernizing of the exterior or interior of the structure. 
4.  Fourth year. The property owner shall pay the property tax based on the prior assessed value plus 60 percent of the assessed value for the new construction, expansion in square footage of existing structure and/or remodeling or modernizing of the exterior or interior of the structure. 
5.  Fifth year. The property owner shall pay the property tax based on the prior assessed value plus 80 percent of the assessed value for the new construction, expansion in square footage of existing structure and/or remodeling or modernizing of the exterior or interior of the structure. 
6.  Sixth year. The property owner shall pay the property tax based on the prior assessed value plus 100 percent of the assessed value for the new construction, expansion in square footage of existing structure and/or remodeling or modernizing of the exterior or interior of the structure. 
(2)  Agreement on assessed values. In determining assessed values and at the initiation of the agreement, the town and the business will agree on assessed values, adjusted for inflation. Once the values and tax payment amounts are agreed to, they will not be further adjusted during the time of the agreement. 
(Res. No. 97-265, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-15, 11-6-01) 
Sec. 18-32. - Eligible entities. 
(a)  Existing business owner. Any existing industrial or noncommercial business responsible for payment of property taxes for said business to the town that has been in existence in the town for five consecutive years is eligible for participation in one of the tax incentive plans provided herein. 
(b)  New business owner. Any new industrial or noncommercial business that will be responsible for payment of property taxes for said business to the town and locating in the town is eligible for participation in one of the tax incentive plans provided herein. 
(c)  New construction, substantial rehabilitation or reutilization of abandoned or blighted properties. Existing business owner or new businesses wanting to build using new construction, substantial rehabilitation or reutilization of abandoned or blighted properties zoned for other than residential business, as well as all properties within the West Warwick Business Park, are responsible for the payment of property taxes for said business to the town. 
(d)  Lessees. Any business paying property taxes to the town pursuant to the terms of a lease agreement, whether the business is operated by a subsidiary company or companies, or other lessees who are not the actual owners of the property at which the business is located, are eligible for participation in one of the tax incentive plans provided above. 
(e)  Commercial property owner who expands. Commercial property owner who expands in or into abandoned or blighted properties, and the West Warwick Business Park. Any commercial property owner who expands the size of a commercial building through new construction, substantial rehabilitation or reutilization of abandoned buildings or within blighted areas zoned for other than residential business or uses, as well as all properties within the West Warwick Business Park. 
(f)  Commercial property owner who remodels or modernizes. Commercial property owner who remodels or modernizes in or into abandoned property and blighted areas, and the West Warwick Business Park. Any commercial property owner who is responsible for payment of property taxes for said business to the town, and who remodels or modernizes the exterior or interior of their existing structure, thereby increasing the property's assessed value without increasing the total square footage, is eligible for participation in one of the tax incentive plans provided herein, as long as new construction, substantial rehabilitation or reutilization of abandoned or buildings is utilized and/or the construction is within blighted areas zoned for other than residential businesses or uses, as well as all properties within the West Warwick Business Park. 
(g)  Responsibility for demonstrating eligibility. Any business or property owner or lessee seeking to qualify as eligible for participation in one of the tax incentive plans provided herein is solely responsible for providing satisfactory evidence of eligibility lessees must provide the town with satisfactory evidence that the lessee is solely responsible for all payments of property tax. A failure to provide adequate proof of eligibility for one of the tax incentive plans does not preclude an applicant from applying for any other tax incentives available to which it may be entitled. 
(Res. No. 99-176, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 2001-15, 11-6-01) 
Sec. 18-33. - Terms and conditions. 
(a)  Applicable to all eligible businesses, property owners, and lessees. Any business or commercial property owner or lessee which/who qualifies for participation in this tax incentive program may receive tax incentives as provided in this article subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The business, property owner, or lessee must apply for designation under this tax incentive program at or before submitting an application for a building permit for new construction, expanded construction or remodeling; 
(2)  The business, property owner, or lessee must be determined to be eligible pursuant to section 18-35; 
(3)  The business, property owner, or lessee may only participate in one of the plans identified in section 18-31; 
(4)  The participating business, property owner; or lessee is required to comply with all federal, state, and municipal rules, regulations, guidelines, and the like as it relates to their business; 
(5)  The participating business, property owner; or lessee must remain current on all municipal taxes and charges; and 
(6)  The tax incentive period shall not exceed six years. 
(b)  Supplementary applicable to existing businesses. In addition to the terms and conditions specified in subsection (a) above, receipt of tax incentives by existing businesses under this tax incentive program are also subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The business must have been in existence in the town for a minimum of five consecutive years immediately prior to applying for designation under this tax incentive program and must provide proof of its five years of operation in the town; and 
(2)  All municipal taxes, fees, and assessments must be paid and current and have been current for the last three years. 
(c)  Lessees. Tax incentives by lessees under this tax incentive program is also subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The lessee must provide satisfactory evidence that they are solely responsible for payment of all property taxes on the property in the town; and 
(2)  If the lessee is applying as an existing business, it must also comply with subsection (b). 
(d)  Commercial property owners (for abandoned and blighted properties and the West Warwick Business Park). Benefits to commercial property owners only apply when new construction, substantial rehabilitation or reutilization of abandoned or buildings occurs, or within blighted areas zoned for other than residential business or purposes, as well as all properties within the West Warwick Business Park. The receipt of tax incentives by commercial property owners under this tax incentive program is also subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The property must be used in conformity with all municipal codes; 
(2)  All municipal taxes, fees, and assessments must be paid and current; and 
(3)  If the same owner has owned the property for three or more years, all municipal sales fees, and assessment must have been current for the last three years. 
(Res. No. 97-265, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 2000-15, 11-6-01) 
Sec. 18-34. - Calculation of tax incentive. 
    Unless specified otherwise herein, the tax incentives offered herein are based upon the projected capital investment made by each business or commercial property owner or lessee within the town through new construction and/or expansion and/or remodeling and renovations which increase the property's assessed value. Determination of the amount of the incentive shall be in accordance with the applicable subsections below: 
(1)  New construction; expansion. Any tax incentive provided herein based upon new construction shall be calculated based upon the percentage of construction completed as determined by the building official and tax assessor for the town. 
(2)  Remodeling and/or modernization. Any tax incentive provided herein based upon an increase in property value through remodeling and/or modernization shall be calculated based upon the amount of the increased valuation only as determined by the tax assessor. 
(3)  Increases in assessed value. The assessor and each business or commercial property owner or lessee shall agree on a percentage or dollar increase in assessed value from year to year. This value will be used to calculate the actual taxes to be paid when taking into account the percentage discount. This policy is designed to insure that a building continues to be assessed at close to actual value. 
(4)  Agreement not to appeal assessed values or increase assessments. Any agreement approved by the town will include a provision that each business or commercial property owner or lessee shall not appeal the agreed upon values for the term of the agreement. In addition, the town agrees to abide by the established values for the life of the agreement. 
(Res. No. 97-265, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-15, 11-6-01) 
Sec. 18-35. - Application; determination of eligibility. 
(a)  Application forms. Application forms for participation in the tax incentive program will be available at the town tax assessor's office and such other offices and locations deemed appropriate by the town planner. 
(b)  Determination of eligibility. Upon receipt of an application for participation in a tax incentive program plan, the tax assessor, building official, and town planner (or their designees) shall jointly recommend to the town manager if the applicant is eligible under the plan for which the application was submitted. 
(c)  Final processing of applications. The town planner shall notify the applicant of the decision regarding their eligibility for the tax incentive program plan. The tax assessor or his designee shall make a record of the determination. Subsequently, the town planner shall inform the town manager of the determination. 
(Res. No. 97-265, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-15, 11-6-01) 
Sec. 18-36. - Submission of annual report. 
(a)  Preparation. The town planner, with assistance from the tax assessor and building official shall prepare an annual report which identifies all businesses and commercial property owners participating in the tax incentive program and shall include a summarization of the projected capital investments made through new and expanded construction and remodeling/modernization activities by these businesses and property owners. This annual report shall include the same information for tax incentives provided under the previous ordinance. 
(b)  Submission. The town planner shall submit the annual report to the town manager and town council no later than April 1st for the preceding calendar year. 
(Res. No. 97-265, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-15, 11-6-01) 
Sec. 18-37. - Previous incentives granted. 
    Any incentives previously granted shall remain in full force and effect pursuant to the provisions of the ordinance in existence at the time of the granting of the tax incentive. 
(Res. No. 97-265, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-15, 11-6-01) 
Sec. 18-38. - Rescission provisions. 
    The tax incentive program established herein may be rescinded or amended by the town council at any time by repeal or amendment of this article. 
(Res. No. 97-265, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 2001-15, 11-6-01) 
Secs. 18-39-18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXPAYERS, DELINQUENT 

Sec. 18-51. - Taxpayers, delinquent-Contracts. 
    The town will not enter into any contract or agreement to purchase services or equipment from any person, corporation or business enterprise who has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges assessed against the business property owned by such person, corporation or business enterprise; or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit, and which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about the business real estate whose owner has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges assessed against the business real estate. 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, 4-3-01) 
Sec. 18-52. - Taxpayers, delinquent-Licenses and permits. 
(a)  The town may deny any application for or revoke or suspend any local license or permit, including renewals and transfers, issued by any board, officer or department for any person, corporation or business enterprise who has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges, or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate whose owner has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges. 
(1)  The tax collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the "tax collector," shall annually furnish to each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the "licensing authority," that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the "party," that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a 12-month period, and that has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the board of assessment review. 
(2)  The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority by the tax collector or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority by the tax collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party by the town clerk as required by applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing before the town council as the town's licensing authority, to be held not earlier than 14 days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The tax collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such a proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing authority receives a certificate issued by the tax collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate. 
(3)  Any party shall be given a one time opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit; and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. The structure of the payment agreement will be at the sole discretion of the tax collector. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law. 
(4)  The town council may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds that there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, in the business or activity conducted in or on said property. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: 
(1)  Dog licenses; 
(2)  Fishing, hunting and trapping licenses; 
(3)  Marriage licenses; 
(4)  Theatrical events and public exhibition permits. 
(Ord. No. 2001-2, 4-3-01) 
Sec. 18-53. - Waiver of interest on overdue quarterly tax payments. 
(a)  The property subject to the overdue payment is the residence of the taxpayer and has been for the five years immediately preceding the tax payment which is overdue. 
(b)  The request for a waiver of interest is in writing, signed and dated by the taxpayer. 
(c)  The taxpayer has made timely payments of taxes to the city or town for the five years immediately preceding the tax payment which is overdue. The burden of proof of timely payments shall be upon the taxpayer. 
(d)  The bill for which the payment is overdue was issued less than two years prior to the date of the request for a waiver of interest. 
(1)  In no event shall the waiver of interest on a tax bill exceed $500.00. Decisions of the tax collector shall be in writing and contain a notice to the city or town council. If the taxpayer receives an adverse decision from the tax collector, the taxpayer must pay the interest and may file a claim for reimbursement with the city or town council within ten days of the decision. 
(2)  Any request for a waiver of taxes which meets criteria established by this section shall be granted by the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 2003-4, 2-18-03) 
ARTICLE V. - TAX ON RENEWABLE ENERGY 

Sec. 18-54. - Tax on renewable energy systems. 
(a)  In accordance with G.L.  44-5-3(c) the Town of West Warwick hereby authorizes its assessor to levy a tax on renewable energy tangible property as defined in G.L.  39-26-5 in accordance with the rules and regulations executed by the Rhode Island Office of Energy Resources. 
(b)  In accordance with G.L.  44-3-21 the Town of West Warwick hereby exempts from taxation commercial net-metered renewable energy systems whose sole purpose is to offset electricity bills and not to sell power back to the electric distribution system. 
(c)  Property owners installing renewable energy systems are required to provide the interconnection application between the renewable energy developer and the electric distribution company and any documentation of program enrollment to the town indicating if the renewable energy system is net-metered or if the system is selling a portion of all the energy produced back to national grid under the renewable energy growth program. A copy of the final interconnection service agreement executed between the renewable energy developer and the electric distribution company shall be provided to the town of prior to construction of the renewable energy system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12 , 4-25-17) 
Chapter 19 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic regulations generally, ch. 11. 

Sec. 19-1. - Establishment of bus stops and taxicab stands. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish bus stops and taxicab stands in such places and in such number as shall be determined to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public and every such stop or stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  23) 
Sec. 19-2. - Assignment of taxicab stands. 
    The chief of police may assign taxicab stands to persons authorized to engage in the taxicab business. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  23) 
Sec. 19-3. - Changes in bus stops, taxicab stands. 
    The chief of police may revoke, alter or amend any bus stop or taxicab stand or any assignment of an established taxicab stand. 
(Comp. Ords. ch. 42,  23) 
Sec. 19-4. - Use of bus stops, taxicab stands. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than a bus to park in an officially designated bus stop or for any vehicle other than a taxicab to park in an officially established taxicab stand. It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to park in any established stand other than that assigned to it. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  24) 
Sec. 19-5. - Parking taxicabs other than in stands. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab to park upon any street at any place other than at an officially designated taxicab stand except while under actual hire. 
(Comp. Ords., ch. 42,  24A) 
Chapter 20 - CASINO AGREEMENT 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this agreement (including, without limitation, the recitals), the following terms shall have the respective meanings indicated in this section: 
    Advance payment means each payment described in section 20-3(6). 
    Advance payment hurdles have the meaning set forth in section 20-3(6)d. 
    Affiliate or affiliates means: 
(1)  In the case of any person, a person which, directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with, such person, and 
(2)  Any individual who is a member of the immediate family (whether by birth or marriage) of an individual who is an affiliate which includes for purposes of this definition a spouse; a brother or sister of the whole or half blood of such individual or his spouse; a lineal descendent or ancestor (including an individual related by or through legal adoption) of any of the foregoing or a trust for the benefit of any of the foregoing. For purposes of the foregoing definition, "control" (including "controlled by" and "under common control with") shall mean possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management policies of the entity in question, whether through the ownership of voting securities, membership interests, partnership interests, or by contract or otherwise. 
    Agreement means this development agreement and all exhibits hereto and all amendments, modifications and supplements hereof entered into by the parties hereto from time to time. 
    Annual period means, for purposes of section 20-3, each annual 12-month period, the first of which begins on the opening date and ends on the 12-month anniversary thereof and thereafter each 12-month period beginning on each anniversary of the opening date. 
    Application means any request filed by the developer with the town, in proper form under the town's ordinances, rules and regulations, seeking town zoning and land use decisions. 
    Arbitrator has the meaning set forth in section 20-21(a). 
    Casino means the space within the facility from time to time which will house or contain the casino gaming. 
    Casino facility means the casino and the facility. 
    Casino gaming means all games defined in and/or authorized by the legislation. 
    Casino gaming income means gross receipts from the casino less the total of all sums paid out as winnings to patrons, including the cash equivalent of any merchandise or things of value included in a jackpot or payout, all as reported by the developer to the gaming control board, for any given calendar year or portion thereof. 
    Casino property tax has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)h. 
    Casino property tax assessment means the assessment established pursuant to section 20-3(10). 
    Casino tax rate has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)h.3. 
    Claims shall mean any and all claims (including any claim for attorneys' fees and/or other professional fees, costs and expenses), demands, obligations, duties, judgments, liabilities, damages, expenses, indebtedness, debts, breaches of contract or duty, acts, omissions, misfeasance, malfeasance, causes of action, sums of money, accounts, compensation, contracts, controversies, promises, damages, costs, losses and remedies therefor, choses in action, rights of indemnity or liability of any type, kind, nature, description or character whatsoever, and irrespective of how, why or by reason of what facts, whether known or unknown, suspected or unsuspected, whether heretofore now existing or hereafter arising, whether liquidated or unliquidated. 
    Closing date has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)c. 
    Completion improvement assessed value has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)d. 
    Completion land assessed value has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)d. 
    Completion personal/tangible assessed value has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)d. 
    Completion project assessed value has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)d. 
    Completion real estate assessed value has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)d. 
    Conditions precedent has the meaning set forth in section 20-11. 
    Construction commencement has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(6)b. 
    Construction period has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)e. 
    Current assessed value has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)f. 
    Developer has the meaning set forth in the preamble and includes any assignee or transferee pursuant to section 33 or any other applicable provision in this agreement. 
    Discriminatory has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(7)b. 
    Environmental audit means the investigative process to determine if all operations and conditions in, on, under, or adjoining and affecting, the site are in compliance with applicable environmental and wetland laws and regulations and to investigate the presence or absence of any toxic or hazardous substances in, on or under the site. 
    Event of default shall have the definition set forth in sections 20-18 and 20-19, as applicable to the town and the developer. 
    Facilities and improvement fund has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(M)b. 
    Facility or facilities means all improvements to the site as well as all buildings, facilities, parking, parking garages, retail and service uses, bars, restaurants, clubs, lounges, hotels and/or hotel time share units, arenas as well as the building within which casino gaming is or will be conducted and other facilities, as originally constructed and as expanded, renovated or modified from time to time. 
    Fire and police equipment fund has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(12)a. 
    First advance payment has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(2)a. 
    First advance payment hurdle has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(6)d. 
    Force majeure event has the meaning set forth in section 20-20(a). 
    Gaming control board means the applicable gaming authority created by the Legislature of the state with jurisdiction to regulate the casino. 
    Guaranty has the meaning set forth in section 20-18(4). 
    Harrah's has the meaning set forth in section 20-33(b)(1). 
    Host community payment has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(1)a. 
    Impositions means the obligations and impositions described in section 20-3(7)a. 
    Improvements means all horizontal improvements to the site, including utilities, infrastructure and subterranean improvements. 
    Index shall mean the consumer price index for all urban consumers for the region in which the project is located, or if such index is not available, a successor index published by the department of labor or a nationally recognized publisher of statistical information. 
    Initial payment has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(5). 
    Land assessed value has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)c. 
    Legislation has the meaning set forth in recital A of the agreement attached to Ord. No. 2006-26. 
    Lender means any of the following: 
(1)  A national bank or federally chartered savings and loan association; 
(2)  A state chartered bank or savings and loan association or trust company; 
(3)  A life insurance company; 
(4)  A pension or retirement fund; 
(5)  A real estate investment trust or conduit lender; 
(6)  A private equity fund or any other person whose principal business is the making of business or commercial construction and permanent loans and other loans to commercial borrowers; or 
(7)  Any other institutional lender. 
    License means the license granted to the developer by or on behalf of the state to conduct casino gaming within the casino facility. 
    Material provisions means 
(1)  Any financial obligations of the parties pursuant to this agreement; or 
(2)  Any specifically enforceable agreements of the parties pursuant to this agreement. 
    "Material provisions" shall include, but not be limited to, the obligations of the parties set forth in sections 20-2(b), 20-3 and 20-4. 
    Notice has the meaning set forth in section 20-26. 
    Offsite improvements means those access roads, exits, entrances and other improvements in, around or abutting the site and/or required to be constructed as a result of any town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals and this agreement. 
    Open for business or opening for business and like references shall mean that the town shall have issued such certificates of occupancy or temporary equivalent and other applicable approvals and/or conducted such inspections as it deems appropriate and pursuant to which the facility or any portion thereof may be open for business to the public. 
    Opening date means the date of the opening for business of the facility to the public for its intended use. 
    Other section 3 monetary obligations has the meaning set forth in section 20-18(1). 
    Outside date means the date set forth in section 20-11. 
    Overdue amount interest rate has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(3)e. 
    Payment date means, for purposes of payment of the host community payment pursuant to section 20-3, the date on or before 15 days after the end of each month during the annual period, with a true up adjustment by the thirtieth day following each quarterly period pursuant to which any required underpayment is paid by the developer and the amount of any overpayment is credited against subsequent host community payment payments in the order of their payment. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited liability partnership, joint venture, estate, trust or unincorporated association, any federal, state, county or municipal government or any bureau, department, agency or instrumentality thereof, any fiduciary acting in such capacity on behalf of any of the foregoing, or any other legal or business entity. 
    Personal/tangible tax rate has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)h.1. 
    Project means all improvements, offsite improvements and facilities. 
    Project costs means all direct and indirect "hard and soft" costs, so called, of acquisition, planning (including studies), due diligence, public relations, the referendum campaign, legal and other consultants and professionals, development, construction and equipping of the facility, including offsite improvements, improvements and other costs relating thereto, including without limitation the site acquisition costs, costs incurred in pursuit or consummation of any financing commitment, the town zoning and land use decisions, public approvals and all costs of demolition or relocation of improvements or businesses displaced by the facility as well as all costs of the project or otherwise incurred by the developer in connection with the project. 
    Project documents means all documents, agreements, authorizations and approvals required by or from the town, gaming control board, other state agencies or instrumentalities, and/or federal agencies related to the project that are required and/or necessary for the development, construction, use and operation of the casino facility and the project. 
    Project plans means plans which contain or depict the project and its use and operation. 
    Proposed facilities has the definition set forth in recital B of the agreement attached to Ord. No. 2006-26. 
    Public approvals means all local, state and federal approvals and other approvals, authorizations, licenses (including liquor licenses) and permits required to develop, construct, use and operate the casino facility for casino gaming and its other intended uses (other than the town zoning and land use decisions), including, but not limited to, traffic modifications and approvals from state department of transportation and the Federal Highway Administration for on and off ramps from Route 95. 
    Real estate tax rate has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)h.1. 
    Recitals means paragraphs A through E on page 1 of the agreement attached to Ord. No. 2006-26, which are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. 
    Referendum means the affirmative vote by the electors of the state and the town at the general election to take place as contemplated in November, 2006, pursuant to the legislation, on whether to allow casino gaming in the town. 
    Resolution shall have the meaning set forth in section 20-39(a). 
    Rhode Island Casino Development District Enabling Act means the act anticipated to be adopted by the legislature of the state substantially in the form of exhibit H attached to Ord. No. 2006-26, and by this reference incorporated herein. 
    Second advance payment has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(2)b. 
    Second advance payment hurdle has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(6)d. 
    Site means the parcels of land identified in exhibit A attached to Ord. No. 2006-26, and by this reference incorporated herein upon which the casino facility will be constructed and casino gaming will be conducted and operated. 
    State means the State of Rhode Island. 
    Tax lots has the meaning set forth in Section 20-3(10)b. 
    Term means the period described in section 20-4. 
    Third advance payment has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(2)c. 
    Third advance payment hurdle has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(6)d. 
    Town means the Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island. 
    Town council means the town council of the town. 
    Town zoning and land use decisions has the meaning set forth in recital C of the agreement attached to Ord. No. 2006-26. 
    Town zoning and land use regulations means the regulations promulgated pursuant to the Rhode Island Casino Development District Enabling Act, as well as all other land use, fire codes, building codes and other laws, ordinances, regulations and codes of the town, as amended from time to time. 
    Toxic or hazardous substance means any of the following: 
(1)  Any substance defined as a hazardous substance pursuant to the Rhode Island Hazardous Waste Management Act of 1978, R.I.G.L.  23-19.1-4, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 9601, et seq. as interpreted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") regulations and the courts, including: 
a.  Any substance designated pursuant to section 1321(b)(2)(A) of title 33 of the United States Code (the "Code"); 
b.  Any element, compound, mixture, solution or substance designated pursuant to section 9602 of title 42 of the Code; 
c.  Any hazardous waste having the characteristics identified under or listed pursuant to section 3001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6921) (but not including any waste the regulation of which under the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) has been suspended by Act of Congress); 
d.  Any toxic pollutant listed under section 1317(a) of title 33 of the Code; 
e.  Any hazardous air pollutant listed under section 112 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7412); and 
f.  Any imminently hazardous chemical substance or mixture with respect to which the administrator of EPA has taken action pursuant to section 2606 of title 15 of the Code; 
(2)  Any petroleum, including crude oil or any fraction thereof, which is not otherwise specifically listed or designated above, natural gas, natural gas liquids, liquefied natural gas, and synthetic gas usable for fuel (or mixtures of any of the foregoing). The word "fraction" refers to certain distillates of crude oil, including gasoline, kerosene, diesel oil, jet fuels, and fuel oil, pursuant to "Standard Definitions of Petroleum Statistics" prepared by the American Petroleum Institute (4th Ed. 1988); 
(3)  Radon and related substances; 
(4)  Asbestos and related substances; 
(5)  Polychloride biphenyls; 
(6)  Vinyl chloride; and 
(7)  Any substance not described above and determined by any federal, state or local official having jurisdiction over the site or the facility to be present on the site or in the facility in amounts or in any manner contrary to any applicable law or regulation. 
    Traffic improvements has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(4)a. 
    Tribal means matters related to the tribe. 
    Tribe means the Narragansett Indian Tribe, a federally recognized Indian Tribe. 
    Unavoidable delays has the meaning set forth in section 22. 
    West Warwick casino property tax legislation has the meaning set forth in section 20-3(10)a. 
    Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the town, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-2. - Town support, intent of parties and public policy. 
(a)  Public policy and intention of parties. The town and the developer recognize that casino gaming is currently not authorized in the state and that except as contemplated in the legislation there does not presently exist any basis upon which the town may approve the site for casino gaming or the operation of the facility for casino gaming purposes. The parties intend at all times in connection with this chapter to comply with applicable law and public policy. This chapter is not and shall not be construed as a contract to violate any law or in derogation of any public policy or to contract for zoning or other governmental approvals in violation of applicable laws. 
(b)  Town zoning and land use regulations. The parties agree to cooperate and use reasonable efforts in connection with the adoption of the Rhode Island Casino Development District Enabling Act and all necessary amendments and/or decisions pursuant to the town zoning and land use regulations and the town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals and to proceed diligently and expeditiously in processing the town zoning and land use decisions. 
(c)  Town support. The town agrees, to the extent allowed by law, to support the developer's request for expedited hearings and review of all town zoning and land use decisions pursuant to the Rhode Island Casino Development District Enabling Act within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(d)  Request for information. The town will timely respond to all requests by the gaming control board and any other state agency or authority involved in the administration of the legislation, including but not limited to, responding to suitability inquiries and providing access to town files relating to the project. 
(e)  Community action plan. The parties will work together to establish a plan of involvement by the developer in associations, organizations and activities that are intended to be supportive of economic development in the town and to create continuing dialogue and interaction among the developer, the town and its business and civic community. At a minimum, during April of each year during the term hereof, the developer and the town will convene a high level meeting of its executives and town leadership or the town's duly appointed designees to discuss issues and opportunities. 
(f)  Access to site. The developer hereby confirms that the highway ramps and related improvements with respect to the project's access to Interstate Route 95 being designed on behalf of the developer are intended to provide primary public access to the site via a dedicated ramp from such interstate highway to the site. The developer shall not promote secondary or alternative means of access to the site. The developer shall promote such interstate highway access as the sole public means of ingress and egress to the site, except for emergency or secondary access as shall be required under the town zoning and land use regulations or other applicable law. 
(g)  Consideration of residents of the town/local businesses. The developer shall establish policies and programs for training and hiring qualified residents of the town for available positions at the facility and affording business vendors located in the town opportunities for contract work for the facility. The developer shall be entitled in any case to award employment to the most qualified applicants and to award vendor contracts to the lowest or otherwise most qualified bidder and to honor applicable union contracts and its vendor, training and employment policies with respect to members of the developer. To the extent permitted by applicable laws, rules and regulations and any governmental requirements and to the extent consistent with the obligations to members of the developer and under applicable union contracts, the developer will use reasonable efforts to implement its policies and programs for training and hiring qualified residents of the town for available positions at the facility and affording business vendors located in the town opportunities for contract work for the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-3. - Host community payment and other payments to the town. 
    In consideration of the town's covenants, agreements and continued performance hereunder, and in lieu of all other payments to the town based upon casino gaming income, receipts or other like revenue (but not in limitation of the other applicable provisions of this chapter), the developer, under the terms and conditions of this section, shall pay the host community payment (as hereinafter defined) calculated as follows: 
(1)  a.  Calculation of host community payment. In consideration of potential reductions of state aid and the rights conferred on developer pursuant to this chapter, the developer shall pay an annual host community payment, commencing on and as of the opening date and thereafter during the term, equal to the applicable percentage set forth in the schedule set forth below of each annual period's casino gaming income (the "host community payment"). The applicable schedule is as follows: 
Host Community Payment/Percent Schedule 
Annual Period Percentage of Casino Gaming Income 1 0.5% 2 0.6% 3 0.7% 4 1.55% 5 1.60% 6 1.65% 7 1.70% 8 1.75% 9 1.80% 10 1.90% 11 2.00% After 11 2.00%  
b.  Adjustments. The host community payment shall be adjusted and/or offset, in calculation and amount, in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  If an imposition is imposed, assessed, or charged by the town against the developer, the casino facility, casino gaming or any of the activities on or access to the casino facility or the site which is determined by a final court order of a court of competent jurisdiction to be discriminatory in any way as described or contemplated in subsection (7), the amount so determined to be discriminatory shall be offset, dollar for dollar, at the time final judgment is entered against the host community payment payable hereunder. 
2.  The advance payments shall be deducted from the host community payment, in the manner provided in section 20-3(6). 
3.  The host community payment shall be adjusted, as required, by the provisions of section 20-3(2). 
(2)  Timing of host community payment and property tax. The host community payment shall be due and payable on each applicable payment date. The property tax for each annual period shall be made on a quarterly basis pursuant to section 20-3(10), with a true up payment due 30 days after any change in the property tax as provided herein for such annual period is calculated by the parties. The developer shall provide the town with an annual reconciliation of the host community payment and property tax payments for each annual period within 90 days after the end of each annual period. If the developer has underpaid the amount due, the deficiency shall be due and payable within 30 days after delivery to the town of such reconciliation without interest or the imposition of a late fee. 
(3)  Town audit rights. 
a.  If the town reasonably determines that information available to the town which has been presented by the developer to the gaming control board with respect to the casino gaming income is not adequate for the town to verify and confirm that the required host community payment is being paid pursuant to this section 20-3, the town shall notify the developer of such fact and designate an independent third party auditing firm to review the books and records of the developer solely with respect to the casino gaming income and the calculation of the host community payment at the office of the developer where such books and records are maintained. 
b.  Such audit and inspection shall be performed at the expense of the town unless the audit reveals an understatement of the host community payment by at least one (1) percent, in which case the reasonable cost of the audit shall be paid by the developer to the town calculated on an hourly fee basis or on a contingent fee or other like arrangement in which the auditing or inspection firm receives a percentage of any additional host community payment generated by the audit or inspection; provided that the developer shall not pay more than $75,000.00 of such contingent fee. 
c.  The auditing or inspection firm shall be required to keep confidential any information which the developer stamps confidential or otherwise states in writing is confidential except as required by court order or litigation between the parties with respect to the calculation of the host community payment. The town acknowledges and agrees that the auditors are not entitled to any information regarding the income or fees generated by or payable with respect to any other casino facility that the developer or its affiliates is involved in and that such information may be redacted by the developer from the materials made available to the auditors if it is not otherwise a public record in any other municipality or state. 
d.  The aforesaid audit or inspection may be conducted once with respect to each applicable annual period and the town must trigger such audit procedure not later than six months after the town's receipt of each annual host community payment or statement showing that no host community payment is payable, if such be the case, or the town will be deemed to have waived its right to audit and inspect with respect to that applicable annual period. 
e.  If the audit or inspection discloses that an additional host community payment is due and payable, the developer shall pay the deficiency within a period of 30 days after the final determination of the amount due and payable together with interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum (the "overdue amount interest rate") in lieu of any late fee. If there has been an overpayment of the host community payment, the developer shall be entitled to deduct the overpayment from subsequent payments of the host community payment until the amount of the overpayment is recouped. 
(4)  Traffic and public safety reimbursements. 
a.  The developer shall cause to be constructed all ramps, highway improvements and other traffic-related improvements to design and construct the highway access ramps and other roads and traffic improvements based upon the traffic and transportation plans being prepared on behalf of the developer which will be submitted to the state department of transportation (collectively, "traffic improvements") required of the developer pursuant to the town zoning and land use decisions and the public approvals. The developer shall reimburse the town for the town's direct costs to accommodate the highway access ramps and road crossing over the James P. Murphy Highway. 
b.  The developer shall reimburse the town for certain costs of police and fire personnel and training costs as set forth in exhibit C attached to Ord. No. 2006-26, and by this reference incorporated herein. 
(5)  Initial payment. Within three days after the execution of this chapter, the developer shall pay to the town $300,000.00 by wire transfer, which amount shall be nonrefundable to the developer (the "initial payment"). 
(6)  Advance payments. 
a.  First advance payment. Within 60 days after the referendum is passed, the developer shall pay to the town the amount $1,000,000.00 as an advance payment of the host community payment due to be paid to the town during the first annual period (the "first advance payment"). Subject to subsection 20-3(6)d., the first advance payment shall be deducted by the developer from the host community payment due to the town during the first annual period until such time as the first advance payment has been fully reimbursed together with interest thereon and once such reimbursement is complete, the developer shall pay any remaining amount of the host community payments for such annual period. 
b.  Second advance payment. Within ten days after the date of construction commencement by the developer, the developer shall pay to the town $2,000,000.00 as an advance payment of the host community payment due to be paid to the town during the first annual period (the "second advance payment"). The developer agrees to promptly notify the town when construction commencement has taken place. "Construction commencement" shall mean the date upon which the developer has obtained all town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals, including a building permit for the facility and has started a material portion of the site work for the project. Subject to section 20-3(6)d., the second advance payment shall be deducted by the developer from the host community payment due to the town during the second annual period until such time as the second advance payment has been fully reimbursed together with interest thereon and once such reimbursement is complete, the developer shall pay any remaining amount of the host community payments for such annual period. 
c.  Third advance payment. Eighteen months after the payment of the first advance payment, the developer shall pay to the town an additional $2,000,000.00 (the "third advance payment"). Subject to section 20-3(6)d., the third advance payment shall be deducted by the developer from the host community payment due to the town in the third annual period until such time as the third advance payment has been fully reimbursed together with interest thereon and once such reimbursement is complete, the developer shall pay any remaining amount of the host community payments for such annual period. 
d.  Reimbursement of advance payments. If casino gaming income exceeds $580,000,000.00 (the "first advance payment hurdle") during the first annual period, the amount of the first advance payment to be reimbursed to the developer shall be reduced to one-half of the amount of the first advance payment. If casino gaming income exceeds $610,000,000.00 (the "second advance payment hurdle") during the second annual period, the amount of the second advance payment to be reimbursed to the developer shall be reduced to one-half of the amount of the second advance payment. If casino gaming income exceeds $640,000,000.00 (the "third advance payment hurdle" and, together with the first advance payment hurdle and the second advance payment hurdle, the "advance payment hurdles") during the third annual period, the amount of the third advance payment to be reimbursed to the developer shall be reduced to one-half of the amount of the third advance payment. 
e.  Procedure for reimbursement. If: 
1.  Any reimbursement of the first advance payment, second advance payment or third advance payment during the first annual period, the second annual period or the third annual period has exceeded one-half of the amount of the first advance payment, second advance payment or third advance payment; and 
2.  The advance payment hurdles are thereafter achieved for the first annual period, the second annual period or the third annual period, as applicable, upon such determination having been made at the end of the first annual period, the second annual period or the third annual period, as applicable, based on the financial statements for the first annual period, the second annual period or the third annual period, as applicable, the developer shall thereupon pay to the town the amount of any reimbursement of the first advance payment, second advance payment or third advance payment in excess of one-half of the first advance payment, second advance payment or third advance payment. 
f.  Subsequent deductions. If not paid from the host community payment due in the first, second and third annual periods, as the case may be, the reimbursable amount of the first advance payment, the second advance payment and the third advance payment, as the case may be, shall be deducted from the host community payment due in the next and subsequent annual periods until the developer has recouped the full reimbursable amount of the first advance payment, the second advance payment and the third advance payment, with interest from the date each of the first advance payment, the second advance payment and the third advance payment, respectively, was advanced to the town until reimbursed to the developer at the annual rate of three percent on any outstanding unreimbursed amounts. 
g.  Reimbursement if legislation is declared unconstitutional. If the legislation is determined to be unconstitutional by a final order of any court with jurisdiction and all rights of appeal shall have expired or been exhausted at any time during the term of this chapter, all advance payments that have been paid to the town and have not been reimbursed to the developer or deducted from the host community payments in accordance with the provisions of this section 20-3(6), as applicable, shall be reimbursed to the developer within 12 months from the date that such rights of appeal have expired or been exhausted. 
(7)  Discriminatory and nondiscriminatory impositions. 
a.  The town shall not be discriminatory in the assessment of any income taxes, sales taxes, utility fees, taxes, charges or assessments, hotel or motel taxes, non-gaming amusement taxes, special service taxes, user fees, service fees, connection fees, the town zoning and land use approval fees, or other taxes, charges or fees of general application, assessments or other payments (collectively "impositions"), and there shall be no impositions that treat in a discriminatory manner the casino facility, the developer or any activity conducted therein, either on their face or as applied. The casino facility shall be subject to taxes, license, use or permit fees and other like fees which are not discriminatory. 
b.  "Discriminatory" shall mean any imposition which is not uniformly applied to commercial business enterprises operating within the town, including, without limitation of the foregoing, any imposition which discriminates against the developer or the casino facility or any activity conducted therein due to the fact that: 
1.  It is assessed solely or primarily against the developer, casino gaming revenue or income or the facility without also applying to all other commercial business enterprises; 
2.  It has the effect, as applied, of being paid disproportionately, or in large part, by the developer or the casino facility or any activity conducted therein (even if cast in terms of general application) in a manner that a court of competent jurisdiction would find discriminatory; 
3.  It is a tax, assessment or other imposition based on income or revenue from casino gaming generated by the casino (excluding the host community payment); or 
4.  It is otherwise discriminatory; provided that, for purposes of this chapter, increases or decreases in the town's tax rate shall not be discriminatory if made pursuant to the town casino property tax legislation or as part of any state law dealing with tax classifications for casinos. 
c.  Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, the host community payment and property tax shall be the only payments, charges or impositions applicable to casino gaming revenue or income and activity and there shall be no such payments, charges or impositions imposed by the town other than the host community payment and property tax. 
d.  The developer acknowledges that the developer will have the burden of providing, by the preponderance of evidence, that any imposition or payment referred to in this section 20-3(7) is discriminatory. 
e.  The town hereby represents, warrants and covenants that the town has, or will have, the right, power and lawful authority to agree to the provisions of this section 20-3(7) and section 20-3(10) with respect to the assessed values and the resulting property tax to be paid thereunder, and that such provisions are binding and enforceable against the town, provided that the town casino property tax legislation is enacted. 
(8)  No other payments. Other than as set forth in this section, the last grammatical paragraph of section 20-11, or any other applicable provision in this chapter, and excluding, the customary fees and charges payable by commercial property owners and commercial business enterprises in the town for water and sewer use and connection fees, fire district assessments, building code and fire review fees in connection with new construction, liquor license renewal fees, entertainment and license fees and other license fees and other fees payable by commercial property owners and commercial business enterprises in the town, the developer shall have no further obligation or liability for payments, cost reimbursements or fees as a result of the development, construction and operation of the facility, the rights granted by this chapter or the execution and performance of the developer or town hereunder. Each party shall be responsible and pay for any other expenses, fees and costs incurred by them in performing or preparing to perform its duties and obligations hereunder. Nothing contained in this subsection shall limit the liabilities of the parties upon the occurrence of an event of default. 
(9)  Tenants of the facility. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the town from imposing the normal and customary fees, tangible property taxes and other charges which would be due and payable to the town under the town zoning and land use regulations and other codes and ordinances 
a.  By any tenant or subtenant of the facility, or 
b.  By any third party leasing equipment to the developer, which, in either such case, is not the developer or any affiliate thereof. 
(10)  Casino property taxes. 
a.  Town casino property tax legislation. The town desires to determine and set a fixed tax rate and assessed real estate and personal/tangible tax value for the project in order to provide for a stable and predictable future revenue stream to the town for the town's planning purposes. To achieve this result, the town and the developer agree to cooperate to seek enactment of the town casino classification legislation substantially in the form of exhibits F-1 and F-2 attached to Ord. No. 2006-26, and by this reference incorporated herein (the "West Warwick Casino Property Tax Legislation"). 
b.  Current assessed value. Exhibit A attached to Ord. No. 2006-26 sets forth all of the tax assessors lots (the "tax lots") in the town which comprise the site. The town hereby represents and confirms that the tax lots have an aggregate assessed value, for real property tax purposes, as of the date hereof, of $13,356,100.00 (the "current assessed value"). As of the date hereof, the town hereby represents and confirms and the parties agree that the applicable tax rate in effect for 2006 for the site is $26.69 for each thousand dollars of assessed value for real property and $30.28 for each thousand dollars of assessed value for personal/tangible property. The annual real estate tax payment currently required to be paid to the town, based on such assessed value and the 2006 real estate tax rate of $26.69 per thousand of assessed value, is $356,474.30. 
c.  Assessed value through the closing date. The parties agree that the site's assessed value shall be the current assessed value from the date hereof through the date on which the developer acquires at least five of tax lots 4, 50, 51, 91, 331, 473, 478 or 480 (see exhibit A to Ord. No. 2006-26 for a listing of all tax lots at the site) through ground lease or conveyance (the "closing date"). The parties agree that the tangible/personal property tax assessment with respect to the site shall be as currently assessed until the closing date. The parties agree that the aggregate assessed value for real estate tax purposes of the land for the site as of the closing date shall be $40,000,000.00 (the "land assessed value"). 
d.  Completion tax assessments. The parties agree that the project, upon the opening date, shall have a total aggregate assessed value for real estate tax purposes in the amount of $350,000,000.00 (the "completion real estate assessed value"), which completion real estate assessed value shall be composed of 40,000,000.00 of land value (the "completion land assessed value") and $310,000,000.00 of improvement value (the "completion improvement assessed value"). The parties further agree that the project, upon the opening date, shall have a total aggregate assessed value for tangible/personal property tax purposes in the amount of $70,000,000.00 (the "completion personal/tangible assessed value" and together with the completion real estate assessed value, the "completion project assessed value"). 
e.  Construction period assessment. From the closing date through the first December 31 after the opening date (the "construction period"), the site's aggregate real estate assessed value shall be: 
1.  The completion land assessed value plus; 
2.  The percentage of casino facility construction that is complete as of the December 31 of any calendar year during the construction period multiplied by the completion improvement assessed value and no amount for personal/tangible assessed value inasmuch as personalty is not anticipated to be installed at the project until approximately the time of the opening date. 
f.  Post-opening date assessments. Upon the first December 31 after the opening date, the casino property tax assessment shall be increased by a percentage equal to the product of one percent of the completion project assessed value and the number of years from December 31, 2009 through the first December 31 after the opening date. Thereafter, the casino property tax assessment shall be increased for the following ten years on each December 31 by one percent of the completion project assessed value. 
g.  Assessment ten years after opening. After the first December 31 after the opening date, the casino property tax assessment shall be determined by a new cost approach appraisal performed by the town. The developer shall have the right to audit and protest such assessed value. 
h.  Casino property tax rates. 
1.  Property tax rates through 2009. The town agrees that property tax rates to be applied for purposes of property taxes at the site through December 31, 2009 shall be: 
i.  $26.69 for each thousand dollars of assessed value for real property (the "real estate tax rate"); and 
ii.  $30.28 for each thousand dollars of assessed value for personal/tangible property (the "personal/tangible tax rate"). 
2.  Rates after 2009 through ten years after opening. From January 1, 2010 through the tenth anniversary of the first December 31 after the opening date, if the town increases its commercial and industrial tax levy for real or tangible property in any annual 12-month period, then the real estate tax rate and personal/tangible tax rate may each be increased at the same percentage rate as such commercial and industrial tax levy is increased during such annual 12-month period. If the town's commercial and industrial tax levy for real or tangible property remains unchanged or decreases in any annual 12-month period, the real estate tax rate and personal/tangible tax rate shall not change during such annual 12-month period. 
3.  After the ten-year period. After the tenth anniversary of the first December 31 after the opening date, if the town increases its commercial and industrial tax rate for real or tangible property in any annual 12-month period, then the real estate tax rate and personal/tangible tax rate may each be increased at the same percentage rate as such commercial and industrial tax rate is increased during such annual 12-month period. The increased or unmodified real estate tax rates and personal/tangible tax rates pursuant to sections 20-3(10)h.2. and 3. shall be herein referred to as the "casino tax rate." 
i.  Casino property tax. The real property and personal/tangible property taxes (the "casino property tax") levied on the site for any year shall be calculated as the product of the applicable casino property tax assessment and the applicable casino tax rate. 
j.  Casino property tax payments. 
1.  The developer shall pay to the town, on a quarterly basis based upon the billing cycle applicable to all taxpayers in the town, one-quarter of the casino property tax for such year. 
2.  The town shall provide the developer with reasonable documentation to substantiate any increase or decrease in its commercial and industrial tax levy and provide reasonable supporting documentation with respect thereto upon the developer's request. 
k.  Facility expansion. With respect to any expansion of the facility subsequent to the date of its initial opening date, the parties shall, in good faith, negotiate to calculate the assessed value of the project with respect to such new improvements. Upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such new improvements or, if a certificate of occupancy is not required with respect thereto under the town zoning and land use regulations, on the date that the developer places such new improvements in use and open to the public, the assessed value of the project shall be recalculated to include the assessed value of the project with respect to such new improvements. 
l.  Limitation on imposition. The town agrees not to assess or otherwise impose any real estate or tangible/personal property tax inconsistent with the provisions of this section 20-3(10) (including, without limitation, with respect to any partially completed or constructed portions of the casino facility or project). 
(11)  Human services fund. Sixty days after the opening date, the developer shall make a distribution to the town in the amount of $100,000.00 and thereafter shall make an annual distribution on each anniversary of the first payment until the termination of this chapter, which subsequent annual distributions shall each be in an amount increased by $3,000.00 from the immediately preceding annual distribution. The fund shall be called the Narragansett Tribe/Harrah's Human Services Fund and shall be spent by the town, in its discretion, to address issues pertaining to or arising as a result of the project being physically located in the town. No accounting or control will be exercised by the developer over this fund but the town will annually provide the developer with a report on the uses to which the fund was put. 
(12)  Town payments. On or before 60 days after the opening date, the developer shall make a one (1) time payment to the town of $1,000,000.00 to be deposited into the funds described in sections 20-3(12)a. and b. 
a.  Fire and police equipment fund. The amount of $250,000.00 shall be deposited into an interest-bearing account (the "fire and police equipment fund") and shall be available for use by the town to purchase fire and police/safety equipment for increased fire and safety needs arising from the operations of the facility. 
b.  Facilities and improvement fund. The amount of $750,000.00 shall be deposited into an interest bearing account (the "facilities and improvement fund") and shall be available for use by the town for a period of three years after establishment of the facilities and improvement fund for offsets against property value reductions, if any, for residential properties affected by the facility pursuant to such policies and procedures established by the town in its sole discretion. To the extent that any amounts remain in the facilities and improvement fund after the expiration of said three years, any such remaining amounts shall be repaid to the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-4. - Term. 
    The term of this chapter shall commence on and as of the date hereof and, subject to the terms of this chapter, shall continue for the same five-year or other initial term as is provided in the license and successive five-year or other renewal terms as shall be provided in the license. The developer agrees to pay the town ten percent of any renewal fee paid by the developer to the state or gaming control board under the legislation to renew the license up to a maximum payment of $100,000. If the developer does not renew or qualify for the license as provided in the legislation, the term of this chapter shall expire. If the developer renews the license, this chapter shall automatically be deemed extended and renewed for a term coterminous with the term of the license. If any five-year or other initial or renewal term expires and the developer is in the process of renewing (or seeking the renewal of) the license, the term hereof shall continue until the resolution of the efforts of the developer to obtain the casino license (which efforts may include litigation by the developer to enforce its right to receive a renewal of the license). 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-5. - Site identification; expansion; alteration. 
(a)  Site expansion. The town hereby agrees that if the developer expands the site from time to time and provided the developer obtains all applicable town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals, the developer shall be entitled to include such additional real estate as part of the site for all purposes of this chapter, including, without limitation, section 20-3 subject to the requirements of section 20-3(10). 
(b)  Expansion of improvements. After completion of the initial construction of the facility, if it was not constructed to the maximum density allowed under the town zoning and land use decisions, or was intended by the developer to be constructed in phases, the developer may expand (or permit the expansion of) the facility after obtaining any and all applicable town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals and otherwise in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-6. - Application process. 
    Once the developer has provided the town with a complete application, the town agrees to expeditiously schedule any necessary meetings and public hearings. The town agrees, to the extent allowed by law, to expedite the review of all applications, project plan submissions and other town zoning and land use decisions. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended, however, to eliminate or modify the requirements to obtain approvals in accordance with the town zoning and land use regulations, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-7. - Commencement and completion of construction. 
(a)  Construction. 
(1)  Subject to the provisions of section 20-22, the developer will use its reasonable good faith efforts to: 
a.  Commence construction of the facility within 30 days following the receipt of all town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals necessary for commencement of construction and the successful passage of the legislation and referendum, and 
b.  Complete construction of the facility sufficient to cause the same to be open for business within 36 months following the commencement of such construction. 
As used in this subsection, commencement of construction shall be deemed to mean commencement of demolition or grading or site leveling in anticipation of either excavation or physical construction. 
(2)  Once commenced, the developer agrees to complete construction of at least the building shell of the facility and put the site in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy. The town shall act on a timely basis to inspect the construction and other work as provided in the town zoning and land use regulations. The town also agrees to timely issue a certificate of occupancy provided the developer is in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations with respect to such construction as contemplated herein. 
(c)  Grant of easement, road closures and related actions by town. In connection with its review of the project, the town agrees to undertake the following with respect to the project: 
(1)  To grant easements and a right of access to develop and construct the project, infrastructure and offsite improvements over any applicable town easements or right of ways or town owned property near the site to allow construction of the project, including the construction of the access ramp from I-95 into the project; provided, however, the developer shall provide reasonable alternative access required by any other business or property owner while the aforesaid construction is taking place; 
(2)  To consider in accordance with applicable law any petition to close and abandon as provided in the town zoning and land use regulations and town owned right of way or public streets within the site that interferes with the development, construction or operation of the project and facilities; and 
(3)  To hire, at the developer's reasonable expense, an independent architect/engineer to assist the town in inspecting construction of the project and for building code review. 
(d)  Town approvals. Nothing contained in section 20-6 or this section shall be construed as modifying the provisions and procedures of the town in regard to the review process and approvals of the town required under the town zoning and land use regulations, if applicable, or other applicable laws and codes including any and all required approvals of the town council. 
(e)  Site regulations. It is anticipated that the town zoning and land use decisions and/or public approvals shall include requirements related to noise and security barrier, landscape, exterior lighting and a 100-foot residential buffer zone for the northern property line of the site. Utility, fire and other necessary circulation as well as screening, berms and noise-dampening barriers shall not be prohibited in the residential buffer zone. The developer shall not be permitted to construct parking or other improvements on the portion of the site currently zoned residential (which currently only includes a portion of assessors parcel 30, tax lot 4, as listed on exhibit A to Ord. No. 2006-26); provided, however, that such portion of said tax lot 4 shall be a part of the site and included for purposes of lot coverage and density calculations. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-8. - Time of essence. 
    Time is of the essence for the performance of all obligations set forth in this agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-9. - Emergency action by the town. 
    If an emergency situation occurs which endangers public safety at the facility and the town under the town zoning and land use regulations or other applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations has a right to take immediate action in such emergency, the town shall be entitled to take such action without the necessity of giving the developer a written notice of default and the cure period set forth in section 20-18. In addition, if the town zoning and land use regulations or other applicable law, code, ordinance or regulation provides that the town shall be entitled to reimbursement from the developer for the cost incurred by the town in taking such emergency action, the amount so due and payable shall be paid by the developer in accordance with applicable law within a period of 30 days from the developer's receipt of a reasonably documented invoice for the aforesaid costs. If the developer fails to pay such invoice within said 30-day period, the amount due and payable shall be deemed added to the host community payment and the town shall have the same remedies set forth in this chapter with respect to the collection thereof as applies to nonpayment of the host community payment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-10. - Town covenants. 
    The town hereby covenants and agrees to the following, recognizing that the developer is relying on same in executing this chapter and performing hereunder: 
(1)  Third person lawsuit. The town agrees that, if a suit is filed by any person other than the developer alleging that this chapter is not valid or void or seeks to enjoin or prevent performance by the town or otherwise challenges this chapter or the rights of the developer hereunder, the town (if requested by the developer) and the developer will each jointly and vigorously defend such suit or claim. The developer agrees to pay on a monthly basis, if so billed by the town's attorney, the reasonable and documented attorneys' fees incurred by the town in such litigation and may deduct one-half of such fees of the town from any of the advance payments to be made by the developer to the town under section 20-3. If the litigation commences after the developer has paid the advance payments, the developer shall pay one-half of such documented attorney's fees on a monthly basis and the town shall pay the other half out of the advance payment or other town funds. The town shall not be obligated to reimburse the developer for its payment of the aforesaid one-half of the attorney's fees and the only source of repayment to the developer shall be a deduction of such amount from the unpaid advance payments. 
(2)  Town zoning and land use regulations modifications. The town agrees that any modifications or amendments to the town zoning and land use regulations including, without limitation, provisions thereof shall apply prospectively only and shall not impact the vested rights, if any, of the developer in and to the project and facilities under applicable laws including, without limitation, section 12 of article I of the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Waiver of financial assurances. The town agrees to treat the developer similar to the manner in which it customarily treats other developers in regard to requests to waive applicable cash bonding requirement under the town zoning and land use regulations for other developers. 
(4)  Confidential disclosures. Subject to the rights of the town under section 20-3(3), the town agrees not to request (and the developer shall not be obligated to divulge) any proprietary or confidential information from the developer regarding the developer's operation of casino gaming at the facility. 
(5)  Exclusive negotiation period. To the fullest extent allowed by law, the town shall not during the pendency of the referendum vote and, thereafter, pending the issuance of a license to the developer, negotiate with the tribe or any other casino operator or affiliate thereof the development or operation of a casino within the town. The town recognizes that the developer will rely upon the exclusivity provisions of this chapter in incurring expenses necessary to acquire, develop and finance the facility and support the approval by referendum. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-11. - Conditions precedent. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the developer shall not be obligated to acquire, develop, construct or operate the casino facility unless the conditions precedent described in this section 20-11 shall have occurred or been waived in writing by the developer on or before March 1, 2008 (the "outside date"). If the conditions precedent shall not have occurred, been approved or waived on or prior to the outside date, or if, prior to the outside date, the developer determines in its sole discretion that a condition precedent may not occur by the outside date or be acceptable when it occurs, then the developer may upon written notice delivered to the town terminate this chapter, in its sole discretion and without liability or claim to the town for such termination, except as provided in the last paragraph hereof. The "conditions precedent" are: 
(1)  Referendum. The referendum shall be approved by the voters of both the state and the town. 
(2)  Site acquisition and status. The site shall have has been acquired by the developer and must be, in all respects, acceptable, including price, location and physical characteristics. Specifically, the developer must have determined that: 
a.  Good, marketable fee simple title or acceptable long term lease to the site has been conveyed to the developer free and clear of all liens, encumbrances, covenants and easements other than those which are acceptable to the developer, in its reasonable discretion; 
b.  The environmental audit, environmental status and zoning and other land uses pertaining to the site are acceptable, in the developer's reasonable discretion, for the uses contemplated in this chapter, or the developer shall have received assurances and/or indemnifications adequate, in the developer's reasonable determination, to protect it against any inadequacies in the environmental status, zoning or land use restrictions; and 
c.  The developer shall have determined that the site is of sufficient size to accommodate the facility. This condition precedent shall be satisfied on or before March 31, 2007 and if the developer does not terminate this chapter on or before such date, the condition precedent set forth in this subsection (2) shall be deemed satisfied. 
(3)  State legislation. The legislation of the state shall have adopted the Rhode Island Casino Development District Enabling Act and the town casino property tax legislation. 
(4)  License, town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals. All town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals shall have been obtained for the development, construction, ownership and operation by the developer of the project, the facility and the conduct of casino gaming at the facility on terms and conditions satisfactory to the developer in its sole discretion. 
(5)  No other casinos. The state shall not have authorized casino gaming at any other location in the state. 
(6)  Project costs. Project costs, as estimated by the developer in good faith, shall be reasonably acceptable to the developer. 
(7)  No litigation. No litigation shall be pending which has or which reasonably may have a materially adverse affect on the casino facility, casino gaming and any town zoning and land use decisions or public approvals or such litigation shall have been resolved in a manner satisfactory to the developer. 
(8)  Suitability. The developer shall have determined that its affiliation with the town, the tribe and all persons or entities associated with the town or the tribe will not jeopardize any gaming license, permit or application of the developer or any of its affiliates in any jurisdiction. 
(9)  Board approval. The developer's board of directors and that of Harrah's shall have approved the transaction and this chapter. 
(10)  Acquisition of the site. The developer must have acquired fee simple title or leasehold title, as applicable, to the site. 
(11)  Event of default. There must not exist an uncured event of default by the town hereunder. 
    If the developer terminates this chapter, solely in reliance on its right to do so as described in subsections (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9) or (10) above or if all town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals have been obtained but not on terms and conditions satisfactory to the developer in its sole discretion, the developer agrees to pay the town for its reasonable third party expenses incurred to negotiate this chapter, and have studies conducted and prepared regarding the impacts to the town of the project not previously paid for or reimbursed by the developer. Such expenses (which are subject to reasonably verification) to be reimbursed by the developer shall not, however, exceed $250,000.00 in the aggregate (which includes the payment by the developer specified in section 20-2(b)), which cap applies to costs and expenses incurred by the town subsequent to the date hereof. Such payment will be made by the developer within 30 days after receipt of such verification. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the developer shall not be obligated to make any such payment subsequent to the payment of the first advance payment to the town. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-12. - Status of agreement during conditions precedent period. 
(a)  Status of conditions. If requested by the town, the developer promptly shall indicate whether it considers that a particular condition precedent shall have been satisfied and, if not approved, shall state with reasonable particularity the reasons why it deems that a condition precedent shall not have been satisfied. 
(b)  Pursuit of public approvals. In addition to the foregoing, the developer agrees that it will pursue all necessary or appropriate town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals necessary to develop, construct, finance and operate the project, and conduct casino gaming thereon. The town hereunder agrees to sign (subject to its reasonable review and approval which it agrees to do promptly) such applications, requests, letters and documents as are necessary for the town to sign in order to obtain the town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals and which the developer may reasonably request in connection with its efforts to obtain the town zoning and land use decisions and public approvals, including but not limited to those required by the legislation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the execution of applicable documents by the town as provided above, shall not create financial obligations on the part of the town (unless the town consents to same or the developer shall provide the town with assurances acceptable to the town that such obligations shall be timely met by the developer or some other party other than the town) or waive the requirements of the town zoning and land use regulations or other applicable law. 
(c)  No implied waiver. No waiver of any of the conditions precedents shall be implied by any conduct of the developer, it being agreed that any waiver by the developer of any such condition precedent shall be effected only by the developer's express written statement to that effect delivered to the town. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-13. - Rights of lenders. 
(a)  Notice of financing. Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, the developer is hereby given the right, without the town's prior consent, to mortgage its interest in the site and project and to assign this chapter as collateral security for such mortgages. If the developer shall mortgage its interest in the site and project or any part thereof to a mortgagee, the developer shall give the town written notice of such mortgage, together with the name and address of the mortgagee and the pertinent recording data respecting such mortgage. After receipt of the foregoing and until the town shall receive notice that such mortgage has been satisfied and discharged, the town shall give to such mortgagee, at the most recent address of such mortgagee set forth in such notice, and otherwise in the manner provided by section 20-26, a copy of each notice of default under sections 20-18(1) and (2) at the same time as, and whenever, any such default notice shall thereafter be given by the town to the developer. 
(b)  General right to cure defaults. Each such mortgagee shall upon receipt of the default notices referred to in section 20-3(1) have the same cure period given to the developer in this chapter for remedying the default, or causing the same to be remedied, or causing action to remedy a default to be commenced. The town shall accept performance by a mortgagee of any covenant, condition or agreement on the developer's part to be performed hereunder with the same force and effect as though performed by the developer. The developer hereby authorizes the town to accept such performance by a mortgagee on the developer's behalf. 
(c)  Possession. If the default of the developer is of such a nature that it can only be remedied by such mortgagee upon the mortgagee or its designee obtaining possession of and access to the site and project (and payment of the host community payment shall not fall into this category of default), and if the mortgagee or its designee shall seek to obtain such possession with diligence and continuity, through a receiver or otherwise, and shall remedy such default within 45 days after obtaining such possession (provided that in the case of a default which, although curable, cannot with diligence be remedied by the mortgagee, or the remedy of which cannot be commenced by the mortgagee within such period of 45 days, such mortgagee shall have such additional period as reasonably may be necessary to remedy such default with diligence and continuity), the mortgagee shall have such time as is necessary to cure such default; provided, however, the other obligations of this chapter shall be performed during such period of time that the mortgagee or its designee is seeking to obtain such possession (subject to the mortgagee's right to cure any subsequent default as provided herein). This subsection is subject to the rights of the town under section 20-9. 
(d)  Waiver as to mortgagee. If a default under section 20-17 is of such a nature that it is impossible for the mortgagee to remedy it even with diligence and continuity and regardless of the amount of time provided for such purpose, any such default shall be deemed waived by the town solely for the benefit of the mortgagee provided the mortgagee has cured any other applicable defaults and otherwise complies with the other applicable provisions of this section and this chapter. 
(e)  New agreement. Upon the request of the mortgagee, and provided the mortgagee has complied with any other applicable provisions of this section and cured any and all other defaults excluding those waived under subsection (d), the town, upon conditions reasonably acceptable to it (including, without limitation, the payment of the town's expenses, including all reasonable attorney's fees, in connection with responding to and complying with such request), shall enter into a new agreement for the project with the mortgagee or its nominee or a purchaser, assignee or other transferee at a foreclosure sale who will thereafter be responsible for performance of the obligations and undertakings of the developer as provided for herein and provided such purchaser, assignee or other transferee also becomes the holder of the casino license. Said new agreement shall contain the same covenants, agreements and conditions as contained herein. The provisions of this subsection shall survive the termination (but not the expiration) of this chapter as a result of any rejection of this chapter by the trustee in bankruptcy of the developer under the applicable provisions of the bankruptcy code, as amended from time to time, for a period of 90 days and shall continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if this subsection were a separate and independent contract among the town, the developer and each mortgagee. At the town's or the mortgagee's request, the parties shall enter into an additional agreement with the town confirmatory of the provisions of this subsection. However, at any time after the delivery of the aforementioned agreement, the mortgagee or its designee may notify the town, in writing, that it has relinquished possession of the project, or that it will not institute foreclosure proceedings or, if such proceedings have been commenced, that it has discontinued them, and in such event, the mortgagee shall have no further liability under such agreement from and after the date it delivers such notice to the town (except as provided below) and, thereupon, the town shall have the unrestricted right to take the actions it is entitled hereunder. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, if a mortgagee shall elect to cure and possession is taken and subsequently abandoned before cure, the mortgagee or its designee or nominee shall be liable to and shall indemnify the town against any loss, cost, expense or damage incurred or to be incurred by the town solely due to acts or failure to act by the mortgagee or its designee or nominee while in possession, including, without limitation, the cost of removal or discharge of liens pertaining to work performed at the request of the mortgagee or its designee or nominee, claims by persons, including tenants, on account of obligations believed by such claimant to have been incurred by the mortgagee or its designee or nominee, claims on account of negligence or fault of the mortgagee or its designee or nominee or persons for whose conduct mortgagee is responsible while in possession. 
(f)  Consent required for modifications. If a mortgagee or its designee shall become the owner of the project or any part thereof, such mortgagee shall be bound by any modification or amendment of this chapter made subsequent to the date of the mortgage and delivery to the town of the notice of the mortgage provided in this section and prior to its acquisition of such interest; provided that the mortgagee shall have consented in writing to modification or amendment. 
(g)  Miscellaneous. If the mortgagee or its nominee succeeds to the developer's interest in this chapter, the town agrees to look solely to such interest in this chapter and to the site and project for the performance of the obligations of the developer hereunder, and shall never seek to recover against any other assets of such mortgagee. Any rights granted under this chapter to mortgagees shall, insofar as the town is affected by the exercise of such rights, be exercised by them in the order of the priority of their respective mortgages, i.e. a first mortgagee of record shall have priority over a second mortgagee of record in the exercise of rights under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-14. - Enforceability provisions. 
(a)  Severability. Unenforceability for any reason of any provision of this chapter shall not limit or impair the operation or validity of any other provisions of this chapter and if any term or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason and to any extent be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this chapter, or the application of such term or provision to persons or circumstances to which it is valid or enforceable, shall not be limited, impaired or otherwise affected thereby, and each term and provision of this chapter shall be valid and enforced to the extent permitted by law. 
(b)  Obligations of town and developer. Notwithstanding subsection (a): 
(1)  To the extent any material provisions of the obligations of the town under this chapter are unenforceable, the developer shall not be obligated to perform its obligations hereunder; and 
(2)  To the extent any material provisions of the obligations of the developer under this chapter are unenforceable, the town shall not be obligated to perform its obligations hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-15. - Further assurances. 
    Each party hereto shall do all acts and things and make, execute and deliver such written instruments as shall from time to time be reasonable required to carry out the terms and provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the parties acknowledge and agree that many of the agreements and obligations hereunder may require an amendment to the constitution of the state, or the ratification, consent or action of other governmental bodies, agencies, boards or commissions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-16. - Representations and warranties of the town. 
    The town represents and warrants to the developer that: 
(1)  The town has full municipal power and authority to enter into this chapter, and the execution, delivery and consummation of this chapter by the town have been duly authorized by all necessary municipal action; 
(2)  The execution, delivery and consummation of this chapter by the town is not prohibited by and does not conflict with any other agreements or instruments to which the town is a party or is otherwise subject; 
(3)  This chapter has been duly authorized executed and delivered by it and has been approved by the town council at a public hearing properly notice and duly held for that purpose and the execution and delivery hereof does not require the approval and consent of any other party; the town has taken all action necessary to be taken for the proper execution and delivery of this chapter; the town has observed all of the requirements of the Rhode Island Open Meetings Act, G.L.  42-46-1 et seq.; and 
(4)  No litigation has commenced against the town which could have the effect of preventing or delaying performance by the town of its obligations hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-17. - Representations, warranties and covenants of the developer. 
    The developer hereby represents, warrants and covenants, as applicable, to the town that: 
(1)  The developer is a validly existing limited liability company duly organized under the laws of the state with the full power and authority to enter into this chapter, to perform its obligations hereunder, and to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby; 
(2)  The developer has the financial capacity on its own, or the ability to obtain from the lender(s), funds sufficient to meet all presently anticipated costs of construction, completion, equipping and commencement of operations of the project; 
(3)  No litigation has commenced or to their respective knowledge is threatened against the developer or any of its affiliates which could have the effect of preventing or delaying performance by the developer of its obligations hereunder, except for litigation relating to Ajax Gaming Ventures, LLC v. Brown, No. CVIA 06-336 S. (D.R.I. August 8, 2006); 
(4)  That all documents submitted to the state in satisfaction of conditions precedent or otherwise, at the time of submission have been (or, if submitted at any time hereafter, will be) true, accurate and complete in all material respects; and 
(5)  This chapter has been duly authorized by all necessary action on its part and has been duly executed and delivered by it and neither the execution and delivery hereof, nor compliance with the terms and provisions hereof, except as contemplated by the terms hereof: 
a.  Requires the approval and consent of any other party; and 
b.  To the knowledge of the developer, contravenes any existing law, judgment, governmental rule, regulation or order applicable to or binding on it. 
The developer agrees, from and after the issuance of the license and while the facility is open for business, to operate the facility in accordance with all applicable laws and to take all action necessary or required to retain and maintain in full force and effect the casino license. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-18. - Events of default of the developer and remedies. 
    The following events in subsections (1), (2) and (3) are hereby defined as "events of default" applicable to the developer: 
(1)  Failure of developer to pay the host community payment. Failure of the developer to pay any portion of the host community payment or the payments required under subsections 20-3(4), (5), (9) and (10) but excluding the property tax (collectively the "other section 20-3 monetary obligations") as herein provided or required when due following 30 days' written notice from the town that such host community payment and/or other section 20-3 monetary obligations are due. If payment of such host community payment and/or other section 20-3 monetary obligations amount due is not received within such 30-day period, then the town will be entitled to proceed to exercise any and all remedies provided in this section 20-18 for an event of default by the developer, including, but not limited to, the collection of all its costs, fees and expenses in exercising such remedies and reasonable attorneys' fees. Until the town has provided the developer with written notice pursuant to this section 20-18(1) and the time periods for cure set forth in this section 20-18 have elapsed without such cure having been effected, the failure of the developer to perform or comply with the covenants of this chapter to pay the host community payment and other section 20-3 monetary obligations shall not be deemed an event of default by the developer. 
(2)  Failure of developer to perform the other non-monetary covenants. Failure of the developer to perform in accordance with or to comply with any of the other material non-monetary covenants, conditions and agreements which are to be performed or complied with by the developer in this chapter and the continuance of such failure for a period of 30 days after notice thereof in writing (other than in cases of emergency when more expeditious action is required as provided in section 20-9) from the town to the developer (which notice shall specify the respects in which the town contends that the developer has failed to perform any such covenants, conditions and agreements), shall constitute an event of default of the developer; provided, however, if such default cannot with reasonable diligence be cured within 30 days and the developer within said 30-day period shall have commenced and thereafter shall have continued diligently to prosecute all actions necessary to cure such default, then the developer shall have an additional reasonable time within which to cure the default. Until the town has provided the developer with written notice pursuant to this subsection and the time periods for cure set forth in this section have elapsed without such cure having been effected, the failure of the developer to perform or comply with the non-monetary covenants, conditions and agreements of this chapter shall not be deemed an event of default by the developer. 
(3)  Interest on overdue amounts. Failure of the developer to pay any portion of the host community payment or other section 20-3 monetary obligations when due shall result in interest accruing on such host community payment and/or other section 20-3 monetary obligations at the overdue amount interest rate from and after the respective due dates thereof until the date on which such host community payment and/or other section 20-3 monetary obligations are received by the town. 
(4)  Guaranty of Harrah's Operating Company, Inc. If the Harrah's guaranty of development agreement (the "guaranty") of Harrah's Operating Company, Inc., a copy of which is attached hereto as exhibit D to Ord. No. 2006-26 and by this reference incorporated herein, is terminated other than pursuant to the terms and provisions thereof, then the developer shall at the election of the town be deemed in default thereof and the town shall have the right, by written notice to developer, to terminate this agreement. 
(5)  Excluded monetary payments. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, the failure of the developer to pay the impositions or property tax payments due and payable to the town as well as other fees, charges and assessments due and payable to the town under the town zoning and land use regulations and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations including, without limitation, water and sewer use fees and charges, license fees and the like, on a timely basis shall entitled the town to exercise all such rights and remedies as apply thereto under state laws, the town zoning and land use regulations and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations. No late fee shall be due and payable with respect to such payments but the developer will be subject to interest if and to the extent so payable to the town under the town zoning and land use regulations and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations. To the extent that the site is taken by the town or any purchaser from the town at tax sale conducted in accordance with the town zoning and land use regulations or other applicable law, and provided the right of redemption of the developer has been extinguished in accordance with the town zoning and land use regulations or other applicable law and the developer is no longer is in business at the facility, then this chapter, at the town's election, shall terminate by written notice to the developer. 
(6)  Remedy limitations. Upon and during the continuance of an event of default under subsections 20-18(1), (2) and (3) by the developer, the town shall be entitled to exercise all remedies provided in law or equity, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the town may not seek to cancel this chapter or prevent the developer from operating the casino facility or prevent the casino facility from operating if the developer and the casino facility are in compliance with the legislation except and to the extent the town has such right to prevent the developer from operating the casino facility under the town zoning and land use regulations and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations. Furthermore, no dispute, disagreement or other claim by the town regarding the calculation of the host community payment, whether such dispute is with the gaming control board, the developer or any state agency shall constitute an event of default hereunder. 
b.  Nothing herein shall prevent the town from exercising its municipal and regulatory powers regarding health, safety and licensing including, without limitation, liquor licenses and other operational licenses. In connection therewith, the developer shall be entitled to any grace period set forth in the town zoning and land use regulations or Town Charter or other applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations of the town. 
c.  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the developer shall be entitled to make any payment of the host community payment or any other payment under this chapter including, without limitation, in order to cure an alleged default by the town under protest, provided, that the developer notifies the town in writing at the time of making the payment that it disputes the same and is paying the same under protest. Any such payment by the developer shall not be deemed a waiver of any of its rights to dispute or otherwise challenge or contest the obligation of the developer to make any such payment hereunder. In addition, the town does further acknowledge and agree that there is no operating covenant, so-called, applicable to the casino facility and the developer shall not be required to remain open for business in whole or in part; provided, however, that the developer shall comply with all other terms and conditions required to be performed or complied with by the developer in accordance with the terms of this chapter. If, however, the casino facility is closed for business for longer than 12 months (except if such closure is due to restoration resulting from remodeling, fire or other casualty or damage or from any taking by condemnation or eminent domain, and the casino facility is being restored, in which case the casino facility shall be reopened for business as soon thereafter as possible), either the developer or the town shall be entitled to terminate this chapter pursuant to 90 days prior written notice to the other, whereupon this chapter shall become null and void and of no force in effect without liability or recourse by or against either party for such closure. Any such termination notice by the town, however, shall be null and void and of no further force or effect if the developer reopens the casino facility prior to the expiration of said 90-day notice period; provided that there is no other uncured default under subsections 20-18(1), (2) and (3). 
(7)  Legal opinion. Concurrently herewith the developer has delivered or has caused to be delivered to the town the legal opinion of its counsel in the form of exhibit G-1 attached to Ord. No. 2006-26 and by this reference incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-19. - Events of default by the town and remedies. 
(a)  Events of default by the town. The occurrence of any of the following shall be an "event of default" by the town under this chapter: 
(1)  If any of the representations by the town contained in section 20-16 shall be false or incorrect in any material respect, and within 60 days following written notice from the developer to the town identifying the basis of the developer's claim, such representation or incorrectness is not made true and correct; or without recourse by or against either party. 
(2)  If the town shall fail to observe or perform one or more of the other material terms, conditions, covenants or agreements contained in this chapter and such failure shall continue for a period of 30 days after notice thereof by the developer to the town specifying such failure unless such failure requires acts to be done, or conditions to be removed, which cannot by their nature reasonably be performed, done or removed, as the case may be, within such 30-day period, in which case no event of default by the town shall be deemed to exist as long as the town shall have commenced curing the same within such 30-day period and shall diligently and continuously prosecute the same to completion. 
(b)  Remedies of the developer. If an event of default by the town shall have occurred and shall not have been remedied within the applicable grace period, the developer shall have the right to select the following remedies: 
(1)  The developer shall have the right to seek: 
a.  Specific performance of the town's obligations hereunder; 
b.  Injunctive relief to prevent the town from the actions which caused or created the event of default by the town; and 
c.  An award of the developer's reasonable attorneys fees and expenses in seeking the remedy described in the preceding clause; or 
(2)  The developer can: 
a.  Withhold or offset its damages against payment of the host community payment after the developer obtains a final court order or award of such damages by a court of competent jurisdiction, or 
b.  Sue the town for damages limited to the amount of the host community payment and property tax previously paid or to be paid. 
(c)  Legal opinion. Concurrently herewith the town has delivered or has caused to be delivered to the developer the legal opinion of its counsel in the form of exhibit G-2 attached to Ord. No. 2006-26 and by this reference incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-20. - Force majeure. 
(a)  Force majeure event. The time period for performance of the obligations of the parties set forth in this chapter shall be subject to extension by reason of any force majeure event. The term "force majeure event" shall mean with respect to the obligations of any party hereunder, actual delay beyond the reasonable control of such party, which is due to any of the following: 
(1)  Fire or other casualty or condemnation; 
(2)  Storm, earthquake, hurricane, tornado, flood, other unusually inclement weather conditions or other act of God; 
(3)  War, act of terrorism, insurrection, rebellion, riots or other civil unrest; 
(4)  Epidemics, quarantine restrictions or other public health restrictions or advisories; 
(5)  Strikes or lockouts or other labor interruptions; 
(6)  Disruption to local, national or international transport services; 
(7)  Embargoes, lack of materials, water, power or telephone transmissions necessary for the development or construction of the project in accordance with this chapter; 
(8)  Failure of any applicable governmental authority to issue any licenses, permits or approvals, or the suspension, termination or revocation of any material licenses, permits or approvals required for the construction of the project; or 
(9)  Any other event that is beyond the reasonable control of a party; 
provided that, with respect to any of the circumstances described in the foregoing clauses (1) through (9) inclusive: 
a.  For the purposes of this chapter, any period of force majeure shall apply only to a party's performance of the obligations necessarily affected by such circumstance and shall continue only so long as such party is continuously and diligently using all reasonable efforts to minimize the effect and duration thereof; and 
b.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, force majeure shall not include the unavailability or insufficiency of funds for any reason (including, without limitation, as a result of the insolvency of a party or any of its affiliates), provided that the funds required under this chapter to be made available to a party have been made available in accordance herewith. 
(b)  Notification requirement. If either party shall be unable to perform its obligations in whole or in part due to a force majeure event, such party shall promptly notify the other party of the nature of such force majeure event and the obligations affected thereby. Upon the occurrence of such force majeure event and delivery of notice to the other party of the occurrence of such force majeure event, the performance by the notifying party of the obligations set forth in such notice shall be suspended to the extent, but solely to the extent, performance of such obligations is affected by such force majeure event. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-21. - Dispute resolution. 
(a)  Arbitration. All disputes relating to any amounts due and payable to the town under section 20-3(4), and any other issue the parties may agree in writing at their option and in their sole discretion to arbitrate, shall be submitted to and resolved by arbitration in accordance with the terms and provisions set forth in this section. All such arbitrations shall be conducted in Providence, Rhode Island. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if both parties agree in writing and in their sole discretion, any dispute may also be resolved by mediation or any other mutually acceptable alternate dispute resolution proceedings undertaken by a mutually acceptable dispute resolution firm or organization. Each party shall be entitled to discovery and the arbitrator(s) shall have the power to order the joinder or consolidation of all claims and parties where common issues exist so as to avoid inconsistent findings and the delay and expense of multiple arbitrations. If the parties are able to agree in writing upon a single arbitrator, the arbitration shall be conducted by such single arbitrator. If the parties are not able for any reason to so agree upon a single arbitrator, each party shall choose one arbitrator and those arbitrators shall choose a third arbitrator and the arbitration shall be conducted by such three arbitrators. Any such arbitrator, mediator or resolution facilitator is referred to herein as an "arbitrator". Any arbitrator selected must be independent having at least 15 years experience in the field(s) to which the disputes pertain and the arbitrators for resolution of any other dispute shall have comparable credentials and experience in relationship to the nature of the dispute. The decision of the arbitrator(s) shall be final and binding on the parties. As soon as the panel has been convened, a hearing date shall be set to occur as soon as reasonably possible, and in any event no later than 21 days thereafter. By a date prior to the hearing and set by the arbitrators, written submittals shall be presented and exchanged by both parties before the hearing date, including reports prepared by experts upon whom either party intends to reply. At such time the parties will also exchange copies of all documentary evidence upon which they will rely at the arbitration hearing and a list of the witnesses whom they intend to call to testify at the hearing. Each party shall also make respective experts available for deposition by the other party prior to the hearing date. The hearings shall be concluded no later than 30 days after the initial hearing date. The arbitrators shall make their award within seven days after the conclusion of the hearing. In the event of a three-member panel, the decisions in which two of the members of the arbitration panel concur shall be the award of the arbitrators. 
(b)  Extension of arbitration period. If the hearing cannot be concluded within the specified 30 days, and the parties cannot agree on an extension of the date for the conclusion of the hearing, the chairman of the arbitration panel shall decide on the appropriate extension of time which shall not exceed 30 days and state the reason for the required extension. 
(c)  Rules of arbitration. The arbitrators shall not be bound by the rules of evidence or civil procedure, but rather may consider such writings and oral presentations as reasonable businesspersons would use in the conduct of their day-to-day affairs, and may require the parties to submit some or all of their presentation as the arbitrators may deem appropriate. It is the intention of the parties to limit the live testimony and cross-examination to the extent absolutely necessary to ensure a fair hearing to the parties on the significant matters submitted to the arbitrators. The parties have included the foregoing provisions limiting the scope and extent of the proceedings before the arbitrators with the intention of providing for prompt, economic and fair resolution of any dispute submitted to the arbitrators. 
(d)  Decision of arbitrator(s). The arbitrators shall have the discretion to allocate in their award the costs of their proceedings, including their fees as they see fit; provided, however, that the respective attorneys fees and costs of each party shall be borne by each such party alone, except in circumstances of bad faith. Judgment upon the award entered by the arbitrator(s) may be entered in any court having competent jurisdiction thereof. The arbitrators shall make their award in accordance with applicable law and based on the evidence presented by the parties, and at the request of either party at the start of the proceeding shall include in their award findings of fact and conclusions of law supporting the award. 
(e)  Emergency relief. Notwithstanding the parties' agreement to mediate, arbitrate or alternatively resolve their disputes as provided in this chapter, any party may seek emergency relief or provisional remedies in a court of law having competent and valid jurisdiction without waiving their rights under this section. 
(f)  Participation by lender. Any mortgagee or lender of the developer shall be allowed, at its option, to participate in the arbitration proceeding which participation shall include the right to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. Any such mortgagee or lender shall be entitled to receive notice of the proceedings and to have an observer present. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-22. - Unavoidable delays. 
    The term "unavoidable delays" means delays incurred due to strikes, lockouts, work stoppages, labor jurisdictional disputes, acts of God, unusual delay in obtaining or inability to obtain labor or materials or sources of energy from reasonable sources, enemy action, riot or other civil commotion, malicious mischief, failure of transportation, sabotage, litigation involving a party related to the town zoning and land use decisions, public approvals, referendum, gaming control board or other state agencies' action or inaction (including appeal, injunctive relief or litigation concerning the town zoning and land use decisions or public approvals), fire, casualty or other causes (whether similar or dissimilar) beyond the reasonable control of the party claiming the unavoidable delay. "unavoidable delays" as to the developer shall also include, without limitation, condemnation or an event of default by the town in the performance of its obligations under this chapter or any other project documents and/or the failure of the town or the state or other applicable state or federal agency to grant, or any delay in granting, any town zoning and land use approval or public approval or other document reasonably determined to be essential to the commencement, efficient progress and timely completion or operation of the project, and for which the developer has completed and filed applications therefor and pursued the issuance process. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-23. - Estoppel certificates. 
    The town and the developer shall at any time and from time to time, within 30 days after written request by the other, execute, acknowledge and deliver to the party which has requested the same and/or to any actual or prospective Lender, assignee or governmental body designated by the developer a certificate stating that: 
(1)  This chapter is in full force and effect and has not been modified, supplemented or amended in any way or, if there have been modifications, the agreement is in full force and effect as modified and identifying such modifications, and if the agreement is not in force and effect, the certificate shall so state; 
(2)  This chapter as modified represents the entire agreement between the parties as to this subject matter or, if its does not, the certificate shall so state; 
(3)  To the knowledge of the certifying party all conditions precedent under the agreement to be performed up to that date have been performed or satisfied and, as of the date of such certificate, there are no existing events of default, defenses or offsets which the town or the developer, as the case may be, has against the enforcement of the agreement by the other party or, if such conditions have not been satisfied or if there are any events of default, defenses or offsets, the certificate shall so state; 
(4)  The host community payment or other monetary payments due and payable for the year in which such certificate is delivered has been paid in full or, if it has not been paid, the certificate shall so state; and 
(5)  Such other matters as may be reasonably included in such certificate consistent with commercial real estate industry practice. 
    Any certificate required to be made by the town or the developer pursuant to this section shall be deemed to have been made by the town or the developer (as the case may be) and not by the person signing same. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-24. - Effectiveness. 
    This chapter shall not be binding upon any parties hereto or effective until and unless: 
(1)  It is executed and delivered by the parties hereto; 
(2)  The board of directors of the developer and its parent approves the agreement and its execution; and 
(3)  The town council approves the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-25. - Conflicts of interest-Town representatives not individually liable. 
    No member, official, representative, or employee of the town shall have any personal interest, direct or indirect, in this chapter, nor shall any such member, official, representative or employee of the town participate in any decision relating to this chapter which affects his or her personal interest or the interest of any corporation, partnership or association in which he or she is, directly or indirectly, interested; provided that except for its own conduct and/or involvement and that of its affiliates, the developer shall not be responsible for the implementation of the foregoing provision and application of the obligations of the town hereunder. No member, official, elected representative or employee of the town shall be personally liable to the developer or any successor in interest in the event of any default or breach by the town or for any amount which may become due to the developer or successor or on any obligations under the terms of the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-26. - All notices, communications in writing. 
    Whenever it is provided herein that notice, demand, request, consent, approval or other communication (a "notice") shall or may be given to, or served upon, either of the parties by the other, or whenever either of the parties desires to give or serve upon the other any notice, each such notice shall be in writing and shall be effective for any purpose only when and if given or served by personal delivery, by facsimile with a copy sent by regular mail, or recognized overnight courier, in either instance as evidenced by acknowledgment of receipt, or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested and received, addressed as follows: 
If to the town: Town of West Warwick 
1170 Main Street 
West Warwick, RI 02893 
Attn: Town Manager With copies to: Town Solicitor 
c/o Town of West Warwick 
1170 Main Street 
West Warwick, RI 02893 If to the developer: Narragansett Tribe/Harrah's Casino Project 
Company, LLC 
c/o Harrah's Operating Company, Inc. 
One Harrah's Court 
Las Vegas, NV 89119 
Attn: Chris Komanowski, 
Vice President-Development With copies to: Harrah's Operating Company, Inc. 
One Harrah's Court 
Las Vegas, NV 89119 
Attn: General Counsel Latham & Watkins 
600 West Broadway, Suite 1800 
San Diego, CA 92101 
Attn: George A. Rice, Esq. Chief Sachem Matthew Thomas 
Narragansett Indian Tribe 
Post Office Box 268 
Charlestown, RI 02813 John F. Killoy, Jr., Esq. 
74 Main Street 
Wakefield, RI 02879  
    Any party may by notice to any other change the address to which notice to such party shall thereafter be given. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-27. - Exculpation. 
    Except as may be specifically provided herein or in the guaranty to the contrary, it is specifically agreed and understood that there is no personal liability on the part of any parent or affiliate of the parent, owner, officer, or director of the developer, stockholder of or a owner of the developer or, if the developer is a corporation, of any officer, director or stockholder of the corporate the developer, or if the developer is a limited liability company, of any member of such company, with respect to the performance of any of the obligations, terms, covenants and conditions of this chapter or any claims. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-28. - No partnership or joint venture. 
    It is mutually understood and agreed that nothing contained in this chapter is intended or shall be construed in any manner or under any circumstances whatsoever as creating or establishing the relationship of co-partners, or creating or establishing the relationship of a joint venture between the town and the developer, or as a lending of the town's taxing power or credit to developer, or as constituting the developer as the agent or representative of the town for any purpose or in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-29. - Counterparts and facsimile. 
    This chapter may be executed in any number of counterparts, each of which shall be an original, but all of which together shall constitute one and the same instrument, and any of the parties or signatories hereto may execute this chapter by signing any such counterpart. This chapter may be executed by facsimile and if so executed shall be legal, valid and binding on any party executing in such manner. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-30. - Captions. 
    The captions of this chapter are for the purpose of convenience of reference only, and in no way define, limit or describe the scope or intent of this chapter or in any way affect this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-31. - Gender. 
    As used in this chapter, the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter, the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular, as the context may require. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-32. - No third-party beneficiaries. 
    Except at may be expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, nothing contained in this chapter shall or shall be construed to confer upon any person other than the developer and the town, any rights, remedies, privileges, benefits or causes of action to any extent whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-33. - Successors and assigns. 
(a)  Binding effect. This chapter shall bind and inure to the benefit of the developer and the successors, designated grantees and assigns of the developer and any subsequent owner of the facility holding the license. The conditions and covenants of this chapter shall constitute covenants running with the site. 
(b)  The developer's right to assign: 
(1)  Provided the developer, at the time of such assignment or transfer, has not been declared to be in default by the town or, if so declared, has cured such default before the expiration of any notice or cure period, the developer shall have the right, at any time and from time to time to assign or otherwise transfer this chapter to 
a.  Harrah's Entertainment Inc., a Delaware corporation ("Harrah's"); 
b.  Any entity resulting from a merger, reorganization or consolidation with Harrah's; 
c.  Any wholly owned affiliate of Harrah's; or 
d.  The tribe. 
(2)  An assignment or transfer to any third party shall be subject to the town's prior consent and approval, which consent and approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed. 
(3)  Any permitted assignee shall assume in writing all of the developer's obligations under this chapter whereupon the developer shall be released from all further obligations hereunder; provided, however, the original developer named herein shall not be released from any monetary obligation under this chapter and any obligation to complete construction of the casino facility if the assignment or transfer occurs during construction of the casino facility, unless and until the initial construction of the casino facility has been substantially completed or the developer has elected to remove any partially constructed improvements as set forth in section 20-7(a). 
(c)  Assignment to lender. If the facility, or a portion thereof, are financed, the developer shall have the right to collaterally assign or otherwise assign this chapter, and/or its right, title and interest in the site and facility, to the issuer of such bonds or other financing, or its designee. The assignment to any such lender or its designee or nominee for financing purposes shall not cause the lender or its designee or nominee to have any liabilities or obligations under this chapter unless and until the lender or its nominee or designee shall succeed to the interests of the developer hereunder. The mere execution of a collateral assignment or other assignment in connection with any such financing shall not cause the lender or its designee or nominee to assume or be responsible for any liabilities or obligations under this chapter. 
(d)  Further rights to reorganize or sell. Nothing herein shall restrict the rights of the owners of the developer to modify the ownership structure or corporate form, or the owners of the developer to sell or transfer their interest in the developer even if such transaction would constitute a change of control of the developer or the right of the owners to sell or transfer any or all of their ownership interest in the developer to the tribe, the tribal entity or an affiliate thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-34. - No amendment. 
    Neither this chapter nor any provisions hereof may be changed, modified, amended, supplemented, altered, waived, discharged or terminated orally, but only by an instrument in writing signed by the party against whom enforcement of the change, modification, amendment, supplement, alteration, waiver, discharge or termination is sought, and, if required by any mortgage document, the applicable lender has consented thereto; provided, however, that the parties acknowledge and agree that they will change, modify, amend, supplement or alter the provisions of this chapter to conform to any legislation of the general assembly of the state as required by the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-35. - Entire agreement. 
    This chapter, together with the exhibits hereto and the other project documents issued or executed by the town contain all of the promises, agreements, conditions, inducements and understandings between the town and the developer concerning the project, and there are no promises, agreements, conditions, inducements or understandings, oral or written, express or implied, between them other than as expressly set forth herein and therein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-36. - Tribal provisions. 
    Because the tribe is a member of the developer and is entitled, under certain circumstances, to acquire total ownership of the developer and/or the site, the town has requested and the tribe, by joinder hereto, has agreed to the inclusion of the following provisions into this chapter and to the right of the town to rely upon and enforce same. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-37. - The tribe's limited sovereign immunity waiver. 
    The tribe acknowledges that its agreements and obligations relative to this chapter are of a commercial nature and the tribe hereby provides an express and irrevocable limited waiver of any applicable sovereign immunity from suit by the town as it relates to this chapter and expressly consents to the dispute resolution provisions of section 20-21 and to be sued in accordance with the provisions of section 20-21 should an action be commenced pursuant thereto. The tribe expressly authorizes any governmental authorities who have the right and duty under applicable law to take any action authorized or ordered by any court having jurisdiction as provided in section 38, including without limitation: 
(1)  Entering the casino facility for the purpose of executing against any property subject to a mortgage or other security interest or otherwise giving effect to any judgment entered; 
(2)  Executing against the tribe's right to receive any payments from the developer, or 
(3)  Otherwise enforce this chapter; provided that in no instance shall any enforcement of any kind be allowed against any assets or revenues of the tribe other than its member interest in the developer, the casino facility or any other revenues, dividends or other amounts arising from or in connection with the casino facility or the developer and any execution shall be subject to the terms and conditions of any documents executed between the tribe and the town. In no instance shall any enforcement of any kind be allowed against the tribe's tribal lands or any other assets or revenues of the tribe other than the limited assets of the tribe as specified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-38. - Governing law; appointment of agents for service; consent to jurisdiction. 
(a)  Governing law. This chapter shall be governed exclusively by its terms and the laws of the state without reference to choice of law provisions. Except as expressly set forth herein, the tribe does not waive, limit or modify its sovereign immunity from suit. The tribe does not consent to the laws of the state relative to the tribe's internal tribal matters. 
(b)  Appointment of agents for service. The tribe irrevocably appoints each of chief sachem and the first councilman of the tribe, as its attorneys upon whom may be served, by regular or certified mail at the address set forth in this chapter, any notice, process or pleading in any action or proceeding against it arising out of or in connection with this chapter. 
(c)  Consent to jurisdiction. The parties hereto consent to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the state. The parties hereto agree that any legal action or proceeding with respect to or arising out of this chapter may be brought in or removed to the United States District Court for the District of Rhode Island and any appellate courts thereto, or if federal jurisdiction is lacking then the courts of the state. By execution and delivery of this chapter, the parties hereto accept, for themselves and in respect of their property, generally and unconditionally, the jurisdiction of the aforesaid courts. The parties hereto irrevocably consent to the service of process out of any of the aforementioned courts in any manner permitted by law. The parties hereto hereby waive any right to stay or dismiss any action or proceeding under or in connection with this chapter brought before the foregoing courts on the basis of forum non-conveniens. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Sec. 20-39. - Other agreements of the tribe. 
(a)  Law of the tribe. The tribe has authorized the execution and delivery of the joinder attached hereto pursuant to that certain Narragansett Tribe resolution regarding casino project (development agreement) (the "resolution") duly adopted by the tribe, a copy of which is attached to Ord. No. 2006-26 as exhibit E and by this reference incorporated herein. The resolution shall not be rescinded, amended or otherwise modified, directly or indirectly, so long as this agreement shall remain in effect. 
(b)  No actions contravening this agreement. The tribe hereby represents and warrants that it shall not take any action which impairs the ability of the tribe to perform its obligations under this agreement. The tribe will be given a reasonable opportunity to comment on any action by the tribe which impact the tribe's rights and obligations under this agreement prior to their implementation. 
(c)  Waiver regarding tribal lands. Except as otherwise agreed by the parties hereto, the tribe will not: 
(1)  Cause or permit the casino facility to become held in trust by the United States for the tribe, or 
(2)  Cause or permit the casino facility to become land held in trust by the tribe which is subject to a restriction on alienation by the United States. 
(d)  Further assurances. The parties agree to execute, deliver and, if necessary, record any and all additional instruments, certifications, amendments, modifications and other documents as may be necessary or desirable to carry out and effectuate the terms and conditions of this agreement. 
(e)  Survival. Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this agreement, the covenants and agreements contained in sections 20-13, 20-16, 20-21, 20-25, 20-36, 20-37, 20-38 and 20-39 inclusive are intended to, and shall, survive the termination of this agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2006-26, 11-1-06) 
Chapter 21 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 21-1. - Declaration of purpose. 
    The purpose of the agency is to carry out the purposes of the Redevelopment Act. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
    Agency means the redevelopment agency created by this chapter and authorized by the Redevelopment Act. 
    Arrested blighted area means any area which, by reason of the existence of physical conditions including, but not by way of limitation, the existence of unsuitable soil conditions, the existence of dumping or other unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the existence of ledge or rock, the necessity of unduly expensive excavation, fill or grading, or the necessity of undertaking unduly expensive measures for the drainage of the area or for the prevention of flooding or for making the area appropriate for sound development, or by reason of obsolete, inappropriate, or otherwise faulty platting or subdivision, deterioration of site improvements, inadequacy of utilities, diversity of ownership of plots, or tax delinquencies, or by reason of any combination of any of the foregoing conditions, is unduly costly to develop soundly through the ordinary operations of private enterprise and impairs the sound growth of the community. 
    Blighted and substandard area includes a slum blighted area, a deteriorated blighted area, or an arrested blighted area, or any combination of these areas. Blighted and substandard area shall also include those areas where the presence of hazardous materials, as defined in RIGL  23-19.14-2, impairs the use, reuse, or redevelopment of impacted sites. 
    Bonds of agency means any bonds, notes, interim certificates, debentures, or other obligations issued by an agency pursuant to RIGL  45-33-5 through 45-33-15. 
    Community means the Town of West Warwick, Rhode Island. 
    Comprehensive plan means the Town of West Warwick comprehensive plan. 
    Deteriorated blighted area means any area in which there exist buildings or improvements, either used or intended to be used for living, commercial, industrial, or other purposes, or any combination of these uses, which by reason of: 
(1)  Dilapidation, deterioration, age, or obsolescence; 
(2)  Inadequate provision for ventilation, light, sanitation, open spaces, and recreation facilities; 
(3)  High density of population and overcrowding; 
(4)  Defective design or unsanitary or unsafe character or conditions of physical construction; 
(5)  Defective or inadequate street and lot layout; and 
(6)  Mixed character, shifting, or deterioration of uses to which they are put, or any combination of these factors and characteristics, are conducive to the further deterioration and decline of the area to the point where it may become a slum blighted area as defined in this chapter, and are detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, and welfare of the inhabitants of the community and of the state generally. A deteriorated blighted area need not be restricted to, or consist entirely of, lands, buildings, or improvements which of themselves are detrimental or inimical to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare, but may consist of an area in which these conditions exist and injuriously affect the entire area. 
    Federal government means the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality, corporate or otherwise, of the United States of America. 
    Planning board means the planning board established under article XVI of the West Warwick Home Rule Charter. 
    Project area means all or any portion of a redevelopment area. A project area may include lands, buildings, or improvements which of themselves are not detrimental or inimical to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare, but whose inclusion is necessary, with or without change in their conditions or ownership, for the effective redevelopment of the area of which they are a part. 
    Public hearing means a hearing before the town council or before any committee of the town council to which the matter to be heard has been referred. 
    Real property means lands, including lands underwater and waterfront property, buildings, structures, fixtures, and improvements to the lands, and every estate, interest, privilege, easement, franchise and right, legal or equitable, including rights-of-way, terms for years and liens, charges or encumbrances by way of judgment, attachment, mortgage, or otherwise, and the indebtedness secured by liens. 
    Redevelopment means the elimination and prevention of the spread of blighted and substandard areas. Redevelopment may include the planning, replanning, acquisition, rehabilitation, improvement, clearance, sale, lease, or other disposition, or any combination of these, of land, buildings, or other improvements for residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, institutional, public, or other purposes, including the provision of streets, utilities, recreational areas, and other open spaces consistent with the needs of sound community growth in accordance with the comprehensive plan and carrying out plans for a program of voluntary repair and rehabilitation of buildings or other improvements. 
    Redevelopment Act means the Redevelopment Act of 1956, RIGL 45-31-45-33, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Redevelopment area means the Arctic Village Redevelopment Area and any other area of the community which the town council, upon recommendation of the planning board, finds is a blighted and substandard area whose redevelopment is necessary to effectuate the public purposes declared in the Redevelopment Act. 
    Redevelopment plan means a plan, as it exists from time to time, for a redevelopment project, which: (i) conforms to the comprehensive plan for the community as a whole; and (ii) is sufficiently complete to indicate land acquisition, demolition and removal of structures, redevelopment, improvements, and rehabilitation as may be proposed to be carried out in the project area, zoning and planning changes, if any, land uses, maximum densities, building requirements, and the plan's relationship to definite local objectives, respecting appropriate land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements. 
    Redevelopment project means any work or undertaking of the agency pursuant to the Redevelopment Act and this chapter. 
    Slum blighted area means any area in which there is a predominance of buildings or improvements, either used or intended to be used for living, commercial, industrial, or other purposes, or any combination of these uses, which by reason of: 
(1)  Dilapidation, deterioration, age, or obsolescence; 
(2)  Inadequate provision for ventilation, light, sanitation, open spaces, and recreation facilities; 
(3)  High density of population and overcrowding; 
(4)  Defective design or unsanitary or unsafe character or condition of physical construction; 
(5)  Defective or inadequate street and lot layout; and 
(6)  Mixed character or shifting of uses to which they are put, or any combination of these factors and characteristics, are conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, juvenile delinquency, and crime; injuriously affect the entire area and constitute a menace to the public health, safety, morals, and welfare of the inhabitants of the community and of the state generally. A slum blighted area need not be restricted to, or consist entirely of, lands, buildings, or improvements which of themselves are detrimental or inimical to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare, but may consist of an area in which these conditions predominate and injuriously affect the entire area. 
    State government means the state of Rhode Island, or any agency or instrumentality of the state, corporate or otherwise. 
    State public body means the state, or any city or town or any other subdivision or public body of the state or of any city or town. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-3. - Agency membership and appointment. 
(a)  The appointment of members and rules governing the tenure and officers of the Agency shall be those as stated in RIGL  45-31-12 through 45-31-15. 
(b)  Appointment of agency members. The president of the town council shall appoint five resident electors of the community as members of the agency subject to the approval of the town council. No member of the agency may be an elected officer or an employee of the community. The powers of the agency shall be vested in the members of the agency then in office. 
(c)  Compensation of agency members. Members shall receive their actual and necessary expenses, including travel expenses, and may receive other compensation as the town council may prescribe. 
(d)  Tenure of agency members. The members who are first appointed shall be designated to serve for terms of one, two, three, four, and five years respectively. Thereafter members shall be appointed for a term of office of five years, except that all vacancies occurring during a term shall be filled for the unexpired term. A member holds office until his or her successor has been appointed and has qualified. 
(e)  Officers of the agency. The agency shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson from among its members. The agency shall elect or appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the agency. The term of office of the chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary, unless otherwise prescribed by the town council, shall be for the calendar year, or for that portion remaining after each officer is designated or elected. 
(f)  Qualifications of agency members. Members of the agency shall possess qualifications in fields that are beneficial to carrying out the purposes of the agency. Without limitation, such qualifications may include expertise in law, architecture, engineering, real estate, finance, construction, planning, and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-4. - Quorum and voting. 
(a)  Quorum. Three members of the agency shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. At least 48 hours' notice shall be given to all members prior to the holding of an agency meeting. 
(b)  Voting. The affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum shall be required for any official action of the agency. The vote by roll call may be taken upon the request of any agency member. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-5. - Interest of officers and employees in project area properties. 
    No officer or employee of the community or of the agency who in the course of his or her duties is required to participate in the formulation of plans or policies for the redevelopment of a project area, or to approve those plans or policies, shall acquire any interest in any property included within a project area within the community. If the officer or employee owns or has any financial interest, direct or indirect, in any property included within a project area, he or she shall immediately disclose, in writing, the interest to the town council, and the disclosure shall be entered in the minutes of the agency and of the town council. Failure to disclose the interest constitutes misconduct in office. No payment shall be made to any member or officer of an agency for any property or interest in property acquired by the agency from the member or officer, unless the amount of the payment is fixed by court order in eminent domain proceedings, or unless the payment is unanimously approved by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-6. - Suspension and removal of agency members. 
    For inefficiency, neglect of duty, or misconduct in office, a member of the agency may be suspended by town council. A member of the agency may be removed by the town council only after he or she has been given a copy of the charges against him or her, which copy shall be served on him or her at least ten days prior to a public hearing, and after he or she has had an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel, at the hearing to be held within 30 days after the date of the suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-7. - Resident attorney. 
    The agency shall appoint, in writing, some competent person or persons resident in this state as its resident attorney or attorneys with authority to accept service of process against the agency in this state, and upon any of whom all process against the agency in this state may be served. The power of attorney shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state and state the name and address of the resident attorney. If the resident attorney dies, resigns, or moves from the state, the agency shall immediately make a new appointment as prescribed and immediately file the power of attorney in the office of the secretary of state. No power of attorney shall be revoked until after a like power has been given to some other competent attorney resident in this state and filed as prescribed. Service of process upon the resident attorney is deemed sufficient service upon the agency. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-8. - Administrative appropriations. 
    When the agency becomes authorized to transact business and exercise its powers, the town council may at that time, and from time to time thereafter, make an estimate of the amount of money required for the administrative purposes of the agency and may appropriate amounts to the agency as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-9. - Budgetary control of agency. 
    The agency shall annually submit to the town council a proposed budget of its administrative expenses. The budget is subject to changes as the town council may prescribe, and its preparation and adoption, and the adoption of any changes in the budget, shall be subject to the same rules which are applicable to other agencies and departments of the community which are subject to budgetary control. No adoption is effective unless it is concurred in by the membership of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-10. - Deactivation or substitution of agency. 
    At any time after two years after adopting a resolution declaring that there is need for an agency to function in the community, the town council, if the agency has not redeveloped or acquired land for, or commenced the redevelopment of a project or entered into any contracts for redevelopment, may by resolution declare that there is no further need for the agency in the community. Thereupon, the offices of the members of the agency shall be vacated and the capacity of the agency to transact business or exercise any power shall be suspended and remain suspended until the town council adopts a resolution declaring the need for the agency to function. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-11. - Periodic reports. 
    The agency shall file with the town council a detailed report of all its transactions, including a statement of all revenues and expenditures, at monthly, quarterly, or annual intervals as the town council may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-12. - Powers and duties of agency. 
(a)  The agency constitutes a public body, corporate and politic, exercising public and essential governmental functions, and has all the powers necessary and convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Redevelopment Act, including the powers enumerated in this section: 
(1)  To sue and be sued; to borrow money; to compromise and settle claims; to have a seal; and to make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of its powers. 
(2)  To make, and, from time to time, amend and repeal bylaws, rules, and regulations, consistent with the Redevelopment Act, to carry into effect the powers and purposes of the Redevelopment Act. 
(3)  To select and appoint officers, agents, counsel, and employees, permanent and temporary, as it may require, and determine their qualifications, duties, and compensation. 
(4)  Within the redevelopment area or for purposes of redevelopment: to purchase, lease, obtain an option upon, acquire by gift, grant, bequest, devise, or otherwise, any real or personal property, or any estate or interest in it, together with any improvements on it; to rehabilitate or otherwise improve any or all substandard buildings, structures, or other improvements; to insure or provide for the insurance of any real or personal property or operations of the agency against risk or hazard; and to rent, maintain, rehabilitate, improve, manage, operate, repair, and clear the property. 
(5)  To develop as a building site or sites any real property owned or acquired by the agency. 
(6)  To cause streets and highways to be laid out and graded, and pavements or other road surfacing, sidewalks, and curbs, public utilities of every kind, parks, playgrounds, and other recreational areas, off street parking areas and other public improvements to be constructed and installed. 
(7)  To prepare or have prepared all plans necessary for the redevelopment of blighted and substandard areas; with the consent and approval of the planning board, to carry on and perform, for and on behalf of the commission, all or any part of the planning activities and functions within the community; to undertake and perform, for the community, industrial, commercial, and family relocation services; to obtain appraisals and title searches; to make investigations, studies, and surveys of physical, economic, and social conditions and trends pertaining to a community; to develop, test, and report methods and techniques and carry out research and other activities for the prevention and the elimination of blighted and substandard conditions and to apply for, accept, and utilize grants of funds from the federal government and other sources for those purposes; and to enter upon any building or property in any redevelopment area in order to make investigations, studies, and surveys, and, in the event entry is denied or resisted, the agency may petition the Kent County superior court for an order for this purpose. Upon the filing of a petition, due notice of it shall be served on the person denying or resisting entry, and after a hearing on the petition, the court shall enter an order granting or denying the petition. 
(8)  To undertake technical assistance to property owners and other private persons to encourage, implement, and facilitate voluntary improvement of real property. 
(9)  To undertake and carry out code enforcement projects pursuant to the provisions of appropriate federal legislation. 
(10)  To invest any funds held in reserves or sinking funds or any funds not required for immediate disbursement, in property or securities in which savings banks may legally invest funds subject to their control; and to purchase its bonds at a price not more than the principal amount and accrued interest, all bonds so purchased to be cancelled. 
(11)  To lend money, and to sell, lease, exchange, subdivide, transfer, assign, pledge, encumber (by mortgage, deed of trust, or otherwise), or otherwise dispose of any real or personal property or any estate or interest in it acquired under the provisions of the Redevelopment Act, to the United States, the state government, any state public body, or any private corporation, firm, or individual at its fair value for uses in accordance with the redevelopment plan, irrespective of the cost of acquiring and preparing the property for redevelopment. In determining the fair value of the property for uses in accordance with the redevelopment plan, the agency shall take into account, and give consideration to, the uses and purposes required by the plan, the restrictions upon, and the obligations assumed by the purchaser or lessee of the property, and the objectives of the redevelopment plan for the prevention of the recurrence of blighted and substandard conditions. Any lease or sale of the property may be made without public bidding provided, that no sale or lease is made until at least ten days after the town council has received from the agency a report concerning the proposed sale or lease. 
(12)  To obligate the purchaser or lessee of any real or personal property or any estate or interest in it to: 
(i)  Use the property only for the purpose and in the manner stated in the redevelopment plan; 
(ii)  Begin and complete the construction or rehabilitation of any structure or improvement within a period of time which the agency fixes as reasonable; and 
(iii)  Comply with other conditions that in the opinion of the agency are necessary to prevent the recurrence of blighted and substandard conditions and otherwise to carry out the purposes of the Redevelopment Act. The agency, by contractual provisions, may make any of the purchasers' or lessees' obligations, covenants, or conditions running with the land, and may provide that, upon breach thereof, the fee reverts to the agency. 
(13)  To exercise all or any part or combination of the powers granted in this chapter. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter authorizes the agency to construct any new buildings for residential, commercial, or industrial uses contemplated by the redevelopment plan. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this chapter authorizes the agency to retain for a period in excess of five years from the date of acquisition, or within another additional period of time that the town council fixes as reasonable, the fee or any estate or interest in it to any building, structure, or other improvement, not demolished or otherwise removed, which has been acquired by the agency in accordance with the redevelopment plan. 
(d)  The powers enumerated in subsections 21-12(4), (11), and (12) shall be exercised only in accordance with a redevelopment plan adopted by the town council pursuant to section 45-32-13 of the Redevelopment Act. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-13. - Property acquisition by eminent domain-Town council approval required. 
    Within a redevelopment area, and only in accordance with a redevelopment plan adopted by the town council pursuant to section 45-32-13 of the Redevelopment Act, the agency shall have the power to acquire by the exercise of the power of eminent domain any real property or any estate or interest within a redevelopment area whenever it is decided by a majority vote of the agency that the acquisition of the real property or any estate or interest is in the public interest and necessary for the public use; and to clear, demolish, or remove any and all buildings, structures, or other improvements from any real property so acquired. The agency shall not exercise the power of eminent domain without the prior approval of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-14. - Selection of redevelopment area(s) and formulation of redevelopment plan(s). 
    The agency may of its own motion, or at the direction of the town council, select one or more project areas comprising all or a portion of a redevelopment area, and formulate a redevelopment plan for each project area. A redevelopment plan may be prepared by the planning board in the event the members of the agency have not been appointed, or at the request of the agency. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
Sec. 21-15. - Submission of redevelopment plans-Conformity. 
    All redevelopment plans shall be submitted by the agency to the town council. All redevelopment plans shall conform to the Redevelopment Act, this chapter 21, and the Comprehensive Plan. The agency shall consult with the planning board in formulating redevelopment plans before their submission to the town council. Whenever a redevelopment plan is submitted to the town council, a copy of the plan shall be submitted to planning board, which shall report to the town council within 30 days on the redevelopment plan and its conformity to the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-4 , 3-25-14) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix is the zoning ordinance of the city, being Ord. No. 94-05, effective July 1, 1994, as amended. The ordinance is included herein substantially as enacted, except that treatment of numbers within text has been made uniform to conform to the style used in this Code, obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation, and in a few instances, material has been added, in brackets, for clarity. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated in parentheses at the ends of affected sections. 

Section 1. - Relation to state law; relation to other zoning. 
    1.1 This zoning ordinance and amendments thereto enacted conform to the provisions of the Rhode Island Zoning Enabling Act (the act) of 1991, G.L. 1956,  45-24-26 through 45-24-72 inclusive. 
    1.2 All provisions of zoning adopted under authority of the provisions of sections 45-24-1 through 45-24-26 or of chapter 2065 of the Public Laws of 1933 repealed hereby shall become null and void as of July 1, 1994 unless amended so as to conform to the provisions of the act. 
    1.3 Notwithstanding any provisions of this zoning ordinance and amendments thereto, structures, buildings and land owned by the town may be used for the placement, erection and maintenance of telecommunication facilities in any district, and such telecommunication facilities so erected and/or used shall be exempt from the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, 2-15-11) 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 2. - General purposes. 
    These zoning regulations are developed and maintained in reliance upon the West Warwick comprehensive plan prepared and adopted by the town in accordance with the Rhode Island General Laws, and are designed to address the following purposes. The town council recognizes these purposes, each with equal priority and numbered for reference only. 
2.1 Promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
2.2 Providing for a range of uses and intensities of use appropriate to the character of the town and reflecting current and expected future needs. 
2.3 Providing for orderly growth and development which recognizes: 
2.3.1 The goals and patterns of land use contained in the comprehensive plan of the Town of West Warwick adopted pursuant to the General Laws; 
2.3.2 The natural characteristics of the land, including its suitability for use based on soil characteristics, topography, and susceptibility to surface or groundwater pollution; 
2.3.3 The values and dynamic nature of freshwater ponds, riverfront, streambanks and the shorelines, and freshwater wetlands; 
2.3.4 The values of unique or valuable natural resources and features; 
2.3.5 The availability and capacity of existing and planned public and/or private services and facilities; 
2.3.6 The need to shape and balance urban and rural development; and 
2.3.7 The use of innovative development regulations and techniques. 
2.4 Providing for the control, protection and/or abatement of air, water, groundwater, and noise pollution, and soil erosion and sedimentation. 
2.5 Providing for the protection of the natural, historic, cultural, and scenic character of the town and areas therein. 
2.6 Providing for the preservation and promotion of agricultural production, forest, silviculture, aquaculture, timber resources, and open space. 
2.7 Providing for the protection of public investment in transportation, water, stormwater management systems, sewage treatment and disposal, solid waste treatment and disposal, schools, recreation, public facilities, open space, and other public requirements. 
2.8 Promoting a balance of housing choices, for all income levels and groups, to assure the health, safety and welfare of all citizens and their rights to affordable, accessible, safe and sanitary housing. 
2.9 Providing opportunities for the establishment of low and moderate income housing. 
2.10 Promoting safety from fire, flood, and other natural or man-made disasters. 
2.11 Promoting a high level of quality in design in the development of private and public facilities. 
2.12 Promoting implementation of the comprehensive plan of the Town of West Warwick adopted pursuant to the General Laws. 
2.13 Providing for coordination of land uses with contiguous municipalities, other municipalities, the state and other agencies, as appropriate, especially with regard to resources and facilities that extend beyond municipal boundaries or have a direct impact on that municipality. 
2.14 Providing for efficient review of development proposals, to clarify and expedite the zoning approval process. 
2.15 Providing for procedures for the administration of the zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, variances, special use permits, and where adopted, procedures for modifications. 
2.16 Providing for coordination with contiguous communities. It is the intention of this ordinance to facilitate coordination with contiguous municipalities and state agencies with regard to land use decisions which may affect shared resources and facilities, abutting property, and the greater public good. This coordination shall be carried out be [by] assuring this ordinance is consistent with the West Warwick comprehensive plan and any amendments thereto, which is reviewed by other municipalities and state agencies; and notifying, in accordance with Rhode Island General Laws, property owners, water resource boards, and/or city or town governing bodies of pending variance and special use applications or zoning map amendment petition, and associated public hearings. Notices of proposals in neighboring communities or by state agencies shall be forwarded to the planning board for their review and when concerns exist with regard to consistency with the objectives of the West Warwick comprehensive plan, comments shall be prepared and forwarded to the agency submitting notice. 
Section 3. - Definitions. 
    Where words or terms used in this chapter are defined in section 45-22.2-4 [the definitions section of the "Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation Act"], they shall have the meanings stated therein. In addition, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
3.1  Abutter. One whose property abuts, that is, adjoins at a border, boundary, or point with no intervening land. 
3.2  Accessory family dwelling unit. An accessory family dwelling unit is a unit located entirely within or directly attached to a single family owner occupied dwelling unit, that is clearly a subordinate part of the single family owner occupied dwelling unit and is designed exclusively as a residence for use of not more than two members of the family occupying the principal single family dwelling unit. 
3.3  Accessory use. A use of land or of a building, or portion thereof, customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building. An accessory use may be restricted to the same lot as the principal use. An accessory use shall not be permitted without the principal use to which it is related. 
3.4  Aggrieved party. An aggrieved party, for purposes of this chapter, shall be: 
(i)  Any person or persons or entity or entities who can demonstrate that their property will be injured by a decision of any officer or agency responsible for administering the zoning ordinance; or 
(ii)  Anyone requiring notice pursuant to this chapter. 
3.5  Agricultural land. "Agricultural land," as defined in section 45-22.2-4. Land suitable for agriculture by reason of suitability of soil or other natural characteristics or past use for agricultural purposes. Agricultural land includes that defined as prime farm land or additional farm land of statewide importance for Rhode Island by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
3.6  Agriculture. The cultivation of the soil for food products, whether or not on agricultural land or in agricultural greenhouses. The normal preparation of such products for market and the incidental raising of small numbers of livestock or poultry for on-premises household consumption shall be considered an accessory use, provided no sale of animals or animal products are conducted. 
3.7  Applicant. An owner or authorized agent of the owner submitting an application or appealing an action of any official, board or agency. 
3.8  Application. The completed form or forms and all accompanying documents, exhibits, and fees required of an applicant by an approving authority for development review, approval, or permitting purposes. 
3.8a.  Bed and breakfast. A residence, usually owner occupied, in which individual furnished rooms are rented on a nightly basis and in which breakfast is included. 
3.9  Buffer. Land which is maintained in either a natural or landscaped state, and is used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on surrounding areas, properties or rights-of-way. 
3.10  Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
3.11  Building envelope. The three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by regulations governing building setbacks, maximum height, and bulk; by other regulations; and/or any combination thereof. 
3.12  Camper. A mobile recreational seasonal living unit designed to be mounted upon and conveyed by another vehicle. A camper unit shall be not be occupied as a dwelling unit. 
3.12a  Cardholder. When used in relation to medical marijuana means a person who has been registered or licensed with the Department of Health or the Department of Business Regulation pursuant to G.L. Title 21, Chapter 28.6 and possesses a valid registry identification card or license. 
3.13  Clinic. A place where medical or dental care is furnished to persons on an out-patient basis by one or more doctors, clinical psychologists, dentists, physician's assistants, nurses, and such other medical professionals licensed or regulated by the State of Rhode Island. 
3.14  Common ownership. Either: 
(i)  Ownership by one or more individuals or entities in any form of ownership of two or more contiguous lots; or 
(ii)  Ownership by any association (such ownership may also include a municipality) of one or more lots under specific development techniques. 
3.15  Community residence. In accordance with the provisions of G.L. Title 45, Chapter 24, a home or residential facility where children and/or adults reside in a family setting and may or may not receive supervised care. This shall not include halfway houses or substance abuse treatment facilities. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
3.15.1 Whenever six or fewer mentally disabled or mentally handicapped or physically handicapped children or adults reside in any type of residence in the community, as licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956,  40.1-24-1 et seq. All requirements pertaining to local zoning are waived for these community residences; 
3.15.2 A group home providing care or supervision, or both, to not more than eight unrelated persons with disabilities, and licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. Chapter 24 of Title 40.1; 
3.15.3 A residence for children providing care or supervision, or both, to not more than eight children including those of the care giver and licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956,  42-72.1-1 et seq.; 
3.15.4 A community transitional residence providing care or assistance, or both, to no more than six unrelated persons or no more than three families, not to exceed a total of eight persons, requiring temporary financial assistance, and/or to persons who are victims of crimes, abuse, or neglect, and who are expected to reside in that residence not less than 60 days nor more than two years. Residents will have access to and use of all common areas, including eating areas and living rooms, and will receive appropriate social services for the purpose of fostering independence, self-sufficiency, and eventual transition to a permanent living situation. 
3.16  Comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan when adopted and approved pursuant to the General Laws and to which any zoning adopted pursuant to the act shall be in compliance. 
3.16a.  Congregate living facility. An establishment or portion thereof that contains sleeping units where residents share bathroom and/or kitchen facilities. 
3.16b  Cooperative cultivations. When used in relation to medical marijuana means two or more qualifying patient or primary caregiver cardholders who cooperatively cultivate marijuana in residential or nonresidential locations and possess a license to operate from the Department of Business Regulation. 
3.17  Day care-day care center. Any other day care center which is not a family day care home. 
3.18  Day care-family day care home. Any home other than the individual's home in which day care in lieu of parental care or supervision is offered at the same time to six or fewer individuals who are not relatives of the care giver, but may not contain more than a total of eight individuals receiving day care, as regulated by the state. 
3.19  Density, residential. The number of dwelling units per unit of land, expressed as the ratio of the total number of dwelling units divided by the total number of acres of usable lot area. 
3.20  Development. The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; any change in use, or alteration or extension of the use, of land. 
3.21  Development plan review. The process whereby authorized local officials review the site plans, maps, and other documentation of a development to determine the compliance with the stated purposes and standards of the ordinance. 
3.21a  Disabilities. When used in the zoning code the term "disabilities" when referring to a person or persons means a person or persons who has/have a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, as defined in G.L., as amended,  42-87-1(7). 
3.22  Drainage system. A system for the removal of water from land by drains, grading, or other appropriate means. 
[3.23  Reserved. ] 
3.24  Dwelling unit. A structure or portion thereof providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, and containing a separate means of ingress and egress. 
3.25  Dwelling, multiple-family. A building containing three or more dwelling units with the number of households in occupancy not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. Apartments, row houses, townhouses, condominium developments, and similar housing types, whether or not dwelling units therein which are sold, rented or leased are included, but not including roominghouses, boardinghouses, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, hotels, motels, hospitals or nursing homes. 
3.26  Dwelling, single-family. A detached building not including a mobile home, containing no more than one dwelling unit. 
3.27  Dwelling, two-family. A detached building containing two dwelling units. 
3.28  Extractive industry. The extraction of minerals, including: solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing, and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the extraction site or as a part of the extractive activity. 
3.29  Family. A person or persons related by blood, marriage, or other legal means. 
3.30  Federally insured or assisted housing. Federally insured or assisted housing means: 
(i)  Low-income housing units insured or assisted under sections 221 (d)(3) and 236 of the National Housing Act [12 U.S.C. section 1701 et seq.]. 
(ii)  Low income housing units produced with assistance under section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 [42 U.S.C. section 1401 et seq.]; and 
(iii)  Rural low income housing financed under section 515 of the Housing Act of 1949 [12 U.S.C. section 1715Z]. 
3.30a.  Firearms. Weapons from which a shot or shots are fired by any explosive force. 
3.31  Floodplains, or flood hazard area. As defined in G.L. 1956,  45-22.2-4. An area that has a one percent or greater chance of inundation in any given year, as delineated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency pursuant to the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended (P.L. 90-448) [42 U.S.C. 4011 et seq.]. 
3.32  Garage, private. A fully enclosed attached or separate accessory building for the storage of motor vehicles, owned or regularly used by the owner or tenant of the lot. Buildings in which fuel is sold or repair or other services performed shall not be construed as private garages. 
3.33  Gas station. A place where motor vehicle fuels and lubricants are sold at retail and dispensed by the patron or by an attendant. Nonautomotive retail convenience goods may be sold on the premises as an accessory use. Automotive repair or services are prohibited. 
3.34  Groundwater. "Groundwater" and associated terms, as defined in G.L. 1956,  46-13.1-3. 
3.35  Halfway houses. A residential facility for adults or children who have been institutionalized for criminal conduct and who require a group setting to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society. 
3.36  Hardship. See G.L. 1956,  45-24-41. 
3.37  Historic district, or historic site. As defined in G.L. 1956,  45-22.2-4. "Historic district" means one or more historic sites and intervening or surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and character of the historic site or sites, and has been registered, or is deemed eligible to be included, on the state register of historical places pursuant to section 42-45-5. "Historic site" means any real property, man-made structure, natural object, or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which has been registered, or is deemed eligible to be included, on the state register of historic places pursuant to G.L. 1956,  42-45-5. 
3.38  Home occupation. Home occupation shall include: 
3.38.1 An accessory use of a dwelling unit or accessory structure, involving the manufacture, provision or sale of good and/or services, which is carried out by members of the family residing on the premises plus no more than one nonresident assistant or employee. 
3.38.2 Home occupations do not include occasional garage sales and yard sales nor home parties which are held for the purpose of sale of goods or services, provided however, that if the collective total of all such sales and/or parties exceed three in any calendar year such sales and/or parties shall be considered a home occupation and regulated hereby. 
3.38a.  Hotel. An establishment that provides lodging and frequently meals, entertainment and various personal services for the public. 
3.39  Household. One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit. The term "household unit" shall be synonymous with the term "dwelling unit" for determining the number of such units allowed within any structure on any lot in a zoning district. An individual household shall consist of any one of the following: 
3.39.1 A family, which may also include servants and employees living with the family; or 
3.39.2 A person or group of no more than three unrelated persons living together. 
3.40  Kennel. The temporary keeping of others' animals for remuneration. 
3.41  Infrastructure. Facilities and services needed to sustain residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and other activities. 
3.42  Land development project. A project in which one or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex of uses, units, or structures, including, but not limited to, planned development and/or cluster development for residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open space, and/or mixed uses as may be provided for in this zoning ordinance. 
3.43  Laundromat. A building or portion thereof where patrons wash, dry or dry-clean clothing and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
3.44  Lot. Either: 
(i)  The basic development unit for determination of lot area, depth, and other dimensional regulations; or 
(ii)  A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 
3.45  Lot area. The total area within the boundaries of a lot, excluding any street right-of-way, usually reported in acres or square feet. 
3.46  Lot area, usable. For the purpose of calculating the lot building coverage on a lot and for the purpose of determining minimum lot area requirements, the calculation of the usable lot area for all uses shall exclude the following: 
(i)  Lands under water; 
(ii)  Wetlands as defined by G.L. 1956,  2-1-1 et seq., or amendments thereto. 
(iii)  All streets or rights-of-way, public or private, which serve or are intended to service more than one principal building or use. Public access or scenic areas, exclusive of those located in wetlands, conveyed by easement to the town, state or other governmental entity solely, or waterfront access may be included in lot area for calculations. 
(iv)  Lands possessing areas with slopes in excess of 20 percent and ledge outcrops. 
(v)  Lands located within special flood hazard areas, as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency's "Flood Insurance Rate Map" and "Flood Boundary and Flood Way Map," as may be amended. 
3.47  Lot building coverage. That portion of the lot that is or may be covered by buildings and accessory buildings. This shall be expressed as a percent and shall express the portion of the usable lot area that is or may be covered by the total maximum horizontal cross-section of any building or buildings. 
3.48  Lot depth. The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth is an average of the depth but shall not be less than minimum required depth, wherever measured. Refer to subsection 5.7.2 for additional measurement procedures. 
3.49  Reserved. 
3.50  Lot frontage. That portion of a lot abutting a street. Refer to subsection 5.7.1 for additional measurement procedures. 
3.51  Lot line. A line of record, bounding a lot, which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public or private space and shall include: 
(i)  Front: The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way where the front lot line fronts on more than one street, the front lot line shall be determined by the building inspector. 
(ii)  Rear: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line, or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, an assumed line at least ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line; and 
(iii)  Side: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. On a corner lot, one side lot line may also be a street lot line. 
3.52  Lot, through. A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
3.53  Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum front setback line. Refer to subsection 5.7.3 for additional measurement procedures. 
3.54  Mere inconvenience. See G.L. 1956,  45-24-41. 
3.55  Mixed use. A mixture of land uses within a single development, building, or tract. 
3.56  Mobile home. A dwelling unit, factory-built and factory-assembled, designed for conveyance, after fabrication, on streets and highways on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailers and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit, complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, such as locating on jacks or other foundation or connection to utilities. A prefabricated home, modular home or structure shall not be included in this definition. 
3.57  Modification. Permission granted and administered by the building inspector pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance to grant a dimensional variance other than lot area requirements, not to exceed 25 percent of each of the applicable dimensional requirements. 
3.57a.  Motel. An establishment that provides lodging and parking for the public and in which rooms are frequently accessible to an outside parking area. 
3.58  Nonconformance. A building, structure, or parcel of land, or use thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the original adoption or amendment of the zoning ordinance and not in conformity with the provisions of such ordinance or amendment. Nonconformance shall be of only two types: 
3.58.1  Nonconforming by use. A lawfully established use of land, building, or structure which is not a permitted use in that zoning district. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of a zoning ordinance shall be nonconforming by use; or 
3.58.2  Nonconforming by dimension. A building, structure, or parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of the zoning ordinance. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of the zoning ordinance, other than those pertaining to the permitted uses. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of a zoning ordinance shall be nonconforming by use; a building or structure containing a permitted number of dwelling units by the use regulations of the zoning ordinance, but not meeting the lot area per dwelling unit regulations, shall be nonconforming by dimension. 
3.59  Nursing home. A structure designed or used for residential occupancy and providing medical or nursing care on the premises for occupants on rehabilitative or long-term care but not including a hospital or clinic, nor separate living quarters for each occupant containing some or all provisions of a dwelling unit. 
3.60  Open space. Any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that the area may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets, and off-street parks and other improvements that are designated to be incidental to the natural openness of the land. 
3.61  Performance standards. A set of criteria or limits relating to elements which a particular use or process either must meet or may not exceed. 
3.62  Permitted use. A use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
3.63  Planned development. A "land development project," as defined herein, and developed according to plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures and/or uses with appurtenant common areas. 
3.64  Planning board. The body established by the town of West Warwick which has the responsibility to prepare a comprehensive plan and make recommendations concerning that plan to the town council. 
3.65  Preapplication conference. A review meeting of a proposed development held between applicants and reviewing agencies as permitted by law and municipal ordinance, before formal submission of an application for a permit or for development approval. 
3.65a  Primary caregiver. When used in relation to medical marijuana means a natural person, who is at least 21 years old. 
3.66  Residential mobile home park. A subdivision designed and intended for residential use where all residences are therein mobile homes. 
3.67  Restaurant, fast food. That type of retail restaurant, refreshment stand, and/or commercial establishment, self-service or otherwise, designed or used, in whole or in part, to cater to and/or accommodate, in whole or in part, the consumption of food, dessert, or beverages anywhere upon the premises, both inside and outside the building from which it is sold and/or dispensed, whether or not the owner of such restaurant or commercial establishment grants active permission for customers to do so, including, but not limited to, that type of retail establishment which includes substantially stand-up, counter and/or drive-in service and primarily serves or dispenses food, dessert, or beverages in or with disposable or nonreusable containers and/or utensils. 
3.68  Restaurant, standard. A retail establishment where food or beverages are cooked or prepared and offered for sale and where individual customer service is provided at fixed or movable seating at which it is consumed, whether or not entertainment is offered, and includes establishments commonly known as bars, grilles, cafes, taverns, and nightclubs permitting consumption on the premises, but excludes fast food restaurants. 
3.69  Right-of-way. Any easement in or property acquired by the town or state for the purpose of establishing streets or highways, including pedestrian sidewalks, bicycle paths, safety rest areas, landscaping, or any other purpose incidental to highway travel. 
3.70  Roominghouse. A dwelling unit where individual rooms, with furniture are provided for rent, usually for an extended period of time. 
3.71  Service station. A business establishment that performs automotive repairs or service, and which may supply fuel, oil, and automobile accessories to motor vehicles, including grease racks, elevators, provide minor tire and battery services, but not including the storage of unregistered cars, nor more than six cars awaiting parts or customer pickup. Nonautomotive or retail convenience sales are not permitted. 
3.72  Setback line or lines. A line or lines parallel to a lot line at the minimum distance of the required setback for the zoning district in which the lot is located that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. 
3.73  Sign. Any permanent or temporary device or structure which contains one or more of the following characteristics in each of the paragraphs 3.73.1, 3.73.2, and 3.73.3 below: 
3.73.1 Freestanding, attached to a building or structure or erected, painted, represented, or reproduced outside any building or structure or any natural object such as a tree, rock, bush, including the ground itself; or 
3.73.2 Which displays, reproduces or includes any letter, word, name, number, model, symbol, insignia, design, device, representation or trademark, or flag (including banner or pennant); or 
3.73.3 Which is used to identify the premises or occupant or owner of the premises; to advertise any trade, business, profession, industry, service, or other activity; to advertise any product or item; to advertise the sale or rental or use of all or part of any premises, including that upon which it is displayed; to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic other than state, county or municipal highway and roadway markers; and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, or any representation used to advertise or promote the interests of any person. 
3.73.4 In no event shall the word "sign" be construed to mean any sign in the interior of any structure unless it is specifically set forth in this ordinance or displayed within the view of persons passing on a street or public sidewalk. 
3.73.5 Signs: Defined by location. 
3.73.5.1  Ground. A detached sign erected upon or supported by the ground. 
3.73.5.2  Roof. A sign erected upon the roof of any building. 
3.73.5.3  Wall. A sign erected against the wall of any building with the exposed face thereof in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall, and which sign is mounted, at a distance, measured perpendicular to said wall, no greater than 12 inches. A wall sign shall include a sign suspended from the ceiling of a marquee, canopy, or vestibule and a sign attached to any fence, screen, or freestanding wall. 
3.73.5.4  Projecting. A sign erected approximately perpendicular to the wall of a building, including a sign erected at the corner of a building, projecting into an open space or yard but not projecting into the right-of-way of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public thoroughfare. 
3.73.5.5  Marquee. A sign other than a projecting sign mounted on the marquee of any building. 
3.73.5.6  Canopy or awning. A sign other than a projecting sign designated on a canopy or awning and identifying the name or address of a building or an establishment contained therein. 
3.73.5.7  Face signs. Sign painted on the wall of a building. 
3.73.5.8  Mobile signs. A sign mounted on its own wheels or mounted on a vehicle. 
3.74  Signs. Defined by message conveyed. 
3.74.1  Real estate. A sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which it is maintained, including a subdivision sign. 
3.74.2  Job site or improvement. Temporary signs announcing the erection of buildings or other construction work, either freestanding or attached to the premises. 
3.74.3  Business. A sign directing attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered upon the same premises as those upon which the sign is maintained. 
3.74.4  Bulletin board; change board. A sign of permanent character, but with movable letters, words or numerals, or changeable copy, not by any mechanical or electronic means, indicating the names of persons associated with the events conducted upon or products or services offered upon the premises upon which such sign is maintained. 
3.74.5  Professional. A sign indicating the name and occupation of a professional person or group or associated professional persons. 
3.74.6  Nameplate. A sign indicating only the name and address of an occupant. 
3.74.7  Instructional or directional. A sign conveying instructions with respect to the premises on which it is maintained, such as a sign designating the entrance to or exit from a parking area, a trespassing sign, danger sign, and similar signs. 
3.74.8  Temporary promotional. A display sign, banner or advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood, or other light temporary material, with or without a structural frame, intended to promote special sales, free gifts, openings, or campaigns. 
3.74.9  Billboard. An off-premises outdoor advertising structure displaying a sign or signs not pertinent to a use on the premises. 
3.74.10  Off-site directional signs. Official signs erected by the town of West Warwick, the State of Rhode Island or federal government, indicating the route to major public facilities, shopping areas and the like and such signs erected by service clubs and churches. 
3.74.11  Political sign. Temporary sign designating a candidate for elective office, or other matter on the ballot. 
3.75  Site plan. The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and/or the proposed conditions of the lot. 
3.76  Special use. A regulated use which is permitted pursuant to the special use permit issued by the authorized governmental entity, pursuant to G.L. 1956,  45-24-42 of the act. Formerly referred to as a "special exception." 
3.76.1  Storage unit. Any temporary structure or container used for the storage personal property of every nature and kind. 
3.77  Street. A public right-of-way or highway established, accepted and maintained under public authority. 
3.78  Street line. The dividing line between a public way and an adjacent lot. 
3.79  Structure. A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below, the surface of land or water. 
3.80  Structure, temporary. A structure having the same requirements as a permanent structure, except that is does not require a foundation. 
3.81  Substandard lot of record. Any lot lawfully existing at the time of adoption or amendment of the zoning ordinance and not in conformance with the dimensional and/or area provisions of the ordinance. 
3.82  Telecommunications facility. The plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services. 
3.83  Travel trailer. A mobile home not exceeding eight feet in width nor more than 33 feet in length. Travel trailers shall not be occupied as a dwelling unit. 
3.84  Use. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
3.85  Variance. Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the zoning ordinance. An authorization for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure, or for the establishment or maintenance of a use of land, which is prohibited by the zoning ordinance. There shall be only two categories of variance, a use variance or a dimensional variance. However, the fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief. 
3.85.1  Use variance. Permission to depart from the use requirements of the zoning ordinance where the applicant for the requested variance has shown by evidence upon the record that the subject land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is to conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
3.85.2  Dimensional variance. Permission to depart from the dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance, where the applicant for the requested relief has shown, by evidence upon the record, that there is no other reasonable alternative way to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of the subject property unless granted the requested relief from the dimensional regulations. 
3.86  Waters. As defined in G.L. 1956,  46-12-1(b). 
3.87  Wetland, freshwater. As defined in G.L. 1956,  2-1-20. A marsh, swamp, bog, pond, river, river or stream flood plain or bank, area subject to flooding or storm flowage; emergent or submergent plant community in any body of fresh water; or area within 50 feet of the edge of a bog, marsh, swamp, or pond, as defined in G.L. 1956,  2-1-20. 
3.88  Yard. The required space on a lot to be open, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures, whether such structures be affixed permanently or temporarily to the ground or whether such structures be an overhang from a principal structure, except as otherwise provided for in this zoning ordinance, or by storage of vehicles, campers, travel trailers, mobile homes, boats, boat trailers or similar equipment, located between any lot line and the setback required there from, except as otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
3.88.1  Yard, front. A required yard extending across the full width of the lot adjacent to the front lot line. 
3.88.2  Yard, rear. A required yard extending from the rear of the principal structure to the rear lot line and extending across the full width of the lot. 
3.88.3  Yard, side. A required yard extending from the rear of the required front yard, or from the side lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear lot line. 
3.88.4  Yard, interior side. A required side yard not adjacent to a public way. 
3.88.5  Yard, corner side. A required side yard adjacent to a public way. 
3.89  Zoning certificate. A document signed by the building inspector, as required in the zoning ordinance, which acknowledges that a use, structure, building or lot either complies with or is legally nonconforming to the provisions of the zoning ordinance or is an authorized variance or modification therefrom. 
3.90  Zoning map. The map or maps which are a part of this zoning ordinance and which delineate the boundaries of all mapped zoning districts within the physical boundary of the town. 
3.91  Zoning ordinance. An ordinance enacted by the West Warwick town council pursuant to the Rhode Island General Laws and in the manner providing for the adoption of ordinances in the town Charter, which sets forth regulations and standards relating to the nature and extent of uses of land and structures, which is consistent with the comprehensive plan of the town as defined in G.L. 1956,  45-22.2-1 et seq., of the act, which includes the zoning map, and which complies with the provisions of Rhode Island General Laws. 
3.92  Zoning use districts. The basic unit in zoning, either mapped or unmapped, to which a uniform set of regulations applies, or a uniform set of regulations for a specified use. The districts may include, but are not limited to: agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional, open space, and residential. Each district may include subdistricts. Districts may be combined. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, 2-2-01; Ord. No. 2005-4, 3-1-05, eff. 3-23-05; Ord. No. 2007-2, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 2008-14, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 2008-19, 11-18-08; Ord. No. 2012-3, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 2013-1, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 2013-3, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 2013-52, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 2016-3 , 5-3-16; Ord. No. 2017-3 , 2-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-4 , 2-28-17) 
Section 4. - Division into districts. 
    4.1  District boundaries. The boundaries of said zoning use districts are hereby established as shown on the town zoning map which is adopted as part of this ordinance and which is on file with office of the town clerk and the building inspector. 
4.1.1  Residential districts. 
Residence 10 (R-10) formerly residence AA 
Residence 8 (R-8) formerly residence A 
Residence 7.5 (R-7.5) formerly residence B 
Residence 6 (R-6) formerly residence C 
4.1.2  Nonresidential districts. 
Business (B) formerly business D 
Commercial industrial (CI) formerly industrial E 
Business park (BP) 
    4.2  Split lots. Wherever a district boundary splits a lot into two or more separate zoning districts, a prospective use may be processed only if it is listed in the table of uses for the district. The dimensional requirements for such use shall be determined by the district in which it is located. Where a proposed use is permitted in two or more districts on the same lot, the dimensional requirements, other than density, shall be determined by the district's dimensional regulations which contains the most usable lot area. For density requirements, all portions of the lot shall be calculated proportionately, by usable lot area within each district. 
    4.3  Interpretation. Where, due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the zoning map of the town of West Warwick, it shall be determined that the boundary lines of districts are lot lines, centerlines of streets or such lines extended, railroad right-of-way lines, or the centerlines of watercourses. Interpretations concerning the text of this ordinance and the exact location of district boundary lines as shown on the zoning map shall be made by the building inspector. Any person aggrieved by such interpretation of the building inspector may appeal such interpretation to the zoning board of review. 
    4.4  Zoning affects every structure and use. No structure shall be constructed, erected, placed, moved or maintained nor shall the exterior be altered and no land use shall be commenced or continued within the town unless in conforming with the regulations wherein specified for the district in which it is located, except as provided for in sections 7 and 8 herein. 
    4.5  Unlisted uses. Any use not listed in the table of uses shall be permitted upon favorable recommendation to the zoning board by the planning board and the granting of a special use permit by the zoning board upon the affirmative finding of each board that the proposed use: 
(1)  Is in conformance with the purposes and intent of the town comprehensive plan and the applicable standards of this ordinance, and 
(2)  Is either a use of the same type and nature that is generally permitted in the zone in which the use is proposed or that the proposed use is a use of less intense nature that the uses presently permitted in the zone in which the use is proposed, and 
(3)  Will not alter the general character of the surrounding area, and 
(4)  Meets the standards required for the granting of a special use permit in section 10.2.1 of this zoning code. 
    4.6  Area requirements dedicated. No part of a lot, yard, parking space, or other dimension required for any building or use for the purposes of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as part of a lot, yard, parking space, or other dimension required under this ordinance for another use or building except as provided in section 5.9.8, joint use. 
    4.7  Only one dwelling on any lot. In no case shall there be more than one dwelling and its accessory buildings on one lot, except that two-family and/or multiple-family developments may permit more than one residential structure per lot in conformity with this ordinance. 
    4.8  More than one nonresidential use or building on a lot. More than one nonresidential structure may be allowed on a single lot within a nonresidential district if devoted to the same use. Upon application to the zoning board of review, a special use permit may be issued in accordance with this ordinance, where more than one use on a lot may be petitioned, provided, however, that such uses shall be only those that are listed within the district. 
    4.9  Street access. No structure shall be erected on or moved onto a lot which does not have frontage equal to or greater than the required minimum frontage as required in this ordinance, for the district in which it is located except as permitted in subsections 7 and 8. 
    4.10  Corner visibility. Within any required front or corner side yard on any corner lot or any driveway or curb cut, no wall, fence, sign, hedge, shrub or other obstruction to visibility shall be permitted between the heights of 21/2 and ten feet above the existing street grade within an area 50 feet long and five feet wide measured along the street line and in either direction from such intersection or driveway or curb cut. 
    4.11  Temporary uses permitted. A temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment, a temporary office for the sale or rental of real property, if in connection with an incidental and necessary to a real estate development, and a temporary trailer used for residential occupancy necessitated by any loss or damage of a principal structure by fire, or natural disaster shall be permitted in any district subject to approval by the building inspector; provided that any building permit for any such temporary use shall be valid for not more than six months unless such time period is extended by the building inspector. All other temporary and/or mobile facilities for residential, commercial or industrial use are prohibited in any district; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to such temporary and/or mobile facilities which are owned and/or operated by federal, state, or municipal agencies or by any hospital, school, charitable, nonprofit, or religious institution. 
    4.12  Reserved. 
    4.13 Overlay district regulations, hotel/motel, multi-family, transient and office business category. 
4.13.1 Intent. The overlay district is established to provide for additional uses now prohibited in the commercial/industrial zone, while maintaining all the dimensional and other requirements associated with the underlying commercial/industrial zone. 
4.13.2 Establishment of the district. The hotel/motel, multi-family and business overlay district is herby established for the following parcels with the current commercial/industrial zone lying south of I-95: Assessor's Plat 30, Lots 1, 7, 13, 14, 15, 18, 22, 32, 34, 36, 39, 41. 
4.13.3. Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the underlying CI district remain permitted, but in addition pursuant to the existing zoning ordinance, the following uses are permitted: 
4.13.3.1 Office business category. 
4.13.3.2 Other business uses (hotel/motel, transient). 
4.13.3.3 Residential uses (multi-family dwellings). 
4.13.4 Qualifier. In the case of conflict among regulations, the stricter standards shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-5-96,  1; Res. No. 2000-154, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2010-6, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-25, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 2014-12 , 6-17-14) 
Section 5. - Use regulations. 
    The Town of West Warwick is divided into the following mapped districts to implement this ordinance and may include, but are not limited to, the separation of residential from nonresidential uses and the division of nonresidential uses into appropriate areas of the town to achieve the purposes stated in section 2 hereinbefore. 
5.1  Reserved. 
5.2  Reserved. 
5.3  Table of use regulations. 
Y = Permitted 
X = Prohibited 
S = Special Use Permit 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS R-10 R-8 R-7.5 R-6 A. Residential uses   1.  Dwelling, single-family Y Y Y Y   2.  Dwelling, two-family S S Y Y   3.  Dwelling, multiple-family S S S S   4.  Dwelling lawfully existing prior to adoption of this ordinance Y Y Y Y   5.  Mobile homes X X X S   6.  Residential mobile home parks S S S S   7.  Rooming house S S S S   8.  Bed and breakfast S S S S   9.  Congregate living facility S S S S B. Residential community facilities   1.  Church, or similar place of worship or religious instruction Y Y Y Y   2.  School, public or private elementary, junior/middle, or high Y Y Y Y   3.  College, university or similar higher educational institution S Y S S   4.  Community residence Y Y Y Y   5.  Family day care home Y Y Y Y   6.  Nursing home S S S S C. General community facilities   1.  Public park or playground Y Y Y Y   2.  Library or museum Y Y Y Y   3.  Public or private golf course, course, or country club Y Y Y Y   4.  Public utility structure or right-of-way, sewage treatment plant, water treatment plant but not including an electric generating plant S S S S   5.  Government building not including a public utility structure or right-of-way Y Y Y Y   6.  Watershed or wellhead supply or protection Y Y Y Y   7.  Transit passenger shelter Y Y Y Y   8.  Cemetery S S S S   9.  Clinic S S S S   10.  Hospital, sanitarium, auxiliary and accessory uses S S S S   11.  Philanthropic, fraternal, social or educational office, club or meeting room S S S S D. Agricultural uses   1.  Agriculture (excluding medical marijuana) Y Y Y Y   2.  Plant nursery Y Y Y Y   3.  Wood lot Y Y Y Y   4.  Conservation area, wildlife refuge Y Y Y Y E. Residential accessory uses   1.  Accessory family dwelling unit S S S S   2.  Accessory use Y Y Y Y   3.  Home occupation Y Y Y Y   4.  Private garage Y Y Y Y   5.  Storage of campers, travel trailers, boats and other recreational vehicles Y Y Y Y   6.  Swimming pool Y Y Y Y   7.  Sign: one face or ground describing one of the following messages: Y Y Y Y      Real estate      Jobsite improvement      Bulletin board      Professional    Nameplate    Instructional or directional   8.  Temporary structure Y Y Y Y F. Telecommunications facilities   1.  Underground facilities S S S S   2.  Overhead facilities S S S S   3.  Monopoles/towers X X X X G. Medical Marijuana   1.  Compassion centers X X X X   2.  Cardholder medical marijuana Y Y Y Y   3.  Cooperative cultivation Y Y Y Y   4.  Licensed cultivators X X X X  
_____ 
Y = Permitted 
X = Prohibited 
S = Special use permit 
Y/S = May be permitted or special use permit subject to section 5.6.20 
NONRESIDENTIAL 
DISTRICTS B CI BP VC * A. Residential Uses   1.  Dwelling lawfully existing prior to adoption of this ordinance Y Y X Y   2.  Dwelling, two-family X X X S   3.  Dwelling, multi-family X X X S B. Residential Community Facilities   1.  Church, or similar place of worship or religious institution Y Y X Y   2.  School, public or private elementary, junior/middle, or high Y Y S Y   3.  College, university or similar higher educational institution S Y S S C. General Community Facilities   1.  Public park or playground Y Y Y Y   2.  Library or museum Y Y X Y   3.  Public or private golf course, country club Y Y Y X   4.  Public utility structure or right-of-way, sewage treatment plant, water treatment plant or electric generating plant Y Y X X   5.  Government building, not including a public utility structure or right-of-way Y Y X Y   6.  Watershed or wellhead supply or protection Y Y S X   7.  Cemetery Y Y X X   8.  Clinic Y Y Y Y   9.  Hospital, sanitarium, auxiliary and accessory uses S S Y S   10.  Philanthropic, fraternal, social or educational office, club or meeting Y Y X Y D. Agricultural Uses    Uses 1 through 4 in Residential Districts inclusive (excluding medical marijuana) Y Y X Y   5.  Animal shelter, kennel, aviary Y Y Y X   6.  Veterinarian, veterinary hospital Y Y X Y   7.  Landscape and horticultural services Y Y Y X   8.  Commercial greenhouse Y Y Y S   9.  Garden center, lawn supplies Y Y Y Y E. Retail Business   1.  Lumber and building materials dealers Y Y Y/S Y/S   2.  Paint, glass and wallpaper stores Y X Y/S Y   3.  Hardware stores Y X Y/S Y   4.  Mobile home dealers Y X Y/S X   5.  Department and variety stores Y X Y/S Y/S   5a.  Sale or trading of firearms Y/S Y/S X Y   6.  General merchandise stores Y X Y/S Y   7.  Food and grocery stores Y X Y/S Y   8.  Meat and fish stores Y X Y/S Y   9.  Fruit and vegetable markets Y X Y/S Y   10.  Candy, nut and confectionery stores Y X Y/S Y   11.  Dairy products stores Y X Y/S Y   12.  Retail bakery, baking, and selling Y X Y/S Y   13.  Motor vehicle dealers (new and used) Y X Y/S X   14.  Auto and home supply stores Y X Y/S S   15.  Gas stations and service stations Y Y S X   16.  Boat dealers Y X Y/S X   17.  Recreational vehicle dealers Y X Y/S X   18.  Motorcycle dealers Y X Y/S Y/S   19.  Clothing, personal furnishings and accessories Y X Y/S Y   20.  Shoe stores Y X Y/S Y   21.  Furniture and home furnishings Y X Y/S Y   22.  Household appliance stores Y X Y/S Y   23.  Radio, television and related stores Y X Y/S Y   24.  Music stores Y X Y/S Y   25.  Restaurant, standard Y Y Y/S Y   26.  Restaurant, fast-food Y Y Y/S Y   27.  Bar, tavern or nightclub Y Y X Y   28.  Drugstores Y X Y/S Y   29.  Liquor stores Y X Y/S Y   30.  Antique and used merchandise stores Y X Y/S Y   31.  Sporting goods and bicycle shops Y X Y/S Y   32.  Bookstores Y X Y/S Y   33.  Stationery stores Y X Y/S Y   34.  Jewelry stores Y X Y/S Y   35.  Hobby, game and toy stores Y X Y/S Y   36.  Camera and photographic supply stores Y X Y/S Y   37.  Gift, novelty and souvenir shops Y X Y/S Y   38.  Luggage and leather goods Y X Y/S Y   39.  Sewing, needlework and piece goods stores Y X Y/S Y   40.  Mail-order houses and other non-store retail Y X Y/S Y   41.  Fuel oil dealers, no on site storage Y Y S X   42.  Fuel oil dealers with on site storage X Y S X    43.  Liquefied gas dealers (fuel storage in tanks) X Y S X    44.  Florists Y X Y/S Y    45.  Cigar stores and tobacconists Y X Y/S Y    46.  News dealers and newsstands Y X Y/S Y   47.  Optical goods Y X Y/S Y   48.  Other retail, not elsewhere classified Y X S Y/S F. Office Business Category   1.  Banks and credit agencies Y X Y/S Y   2.  Security and commodity brokers Y X Y/S Y   3.  Exchanges and services Y X Y/S Y   4.  Insurance offices Y X Y/S Y   5.  Real estate offices Y X Y/S Y   6.  Other investment offices Y X Y/S Y   7.  Advertising services Y X Y/S Y   8.  Advertising Y X Y/S Y   9.  Credit/mercantile reporting and collection agencies Y X Y/S Y   10.  Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and steno services Y X Y/S Y   11.  Services to buildings Y X Y/S Y/S   12.  Miscellaneous equipment rental Y X S Y/S   13.  Personnel supply agencies Y X Y/S Y   14.  Computer and data processing services Y X Y/S Y   15.  Management, consulting and public relations services Y X Y/S Y   16.  Miscellaneous business services Y X S Y   17.  Offices of physicians, dentists and other health practitioners and medical arts buildings Y X Y/S Y   18.  Medical and dental laboratories Y X Y/S Y   19.  Outpatient care facilities Y X Y/S Y   20.  Other health services Y X S Y   21.  Legal Services Y X Y/S Y   22.  Correspondence, vocational and job training schools Y Y Y/S Y   23.  Other schools and educational services Y X Y Y   24.  Business, professional, and labor organizations Y X S Y   25.  Civic, social and fraternal associations Y X S Y   26.  Political organizations Y X S Y   27.  Other membership organizations Y X S Y   28.  Engineering, architectural and surveying services Y X Y/S Y   29.  Noncommercial educational, scientific and research organizations Y Y Y/S Y   30.  Accounting, auditing and booking services Y X Y/S Y   31.  Other services Y X S Y G. Personal and Other Service Categories   1.  Building construction, general and special trade contractors Y Y Y/S Y/S   2.  Laundry, dry-cleaning plants and garment services Y S S   3.  Laundry, dry cleaning and garment services (self-service only) Y X X Y   4.  Photographic studios Y X Y/S Y   5.  Beauty or barber shops Y X Y/S Y   6.  Shoe repair Y X Y/S Y   7.  Funeral services, crematory Y X S Y/S   8.  Other personal services Y X S Y/S   9.  Appliance, furniture and equipment rental and leasing Y X Y/S Y   10.  Auto, truck and trailer rental and leasing Y Y Y/S X   11.  Automotive and auto body repair and service X Y S X   12.  Automobile parking lots or garages Y Y X S   13.  Auto cleaning and carwashes Y Y S X   14.  General electrical repair shops Y Y Y/S Y   15.  Watch, clock and jewelry repair Y X Y/S Y   16.  Re-upholstery and furniture repair Y Y Y/S Y   17.  Other repair services, welding X Y S S H. Wholesale Business Category   1.  Wholesale business office or showroom: display of wares and sales transactions only Y Y Y Y   2.  Wholesale trade or transfer of durable goods, not elsewhere classified X Y S S   3.  Wholesale trade or transfer of nondurable goods, not elsewhere classified X Y S S I. Amusement and Recreational Business Category   1.  Motion-picture, film, tape and disk distribution Y Y Y/S Y   2.  Motion-picture theaters Y Y Y/S Y   3.  Dance halls, studios or schools Y Y Y/S Y   4.  Bowling alleys or billiards Y Y Y/S Y   5.  Other indoor recreation Y Y Y Y/S   6.  Amusement park or other outdoor recreation S Y Y/S Y/S   7.  Art galleries Y Y Y/S Y J. Other Business Uses   1.  Hotels and motels, transient Y X S S K.  Transportation, Telecommunications Facilities   1.  Local and intercity bus transportation Y Y Y/S Y/S   2.  Bus charter service Y Y Y/S Y/S   3.  Taxicab establishment Y Y Y/S Y   4.  Trucking service and/or terminal X Y Y/S X   5.  Courier service X Y Y/S Y/S   6.  Warehousing: general and/or refrigerated X Y Y/S X   6a.  Warehousing: public X Y S X   7.  Communications: services and broadcasting offices Y Y Y/S Y   8a. Underground facilities S S S S   8b. Overhead facilities S S S S   8c. Monopoles/towers S S S S   9.  Sanitary services (not including waste storage, treatment or disposal X Y S X L. Manufacturing   1.  Food and kindred manufacturing processing or packaging Y S S X   2.  Textile mill products and production X Y Y X   3.  Apparel and finished products X Y Y X   4.  Lumber and wood products X Y Y X   5.  Furniture and fixtures X Y Y X   6.  Paper and allied products X S S X   7.  Printing, publishing and allied industries X Y Y X   8.  Chemicals and allied products X S S X   9.  Petroleum refining and related industries X X X X   10.  Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products X S S X   11.  Leather and leather products X S S X   12.  Stone, clay, glass and concrete products X S S X   13.  Primary metals industries (except blast furnaces, steel works, foundries and primary smelting) X S S X   14.  Fabricated metal products, (except machinery and transportation equipment) X S S X   15.  Industrial and commercial machinery and computer equipment X Y Y X   16.  Electronic and other electrical equipment, except computers X Y Y X   17.  Transportation equipment X Y Y X   18.  Instruments: photographic, medical and optical goods, chronographs X Y Y X   19.  Miscellaneous manufacturing X S S X M. Mining   1.  Nonmetallic mineral extraction or quarrying X S S X   2.  Crushing, processing, grading, washing of material X S S X N. Accessory Uses   1.  Residential accessory uses for dwellings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance; accessory uses 1 through 8 inclusive as permitted in, prohibited, or regulated by special use permit in residential districts - - - -   2.  Signs Y Y Y Y   3.  Incidental temporary structure Y Y Y Y    (a)(i) If a construction trailer or similar building on site only during the time period a building is being constructed;    (a)(ii) Other temporary structures used on a given parcel of land for no more than one continuous period of not more than 90 days during any one calendar year   3a.  Other temporary structure Y Y X Y   4.  Private garage Y Y Y Y O. Medical Marijuana   1.  Compassion centers X S X X   2.  Cardholder medical marijuana Y Y Y Y   3.  Cooperative cultivation Y Y Y Y   4.  Licensed cultivator X S X X  
* In the case of conflict among regulations, the stricter standards of the Business District shall apply. 
5.3.1  Wind energy systems. Wind energy systems (WES) shall be permitted only in R-10, CI and BP districts by Special Use Permit. 
5.3.2  Adult entertainment uses. Adult entertainment uses shall be permitted in the CI (commercial industrial) zoning district only by a special use permit from the ZBR. 
5.4  Standard dimensional regulations table. 
DIMENSION DISTRICT R-10 R-8 R-7.5 R-6 B CI BP VC Minima:  Lot area in sq. ft.:   1-family 10,000 8,000  7,500 6,000 10,000 40,000 40,000 x   2-family 15,000 12,000 10,000 8,000 x x x x  Lot width (feet) 100 80 75 60 100 150 150 x  Lot depth (feet) 100 100 100 100 100 200 200 x   Lot frontage (feet) 80 70 70 55 x x x x  Yards (feet):   Front (principal bldg.) 30 25 20 20 5 50 50 5    Interior side, (principal bldg.) 10 10 7 6 15 20 20 x    Corner side, (principal bldg.) 30 25 20 20 15 50 50 x    Rear, (principal bldg.) 30 25 20 20 30 50 50 x    Front (accessory use) 30 25 20 20 5 50 50 x    Interior side, (accessory use) 10 10 7 6 10 20 20 x    Corner side, (accessory use) 20 20 20 20 20 50 50 x    Rear (accessory use) 10 10 7 6 10 50 50 x Maxima:  Stories 2 2 3 3 x x x x  Height (feet) 30 25 35 35 90 90 90 90   Building lot coverage (%) 20 25 25 30 50 30 50 80 S.F. = square feet Notes: (1) Residences permitted in conjunction with all agricultural uses. (2) Not applicable.  
_____ 
5.5  Minimum residential floor area. No single-family, two-family or multifamily dwelling shall be erected or shall be reconstructed, remodeled or altered, which has living space per family of less than: 
5.5.1 Seven hundred twenty square feet on one floor in a single-family one-story structure. 
5.5.2 One thousand square feet on two floors in a detached single-family two- or more story structure with a minimum of 600 square feet on the first floor. 
5.5.3 Seven hundred twenty square feet per family in a two- or multifamily structure. 
5.5.4 Four hundred square feet for an accessory family dwelling unit. 
5.5.5 Six hundred square feet for a mobile home. 
5.6.  Supplemental use regulations. 
5.6.1 Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings and uses are subject to all the requirements of this ordinance in addition to the following regulations: Accessory buildings and uses, including private garages, in a residential district are permitted which are clearly incidental to subordinate and customarily associated with the principal use; are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the principal use; and for dimensional purposes, do not exceed the principal building by more than 50 percent of the outside circumferential dimensional coverage of the principal building. Accessory uses shall be restricted to the same lot as the principal use and shall not be an extension or enlargement of the principal use to which it is related. All other dimensional and use restrictions of the zoning ordinances which are more limited than the foregoing shall apply. 
5.6.2  Location of accessory buildings and uses. A building or accessory use, including an attached or detached garage, carport, or any vehicles or recreational items listed in section 5.6.10, shall be located so as to meet all the dimensional requirements for accessory uses as set forth in the zoning ordinance. Moreover, no accessory use shall be permitted which would create a sediment control or erosion hazard to any surrounding properties. 
5.6.3 Accessory buildings, including garages, if detached from a principal building or if connected only by an open breezeway-type structure, shall be not less than five feet from the principal building, nor more than 20 feet in height. 
5.6.4 A private garage may be constructed as a structural part of a main building, provided that when so constructed the garage walls shall be regarded as the walls of the main building in applying the front, rear and side yard regulations of this ordinance. 
5.6.5 No accessory building or temporary structure shall be constructed upon a lot unless a main or principal building already exists on said lot and has a valid zoning certificate or a valid building permit has been issued and is in effect for the construction or erection of a main or principal building. This restriction shall not apply to agricultural or farm buildings. 
5.6.6 An access driveway for the lot may be located within its required yard. 
5.6.7 Accessory off-street parking or truck loading areas shall be improved in accordance with town specifications. 
5.6.8 Required accessory off-street parking areas or truck loading space shall not be encroached upon by buildings, open storage or any other use. 
5.6.9 Accessory off-street parking areas shall not be located in a required front yard or side yard and shall be not less than ten feet from any property line in a required rear yard. 
5.6.10 No commercial vehicle nor any camper, travel trailer, mobile home, boat, boat trailer, storage unit, dumpster or similar equipment used for storage of the vehicle, camper, travel trailer, mobile home, boat or boat trailer, storage unit, dumpster or similar equipment, shall be stored within the setback of any front or interior side or corner side property line as provided in section 5.4 hereof. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes. For purposes of this section "shall be stored" shall refer to the location of such items on the property for more than 31 days in any 120-day period of time. Provided however, any time a building or other structure used for residential purposes, or a portion of a building containing residential units, is uninhabitable by virtue of a casualty such as fire or flood, the owner of the property is allowed to park, temporarily, mobile and manufactured home or homes, as the need may be, elsewhere upon the land, for use and occupancy of the former occupants for a period up to 12 months, or until the building or structure is rehabilitated and otherwise made fit for occupancy. The property owner, or properly designated agent of the owner, is only allowed to cause the mobile and manufactured home or homes, to remain temporarily upon the land by making timely application to the building official for the purposes of obtaining necessary permits to repair or rebuild of the structure. 
5.6.11 Any private garage in a residence district shall be occupied by boats or vehicles owned and operated only by the residents of the dwellings on the same lot. Except that one parking space may be occupied by the boat or the vehicle of a nonresident owner, if that space is in excess of the minimum requirements for the lot. 
5.6.12 No commercial vehicles having three or more axles shall be stored, parked or garaged in a residential district, and the parking, storage or garaging of vans, trailers or semitrailers or similar vehicles designed to be propelled by a separate means of locomotion, or vehicles designed to be used for moving said vans, trailers or semitrailers, and all self-propelled machinery designed for commercial use shall be prohibited in residence districts. Vehicles used principally as pleasure or recreational vehicles registered to an occupant of the premises shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
5.6.13 Overnight parking of buses. Overnight parking of buses shall not be permitted in a residence district. 
5.6.14 Accessory buildings and or structures to be located or constructed in any residential zone in the required rear yard for a main or principal building shall not occupy more than 20 percent of such required rear yard. The total lot coverage shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage provided in the table of standard dimensional regulations. 
5.6.15 The following accessory uses shall be permitted in residential districts provided that they shall conform to all other provisions of this ordinance and that they shall not be detrimental to or impair adjacent properties or the neighborhood. 
5.6.15.1 The raising or growing of horticultural products for home use by a residential family thereon. 
5.6.15.2 A hen house, barn, stable, kennel or dairy incidental to a permitted farming use. 
5.6.15.3 A garden or tool shed used only for the storage of garden implements and light home maintenance tools. 
5.6.15.4 A greenhouse not used for commercial purposes. 
5.6.15.5 Swimming pools, including appurtenant structures such as dressing and shower rooms and equipment houses, enclosed by a fence not less than five feet in height. 
5.6.16 An accessory family dwelling unit shall be permitted upon application by the owner in an owner occupied single-family dwelling for a special use permit pursuant to section 10 provided the following conditions are met: 
5.6.16.1 A valid zoning certificate shall be in existence; 
5.6.16.2 The dwelling to which the accessory family dwelling unit is to be added shall be the only dwelling on the lot; 
5.6.16.3 No more than one accessory family dwelling unit shall be permitted; 
5.6.16.4 No violations of any of the town's codes or ordinances shall exist on the lot at the time of the application; 
5.6.16.5 The accessory family dwelling unit shall not contain more than two bedrooms; 
5.6.16.6 At least one additional off-street parking space shall be provided for on the lot for the accessory family dwelling unit; and, 
5.6.16.7 The accessory family dwelling unit shall be constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the zoning board of review. 
5.6.16.8 The accessory family dwelling shall be located entirely within or be directly attached to the owner occupied single family dwelling and no breeze way shall be allowed between the accessory family dwelling and the principal dwelling. 
5.6.16.9 The accessory family dwelling shall occupy no more than 50 percent of the total living space of the total owner occupied dwelling unit, exclusive of a basement, and shall contain no less than 400 square feet and no more than 800 square feet of living space. 
5.6.16.10 No accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed above the second floor of the principal single family dwelling unit. 
5.6.16.11 The accessory dwelling unit shall have direct access for ingress and egress from the principal single family dwelling and separate access for ingress and egress to the outside. 
5.6.16.12 All minimum dimensional and set back requirements of the zoning code must be complied with unless a dimensional variance is granted by the zoning board of review. 
5.6.16.13 The accessory dwelling unit shall not have separate connections to any utilities servicing the accessory family dwelling unit. 
5.6.16.14 A kitchen area of an accessory dwelling unit be not less than 50 square feet and shall not exceed 75 square feet. 
5.6.16.15 There shall be no enlargement of the principal single-family dwelling unit or of the accessory dwelling unit without prior approval of the zoning board of review. 
The granting of a special use permit for an accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to the following: 
5.6.16.16 The use as an accessory dwelling unit shall automatically cease and no longer be valid upon (1) such accessory dwelling unit being occupied by any person other than an immediate family member of the owner occupant of the principal single family dwelling unit or (2) conveyance of the principal single family dwelling unit to any person other than the present owner, whichever shall first occur, provided however, in the event if conveyance of the principal single family dwelling unit to any person other than the present owner and the transferee of such conveyance shall desire to continue that approved accessory dwelling unit without making any changes thereto, such accessory dwelling family dwelling unit approval may be continued subject to all prior conditions and stipulations and specifically subject to sections 5.6.19.20, 5.6.19.21 and 5.6.16.22 such continuation of the approval of the accessory dwelling you may be approved administratively in the discretion of the town planner. 
5.6.16.17 Payment of a fee in lieu pursuant to the provisions of section 17-21 of the town land development and subdivision review regulations. 
5.6.16.18 The decision granting approval of the accessory dwelling unit shall be recorded in the records of land evidence. 
5.6.16.19 The owner applicant of the principal single family dwelling shall biennially apply for a certificate of compliance with the provisions of the granting of the special use permit for and accessory family dwelling unit from the building official which shall also include an affidavit of residency stating the relationship of the occupant of the accessory family dwelling unit. Additionally, any owner of a single-family dwelling unit granted and/or operating under a special use permit, as an accessory family dwelling unit prior to June 5, 2007, shall biennially apply for a certificate of compliance and affidavit of residency to ensure their continued use as an accessory family dwelling unit. 
5.6.16.20 The building official shall have authority to enter the premises at all reasonable times upon reasonable notice to determine compliance with the provisions of the granting of the special use permit. 
5.6.16.21 Notwithstanding any other provision of this zoning code, an accessory family dwelling unit in an owner-occupied, single-family residence shall be permitted as a reasonable accommodation for family members with disabilities or who are 62 years of age or older. The appearance of the structure shall remain that of a single family residence and there shall be an internal means of egress between the principal unit and the accessory family dwelling unit. If possible, no additional exterior entrances shall be added. Where additional entrances required, placement should be generally in the rear or side of the structure. When the structure is serviced by an individual sewage-disposal system, the applicant shall have the existing or any new system approved by the Department of Environmental Management. The zoning enforcement officer shall require that a declaration of the accessory family dwelling unit for the family member or members and its restrictions be recorded in the records of land evidence and filed with the zoning enforcement officer and the building official. Once the family member or members with disabilities or 62 years of age or older, no longer reside(s) in the premises on a permanent basis, or the title is transferred, the property owner shall notify the zoning officials in writing, and the accessory family dwelling unit shall no longer be permitted, unless there is a subsequent valid application. 
5.6.17 Home occupations as defined in section 3.38 shall be permitted as accessory uses in all zones, provided however, all such home occupations shall meet the following standards: 
5.6.17.1  Application. An application for such occupation shall be submitted to and approved by the building official, which application shall include such information as the building official shall determine reasonable and which may include, but not be limited to, a site inspection by such town officials as the building official designates. 
5.6.17.2  Outward appearance. The exterior appearance of the residential structure shall not be changed. There shall be no outside storage or window display. Noise, dust, odors, noxious fumes or vibrations emanating from the premises shall not exceed that which is normally produced by a single dwelling unit. Mechanical or electronic equipment which is incidental to the home occupation may be used provided it does not create visible or audible interference in radio or television receivers or cause fluctuation in line voltage of the premises. The home occupation shall not interfere with the delivery of utilities or other services to the area. 
5.6.17.3  Traffic. The home occupation should not generate significantly greater traffic volume than would normally be expected in the particular zone in which the home occupation is conducted. Delivery and pick-up of materials and commodities to and from the premises by a commercial vehicle shall not exceed more than two trips per week. A commercial vehicle for the purpose of this section is any motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of more than 14,000 pounds. 
5.6.17.4  Parking. The parking of customer's or client's vehicles shall not create safety hazards or congestion. At any one time only one commercial vehicle associated with the activities of the home occupation may be parked near the premises for more than two consecutive hours. One additional on-site parking space shall be required above the normal parking requirements for the residential use for any home occupation where students or clients visit the premises. One additional on-site parking space shall be required above the normal parking requirements for the residential use for any home occupation where a nonresident employee's method of transportation to and from the site of the home occupation is a motor vehicle which would normally be parked on or near the site of the home occupation. Two additional on-site parking spaces shall be required above the normal parking requirements for the residential use for any home occupation where both: 
(1)  Students or clients may visit the premises and 
(2)  Where a nonresident employee's method of transportation to and from the site of the home occupation is a motor vehicle which would normally be parked on or near the site of the home occupation. 
5.6.17.5  Employees. The home occupation is to be conducted only by members of the family residing in the dwelling unit plus no more than one nonresident employee or assistant. Persons engaged in building trades or similar fields, using their dwelling units or residential premises as an office for business activities conducted off the premises, may have more employees than the limitations set forth in this subsection if they are not employed on the premises. 
5.6.17.6  Signage. The intent of signage at home occupations is to identify the location of the property and not to garner or advertise additional business which would have the effect of increasing traffic in the neighborhood, therefore only one sign, not over two square feet in area, flush mounted to the building, shall be permitted per dwelling unit. The sign shall only show the name of the occupant and the type of occupation. The sign shall not be internally or externally lit. A permit for the sign is required in accordance with section 5.10. 
5.6.17.7  Limits on class/instruction. If the home occupation is the type in which classes are held or instruction given, there shall be no more than six students or pupils in the dwelling unit or on the premises at any one time. More than six students or pupils shall require a special use permit. These requirements limiting class size shall not be construed to prohibit occasional exceptions for events such as recitals, demonstrations and other similar gatherings. 
5.6.17.8  Limits on clients/customers. If the home occupation is the type in which customers or clients visit the premises, there shall be no more than six customers or clients in the dwelling unit or on the premises during any period of 60 consecutive minutes. Motor vehicle traffic generated by customers or clients of a home occupation shall be prohibited from visiting the premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
5.6.17.9  Allowable number of home occupations. The total number of home occupations conducted within a dwelling unit is not limited, except that the cumulative impact of all home occupations conducted within the dwelling unit or on the premises thereof shall not be greater than the impact of one home occupation as set forth herein. 
5.6.17.10  Compliance. Home occupations shall comply with all local, state and federal requirements pertinent to the activity pursued, and the requirements of or permission granted by this section shall not be construed as an exemption from such regulations. 
5.6.18 Dormitory or living quarters for churches or other places of worship, educational or religious institutions, hospitals, sanitariums, and other similar uses. 
5.6.19 Accessory buildings and uses are permitted as follows in nonresidential districts. 
5.6.19.1 Accessory off-street parking areas may be located in required front, side, corner side, or rear yards, provided that they are set back at least ten feet from all property lines, and further provided that they do not encroach on corner clearance requirements established in accordance with this ordinance. The planning board may allow accessory off-street parking areas to be set back less than the above-required ten feet, so long as the planning board finds that the location of such off-street parking areas facilitates the coordination of joint access driveways and/or joint parking areas with abutting nonresidential properties. 
5.6.19.2 Dormitory or living quarters for educational or religious institutions, hospitals, sanitariums, and other similar uses. 
5.6.19.3 Repair facilities when conducted entirely within a building incidental to the principal use. 
5.6.19.4 Accessory buildings and uses other than for surface off-street parking shall not be located in any required front, side, corner side, or rear yard. 
5.6.20 Special provisions applicable to the BP business park zoning district. 
5.6.20.1  Purpose, intent, and applicability of zoning district. In addition to the general purposes of this zoning ordinance as established in article I, section 2 of this zoning ordinance, this district is specifically created to promote private investment to expand the tax base and development of employment-intensive businesses and those associated businesses which provide beneficial goods and services to such employment centers and therefore, need to be near such employment centers. As such, access to major roadways and noninterference with residential neighborhoods are essential to fulfillment of the purpose of this district. Therefore, only property which meets the following conditions should be classified as a BP business park zoning district: 1) no street access to a roadway with residential development located thereon, and 2) no property with existing residential or enterprises exempt from town taxes located thereon, and 3) access onto a major arterial which has immediate access to the interstate highway system. 
5.6.20.2  Prohibition on nonprofit/tax exempt businesses. Within the planned business park zoning district, there shall not be permitted any enterprise which by its tax exempt or nonprofit nature would make the property on which the enterprise is situated exempt from the property or other taxes of the town. This is not to be construed as to prohibit such nonprofit or tax exempt entities from establishing offices in the BP zoning district unless such actions would make the property exempt from such taxes. 
5.6.20.3  Preexisting zoning conditions. Whenever a parcel of land within a BP zoning district was rezoned with special conditions prior to being zoned BP, those conditions shall continue in effect without alteration by the zoning to BP. 
5.6.20.4  Variance notification procedures. In addition to the notification provisions established in section 9 of this ordinance as they pertain to variances, the actions required under subsections 9.4.2 and 9.5 shall include listing and notification of all owners of property in the BP zoning district in the same manner and with the same information as the notifications required of all owners of property within 200 feet radius of the subject site. 
5.6.20.5  Special use permit notification procedures. In addition to the notification provisions established in section 10 of this ordinance as they pertain to special use permits, the actions required under subsections 10.5.2 and 10.7 shall include listing and notification of all owners of property in the BP zoning district in the same manner and with the same information as the notifications required of all owners of property within 200 feet radius of the subject site. 
5.6.20.6  Uses designated as Y/S in subsection 5.3, table of use regulations. Those uses designed [designated] as Y/S are permitted uses or special use permit uses depending on the following: 
a.  For those uses designated as Y/S, the use is considered permitted only if the space occupied by the specified use is over 50,000 square feet in contiguous, undivided floor area. If the space occupied by the specified use is 50,000 or less square feet in contiguous, undivided floor area, the use is subject to a special use permit. 
5.6.20.7  Limits on building heights in proximity to residential structures. Where a parcel of land adjoins property zoned R-10 and the R-10 zoned property is developed with a single-family home and no accessory apartments or nonconforming structures, the maximum height for the structure on the BP zoned parcel shall be limited as follows: 
(a)  No structure on the BP zoned parcel shall exceed the following limits: 
30 feet in height within 60 feet of the property line common to the BP and R-10 zoned parcels; and, 
45 feet in height in the portion of the BP zoned parcel which is 60 feet away from, but within 90 feet of, the property line common to the BP and R-10 zoned parcels; and, 
60 feet in height in the portion of the BP zoned parcel which is 90 feet away from, but within 120 feet of, the property line common to the BP and R-10 zoned parcels; and, 
75 feet in height in the portion of the BP zoned [parcel] which is 120 feet away from, but within 150 feet of, the property line common to the BP and R-10 zoned parcels; and, 
After 150 feet from the property line common to the BP and R-10 zoned parcels, the building height for structures on the BP zoned parcels may reach their normal legal limit. 
(b)  Exceptions to the height limits established in subsection 5.6.20.6(a) above. 
(1)  Where the residential structure on the adjoining property receives a height variance (or has received such a variance), the height limits on the structure on the BP zoned property may be increased by an equal amount, but shall not exceed the established maximum limit for the BP district without a variance for the specific BP zoned parcel. 
(2)  The board of zoning review may increase the height limits in the incremental areas established in subsection 5.6.20.6(a) above up to the established limit for the BP district where the planning board has, as part of the development plan review process, requested creation of a buffer on the BP zoned parcel along the common property line between the R-10 and BP zoned parcels. This variance shall be conditioned upon the creation of the buffer. Any such buffer must be in addition to any buffer established on the subject property as a condition of prior rezoning action. 
(3)  The special height limits established in subsection 5.6.20.6(a) above shall only apply to uses which are not permitted in the CI zoning district. 
5.6.20.8  Hotels and motels. Any hotel or motel developed within the BP district must have an average height of at least three (3) floors of rooms for occupancy. Sites must also be extensively landscaped with natural undisturbed vegetation and/or planted landscaping elements. 
5.7  Supplementary dimensional regulations. 
5.7.1  Lot frontage. Lot frontage shall be measured along the street right-of-way line between the side lot lines. Where all frontage is not contiguous, then only the largest single frontage will be considered with regard to minimum frontage requirements; in cases of equal noncontiguous frontage, minimum frontage will be determined by the building official. 
5.7.2  Lot depth. Lot depth shall be measured from the midpoint of the lot frontage by a line perpendicular to the street or private right-of-way. If a curved frontage, lot depth shall be measured by a radial line from the midpoint of the lot frontage. If a corner lot, lot depth shall be measured by the perpendicular or radial line from the lot frontage, whichever is applicable, that will result in the longest lot depth line. 
5.7.3  Lot width. Lot width shall be measured perpendicular to the lot depth line at the existing front setback if a building exists or at the minimum front set back if no building exists. 
5.7.4  Corner clearance at corner lots. On a corner lot in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of 21/2 and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along the street lines 30 feet from the point of the intersection. 
5.7.5  Yards. 
5.7.5.1 The following accessory structures may be located in any required front or rear yard: 
5.7.5.1.1 Awning or movable canopy not exceeding ten feet in height. 
5.7.5.1.2 Open arbor or trellis. 
5.7.5.1.3 Retaining wall, fence or masonry wall, pursuant to subsection 5.7.7 of this ordinance. 
5.7.5.1.4 Reserved. 
5.7.5.1.5 Walkway or driveway sign. 
5.7.5.1.6 Light post. 
5.7.5.2 The space in a required front yard shall be open and unobstructed, except for structures provided for in subsection 5.7.5.1 and the following: 
5.7.5.2.1 An unroofed balcony projecting not more than eight feet into the yard. 
5.7.5.2.2 Other projections specifically authorized in subsections 5.7.6 and 5.7.7. 
5.7.5.3 Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for retaining walls, accessory buildings in a rear yard, and the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses and ornamental features projecting not to exceed six inches. Cornices and eaves shall not project more than 24 inches. Exterior cellar entrances (commonly known as "bilco doors"), shall not encroach more than four feet into the required rear yard and shall not encroach at all into any other required yard. 
5.7.5.4 Open or lattice-enclosed fireproof fire escapes or stairways required by law, projecting into a yard not more than four feet, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and pilasters shall be permitted by the building inspector when placed so as not to obstruct light and ventilation. 
5.7.5.5 Where a lot extends through from street to street, the applicable front yard regulations shall apply on both street frontages. 
5.7.5.6 Yard extension for gasoline pumps. A gasoline pump or pumps may be located no less than 20 feet from any front lot line. 
5.7.5.7 Required front yards in developed block. In a block in which 25 percent or more of the frontage within 200 feet of a lot and on the same side of the street is developed with structures, the required front yard for a structure hereafter erected on that lot shall extend to average alignment of the two nearest existing structures instead of the minimum in the district. No residence shall have a front yard of less than five feet in depth or be required to have a front yard of greater depth than required by the district. 
5.7.6  Height. 
5.7.6.1 Nothing herein contained shall restrict the height of the following architectural and structural features: 
5.7.6.1.1 On any public or semipublic building, a spire, cupola, dome, belfry, or clock tower; 
5.7.6.1.2 A flagpole, chimney flue, elevator or stair bulkhead, water tank, stage tower, or scenery loft as accessory facilities to permitted or special permitted uses in a given district; 
5.7.6.1.3 Barns, silos, or similar farm structures as accessory structures to agriculture; and, 
5.7.6.1.4 A telecommunications tower, transmission line or tower of similar structure only if approved as a special use by the zoning board of review. 
5.7.6.2 No building or structure erected pursuant to subsection 5.7.6 to a height in excess of the height limit for the district in which it is situated shall: 
5.7.6.2.1 Have a lot coverage in excess of ten percent of the lot area; 
5.7.6.2.2 Be used for residence or tenancy purposes; 
5.7.6.2.3 Have any sign, nameplate, display or advertising device of any kind whatsoever inscribed upon or attached to such building or structure. 
5.7.7  Fences and walls. 
5.7.7.1 In residence districts. No fence or wall constructed wholly or in part of barbed wire or other protruding or sharp objects shall be permitted in residence districts, except upon approval of the zoning board of review. No fence may exceed six feet in height. 
5.7.7.2 In all districts. No electrically charged fence or portion of a fence or wall shall be permitted in any district unless the owner of the property shall have obtained a variance from the zoning board, in accordance with section 9 of this ordinance. In making its written findings, the zoning board shall also consider the character of the district, the location of the fence, the likelihood of injury or shock to persons and animals from the fence, and the purpose of the fence and that the fence does not constitute a nuisance or hazard. This regulation shall apply to existing as well as proposed fences. 
5.7.7.3 In nonresidential districts, no fence or wall shall exceed six feet in height. 
5.7.7.4 Method of measurement of a fence or wall. The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from existing or natural ground level at the base of the fence, except that, where there is a retaining wall, the height measured from the average of the ground levels at each side of the retaining wall, and further except that any fence or wall on the uphill side of such retaining wall may be at least four feet high, not withstanding provisions 5.7.7.1 and 5.7.7.3 above. 
5.8.  Performance standards. 
5.8.1  Performance standards for all uses. All uses shall be subject to the following performance standards. To ensure compliance, detailed plans may be required by the building inspector before the issuance of a building permit. Where parameters listed below are already regulated by a regional, state, or federal authority, the stricter regulation shall prevail. 
5.8.2  Particulates. Any handling, transfer or storage of materials shall use best available technology to control fugitive emissions of dust or other particulate matter migrating to off-site locations in any amount which is injurious to human health, animals, vegetation or other forms of property or which causes any excessive soiling at any point beyond the property lines. Such technology may include dust collection/suppression systems, wind guards and spraying of stockpiles with surfactants. 
5.8.3  Odor. No odorous emission shall be permitted which is determined to be obnoxious or which unduly transfers with or prevents the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. No emission of odorous gases noticeable to the human sense of smell or other odorous matter in such quantities as are at the property line shall be permitted. 
5.8.4  Noise. All noise emissions shall comply with ordinance 93-28 section 1-1, and section 11-32 (traffic noise) of the Code of Ordinances of the town. 
5.8.5  Vibration. 
5.8.5.1 Vibration shall be measured from the nearest property line. 
5.8.5.2 No vibration is permitted which is discernible to the human sense of feeling for three minutes or more duration in any hour of the day between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or of 30 seconds or more duration in any one hour between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
5.8.6  Heat and glare. No use shall carry on any operation that would produce heat or glare beyond its property line. No activity shall use any lighting in a manner that produces glare on adjacent property, or on public or private roads. 
5.8.7  Wastewater. All wastewater shall be collected by a public sewage system when available. Such wastes, if treated by a private treatment plant, may be collected by other than a public sewage system provided that approval has been obtained from the appropriate state and federal agencies. 
5.8.8  Storm and surface water runoff. Storm drainage systems shall be designed by a Rhode Island registered professional engineer and all storm and surface water runoff control systems shall be approved by the town director of public works, before the issuance of a building permit. A zero net increase in runoff over existing conditions shall be required. 
5.9  Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
5.9.1 Requirements. In any district where permitted, no use of premises shall be authorized or extended, no land shall be used or occupied and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, used or enlarged unless there is provided for such use, extension, erection, alteration or enlargement off-street automobile parking spaces as hereinafter required. Any building or use of premises existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance with parking space that does not meet the requirements of this ordinance will not be required to do so, provided that any enlargement, extension or alteration of the building or use of the premises shall provide off-street parking spaces as herein and hereinafter required. Such off-street parking space may be provided in the open or under cover. 
5.9.2 Continuation of requirements. The off-street parking spaces associated with uses as provided for and required by this ordinance shall be a continuing obligation of the present or future owner of any premises and shall not be reduced, changed, encroached upon in any manner or discontinued unless a change in the parking requirements of such associated uses occurs to permit a corresponding change in the size of the required off-street parking area. 
5.9.3 Fractional measurements. When units or measurements determining the number of required off-street parking spaces result in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to but not including one-half shall be disregarded, and fractions including and over one-half shall require one additional off-street parking space. 
5.9.4 Minimum size. Each parking space shall contain an unobstructed area of not less than 162 square feet or appropriate dimensions for the parking of one vehicle, exclusive of necessary drives or aisles. Accordingly, the minimum width and length of each space shall be: 
9 feet by 18 feet 
Further, to provide sufficient vehicle maneuvering space, the minimum unobstructed aisle width shall be determined by the angle of the parking spaces to the layout of the parking aisle as delineated below: 
Angle of parking space Minimum aisle width 90-degree angle parking 24 feet 60-degree angle parking 18 feet 45-degree angle parking 13 feet 30-degree angle parking 11 feet 0-degree angle (parallel) 
 parking 12 feet  
Except for a single-family detached dwelling, each parking space shall be marked by pavement lines. A driveway may be considered a required parking space only for a detached single-family dwelling. 
All parking spaces and areas shall comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended. 
5.9.5 Location of required parking spaces. Off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the structure or use they are intended to serve or on an abutting lot. Upon application to the zoning board of review, a variance pursuant to section 9 of this ordinance may be granted by the board to allow off-street parking on other off-site lots in the same district as the subject lot provided that the following conditions are met in addition to the requirements of section 9. 
5.9.5.1 Other allowable off-site parking is a location that is within 100 feet of the boundary of the lot of the principal use or structure; and reasonably and safely accessible, in the opinion of the zoning board, by pedestrians provided, however, that such off-site locations shall be compatible with the use, value [of] neighboring property, and that the approval of the off-site location will not be detrimental to the general health and welfare of the community and be consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
5.9.6 Setbacks of parking spaces. No parking space or aisle shall be closer than ten feet to any front or corner side yard property line. No parking space or aisle shall be closer than five feet to any building or as required by the West Warwick Fire Department. Parking spaces less than ten feet from any building shall be separated from such building by raised curb, bumper or wheel guards. The requirement of this subsection shall not apply to detached single-family dwellings. 
5.9.7 Entrance and exit. Each parking space shall be designed with the adequate off-street area for approach, turning and exit without the need or ability to use any part of a street or sidewalk. All driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width for maneuvering each lane of traffic using such driveway. All corners shall provide a turning radius of 45 feet. There shall be no architectural, landscaping, or natural barriers to prevent access to any side of a building by an emergency vehicle. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to detached single-family dwellings. 
5.9.8 Joint use. 
5.9.8.1 No part of an off-street parking space required for any building, structure, or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as part of an off-street parking space similarly required for another building, structure or use unless the type of use indicates that the period of usage of such buildings, structures, or uses will not be simultaneously with each other as determined by the planning board. 
5.9.8.2 Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the joint use of off-street parking space for two or more buildings, structures or uses if the total of such spaces when used together shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.9.9 Mixed uses. In the case of mixed uses on a premises, the total requirements for off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately as hereinafter required and the off-street parking space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off-street parking space of any other use. 
5.9.10 Plans, construction and maintenance of off-street parking areas. 
5.9.10.1 Plans. For the purpose of constructing the required parking area, plans for parking areas shall be submitted to the planning board to show how the required parking shall be arranged in the area supplied for such purposes and to indicate sufficient space for parking maneuvers as well as adequate ingress and egress to the parking area. Such plans shall also indicate the location and design of required landscaping. The planning board may make such referrals and require additional studies as it deems warranted. 
5.9.10.2 Construction. Every parcel of land on which after the effective date of the ordinance a parking area is constructed shall be developed as follows, subject to the review and approval of hereinabove required plans by the town Engineer and subject to approval of the planning board: 
5.9.10.2.1 Such area where subject to wheeled traffic shall be paved with an impervious surface, drained, lighted and arranged for convenience access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles; 
5.9.10.2.2 Any light used to illuminate the parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and streets; 
5.9.10.2.3 Suitable separation shall be made between the pedestrian sidewalk and the vehicular parking or moving area with the use of appropriate bumper or wheel guards, traffic islands or raised sidewalk; 
5.9.10.2.4 The location and extent of the appropriate curb cuts shall be determined by the town Engineer, subject to the approval of the planning board and wherever state jurisdiction exists, all curb cuts shall be subject to the approval of the Rhode Island department of Transportation. In order to minimize vehicular conflicts, curb cuts shall be placed at the maximum feasible distance from intersections or from curb cuts for adjacent properties except where they are combined. Except unless traffic site or safety conditions warrant, only one curb cut shall be permitted for development. 
5.9.10.3 Buffers: Nonresidential parking. Where any parking area containing five parking spaces or more and located in a nonresidential district adjoins or abuts a residential district or a lot or premises used for residential, educational, recreational, or religious purposes, there shall be provided a five-foot wide landscaped strip containing a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge having a height of not less than 51/2 feet maintained in a neat and attractive manner between the parking area and the residential district or residential, educational, recreational or religious premises. 
5.9.10.4 Buffers: Residential parking. Where any parking area containing five parking spaces or more and located in a residential district adjoins or abuts a lot or premises used for residential purposes, a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge of minimum four-foot width having a height of not less than 51/2 feet shall be erected and maintained in a neat and attractive manner between the parking area and the lot or premises, subject to the approval of the planning board. 
5.9.10.5 Landscaping. Any parking area established, expanded, or required to be altered because of building alteration or reuse of premises, after the effective date of this ordinance shall provide a minimum of five-foot wide planting strip between the parking area and the street. The planting strip may be interrupted to allow for entrances and exits but in no portion may the planting strip be less than ten feet in length. The planting strip shall be planted with trees or vegetation not exceeding 21/2 feet in height. Such other landscaping treatment to enhance the premises and make the parking area acceptable and attractive to the adjoining neighborhood shall be provided, subject to the approval of the planning board. 
The interior of the parking areas shall be suitably landscaped with trees, shrubs, vegetation or ground cover. At least one landscaped area shall be provided for every parking area containing 20 parking spaces or more, which in the aggregate shall be at least 15 square feet per parking space. Such areas shall be appropriately located to prevent long, uninterrupted rows of parking spaces. Landscaped areas shall be separated and protected from parking areas by curbing or other means. 
5.9.10.6 Maintenance. Any parking space or area shall be kept by the owner in a neat and attractive manner in accordance with specifications and ordinances of the town. The owner shall be responsible for maintenance of landscaping, including the removal and replacement of all dead or diseased plantings. The parking area shall be plowed and/or sanded within 24 hours after the end of any snow, ice, or sleet storm. 
_____ 
5.9.10.7 Off-street parking space requirements. The number of off-street parking spaces for each use shall be required as follows: 
Use Minimum Requirement 
Parking Space Per Unit 
or Gross Floor Area 
(GFA) Residential:   Single-family 2/dwelling unit (DU)   Two-family 2/DU   Multiple-family 2/DU   Elderly housing 1/DU   Rooming house 1/room   Home occupation 1/100 square feet of home occupation Accessory family dwelling unit 1/DU Mobile home 1/DU Office:   Banks and other financial institutions 1/200 square feet GFA   Medical office and clinic 1/150 square feet   Business and other educational service 1/instructor plus 1/employee or staff peak shift plus 1/4 students Service:   Business and commercial service 1/200 square feet (GFA)   Hotel/motel 1/bedroom plus 1/employee peak shift   Funeral home 1/3 seats plus 1/employee peak shift plus 1/hearse   Theater and auditorium 1/3 seats   Indoor commercial recreation and coin-operated amusement establishments 1/200 square feet (GFA)   Golf course 3/hole plus 1/employee peak shift   Driving range 1/tee   Outdoor commercial recreation 1/1000 square feet of lot area   Gas or service station 1/employee plus 4/bay Retail:   Restaurant 1/90 square feet GFA plus 1/employee peak shift   Fast food restaurant 1/50 square feet GFA plus 1/employee peak shift plus 10 car queuing line   New and used vehicle and boat sales 1/200 square feet GFA   Furniture, appliance or carpet sales 1/400 square feet GFA   Other retail uses 1/200 square feet GFA Transportation and utility:   Passenger terminal 1/200 square feet GFA plus 1/employee peak shift   Public and private utilities 1/300 square feet GFA   Commercial vehicle terminal 1/400 square feet GFA Community facilities:   Place of worship 1/5 seats   Preschool 1/500 square feet GFA   Primary or junior high school 5/classroom plus 1/staff member and employee peak shift   High school 1/5 students plus 1/staff member and employee peak shift   Junior college, college university, vocational, or business school 1/3 students   Resident dormitory, fraternity or sorority 1/bed   Nursing, convalescent home 1/2 beds plus 1/employee peak shift   Library, museum 1/400 square feet GFA   Hospital, sanitarium 1/2 beds plus 1/2 employees and staff peak shift   Clinics 4/doctor plus 1/employee peak shift   Clubs, civic, social and fraternal 1/5 members or 1/5 seats whichever is greater plus 1/2 employees peak shift   Clubs, country, swimming and similar uses 1/3 members plus 1/employee peak shift Other uses Space in accordance with the parking needs as may be reasonably determined by the town engineer, subject to the approval of the building inspector  
In addition to the hereinabove required off-street parking spaces, adequate provisions shall be made for the off-street parking of all company-owned vehicles operating out of the premises as determined by the town engineer, subject to the approval of the planning board. 
_____ 
5.9.11 Off-street loading and unloading; required areas. In order to avoid undue interference with the public use of the street, adequate space for the standing, loading, and unloading of delivery vehicles shall be provided and maintained. No land or premises shall be used or occupied and no buildings or structures shall be erected or used unless off-street loading space as required by this ordinance is provided. Such off-street space is not required for any building, structure or use of premises existing on the effective date of the ordinance with off-street loading spaces that do not meet the requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that off-street loading space as required by this ordinance shall be provided for by any enlargement, extension or alteration to any such existing structure or use. 
5.9.12 Continuation of requirements. Off-street spaces with permitted uses as required by this ordinance shall be a continuing obligation of the present or future owner of any premises and shall not be reduced, changed, encroached upon in any manner or discontinued unless a change in the loading requirements of such associated permitted uses occurs to permit a corresponding change in the number of off-street loading spaces. 
5.9.13 Joint use. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the joint use of off-street loading space for two or more buildings, structures, or uses on the same or contiguous premises if the total of such spaces when used together shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with the provisions [of] this ordinance. 
5.9.14 Location and street access. The off-street loading spaces required by this ordinance shall be in all cases on the same premises as the use, building or structure they are intended to serve and shall have vehicular access to a street. In no case shall any required off-street loading space be part of an area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this ordinance. The use of such off-street loading space shall not hinder the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley and shall be located to the rear of the building serviced. 
5.9.15 Space requirements. For each club of any type, business, educational institution, commercial recreation, cultural center, educational institution, motel, hotel, or motor inn, hospital or sanitarium, office, place of public assembly, elementary, junior or high school or other similar use not herein provided for, off-street loading and unloading space of at least 480 square feet in area with a minimum width of 14 feet, a minimum length of 60 feet and, where covered, a minimum overhead clearance of 15 feet shall be provided according to the following schedule: 
Gross Floor Area 
In Square Feet Required 
Number of 
Off-street 
Loading Spaces 0 to 1,000 0 10,000 to 49,999 1 50,000 to 999,099 2 Each additional 100,000 1  
5.9.16 Plans, construction and maintenance of off-street loading areas. 
5.9.16.1 Plans. Detailed plans shall be submitted to the planning board to show how the off-street loading space shall be arranged and to indicate sufficient space for maneuvering as well as adequate ingress and egress to and from the street, subject to review of the town engineer, before any permits are issued or approved by the building inspector. 
5.9.16.2 Construction. Off-street loading space and access drives shall be paved, drained and lighted and shall have appropriate bumper or wheel guards where needed, and any light used for illumination shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and streets. Where any off-street loading space adjoins or abuts a residential district or a lot or premises used for residential, educational, recreational or religious purposes, there shall be provided a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge having a height of not less than 51/2 feet maintained in a neat and attractive manner between the off-street loading space and the residential district or residential, educational or religious premises, subject to the approval of the planning board, provided that when the provisions in the judgment of the planning board are impossible or impractical of performance, they may be waived by the planning board. 
5.9.17 Relief from application of gross floor area (GFA) standards. The term "gross floor area" includes all floor spaces within an existing or proposed structure. When an existing building is being modified, altered, or expanded, or the use therein is being so modified or altered, the planning board may, upon request by the property owner or developer, exclude from the calculation of the gross floor area that portion of the building which may not be occupied in such a way as to affect the building's parking demand. Examples of such areas may include, but need not include, such areas as basements, attics, machinery and equipment rooms, etc. The planning board may only grant such relief where the following conditions are met: 
a.  The planning board finds that granting such relief will not be injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare; 
b.  The planning board finds that not granting such relief will place an undue burden on the property owner/developer; 
c.  The town engineer has reviewed the proposed request and provided the planning board with comments on the request; 
d.  The relief is solely for the benefit of a proposed nonresidential development and any associated existing or proposed residential development will be in strict conformance with the parking requirements unless a variance has been duly granted by the zoning board of review. 
5.10  Signs. 
5.10.1   [Authority; purpose.] 
(a)  Authority for this chapter is granted under the Rhode Island Zoning Enabling Act, Chapter 45-24. Additional authority for this article is granted by G.L. 1956, tit. 24, Ch. 7,  24-7-1 (Power of towns to establish and regulate sidewalks). 
(b)  The purpose of this sign ordinance is to: Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communications in the town; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the town's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this sign ordinance. 
5.10.2 Definitions. Sign definitions are provided to clarify and distinguish the range of possible structures and formats associated with signage. Defined signs are permitted in all zones as provided herein, unless restricted geographically by zone in the sign table. Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined in this chapter, but defined in other ordinances of the town shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinance. Principles for computing sign areas and sign heights are contained in section 20-3. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Chapter and section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this chapter. 
Animated sign. Any sign that uses movement or change or lighting to depict action or create a special effect and/or scene. Electronic message display devises are considered animated signs unless the message is fixed and does not flash, move, or change message text on an intermittent basis. 
Awning. Any temporary or retractable covering or shelter which is supported entirely by the exterior wall of a building (see also "canopy sign"). 
Awning sign. See "canopy sign." 
Balloon/inflatable object. Any object and/or sign filled with helium or other gas or air used to expand its shape and/or form. Such objects are considered advertising devises and are prohibited. 
Banner. Any sign or fabric or similar material that is mounted to a pole, building, or other structural support. Street banners are those banners installed so as to hang across a public road or thoroughfare for governmental sponsored and nonprofit purposes, and may be installed for a period not to exceed 30 days within a six-month period per organization. Such installation may only be made following written notification to the building official. Storefront banners are any kind of banner installed on private property. 
Billboards. Any off-premises sign exceeding 15 square feet in area. 
Bracket. The device used to attach and support a sign face to a building or freestanding structure. 
Building marker. Any sign indicating the name of a building and/or date and/or incidental information about its history or construction, which sign is incombustible material and is attached parallel to the surface of the building. Building markers may not exceed four square feet in height. 
Bulletin board. A board or wall area on which bulletins, notices, or displays are temporarily posted. Such signs may not exceed five square feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions when located upon the premises of said institutions. 
Canopy. A roof-like projection, or portico, over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area, including, but not limited to, industry standard gas station roofs independent of an enclosed structure. 
Canopy sign. Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outside service area. (A marquee is not a canopy sign). Where canopy signs are permitted, they shall be allowed in lieu of wall signs. The maximum width of the area of a sign display shall be 70 percent of the linear frontage associated with the business. The maximum height of the sign display shall be 36 inches. 
Commercial message. Any sign, wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
Construction sign. Any sign whose purpose is to display the name of the contractor and/or subcontractors employed on a work site, and/or the consultants and/or financial institutions participating in the project, such signs shall be either freestanding or attached to the structure and shall not exceed 12 square feet in residential zones or 30 square feet in all other zones. Such signs shall be temporary in nature and shall be removed upon completion of construction. This definition does not include signs located on the premises of the general offices of a contractor. 
Directional sign. Any sign whose purpose is to direct vehicles and/or pedestrians onto, around, and off of premises. 
Directory sign. A wall sign which provides dedicated space for listings of two or more professional, service, business and/or commercial activities and is designed and constructed with provision to allow changes of occupancy to be reflected on the sign. One such sign shall be permitted per building, either as a wall directory sign or as a freestanding directory sign. Wall sign directions are permitted in lieu of individual wall signs, but such sign areas shall be no greater than 40 square feet. Freestanding directory signs are permitted in lieu of freestanding signs or monument signs and shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 60 square feet in sign area. 
Electronic message display device. An electronic device that utilizes LED (light emitting diodes), or other similar technology to display scripted messages or displays on a display panel. Such signs are allowed by special permit, except for "menu" system signs, and are limited as a component of freestanding signs and wall signs, and cannot exceed 25 percent of the total allowed area of each type of sign. 
Externally illuminated sign. Any sign whose light source is located outside of the sign. This includes, but is not limited to, spotlights. 
Financing sign. See "construction sign." 
Flag. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, words and/or symbols. Up to three flags shall be permitted per business or residence. Flags attached to a building shall be displayed at a height where the lowest portion of flag material is a minimum of seven feet off the ground if hanging over a public right-of-way. Standing flags shall be allowed in existing flag holes in the sidewalk within the village commercial (VC) district without a minimum clearance restriction. 
Flashing sign. See "animated sign." 
Freestanding sign. Any sign supported by a structural device or devices that is placed on, or anchored into, the ground and that is independent from any building. One freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot (as provided for in the sign table), with a maximum visible sign area of 40 square feet (see also section 20-3, Computations) and a minimum sign clearance of eight feet between the grade and the base of the lowest part of the sign to ensure adequate site clearance for pedestrians and vehicles. Maximum sign height shall be 15 feet. Freestanding signs may contain an electronic message display device that is limited to 25 percent of the total allowed sign area, by special permit. 
Gas filled sign. Any sign internally colored by gases not specifically prohibited in section 20-5(9) of this chapter. 
Gas station signs. Signs necessary to the operation of filling and service stations limited to the following: 
(1)  Lettering on buildings displayed over individual entrance doors consisting of the words "washing," "lubrication", "repairing," and/or words of similar relevance, provided that there shall not be more than one such sign centered over each entrance, and that the sign area shall not exceed 12 inches in height. 
(2)  Lettering or other insignia which are part of a gasoline pump, consisting only of a brand name, lead warning sign, price and other signs required by law. 
(3)  A credit card sign not exceeding one square foot in area, affixed to the building or window. 
(4)  Other signs as permitted by this chapter. 
Government signs. Signs erected by or on behalf of the United States of America, the state and the town, traffic controls, legal notices, or other signs required by law including all signs erected under the authority of the town on town owned or controlled land. The town shall have the ability to erect such signs without sign approval. 
Internally illuminated sign. Any sign, exclusive of gas filled signs, whose light source is located behind and/or within the sign itself or behind and/or within any individual element(s) of a sign. 
Incidental sign. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "loading zone," "telephone," and other similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental. 
Legal nonconforming sign. 
(1)  A sign which was erected legally prior to the enactment of this chapter; 
(2)  A sign which does not conform to the sign code requirement, for which zoning relief has been granted through the zoning board of review. 
Lot frontage. Roadway frontage on a local access road. 
Marquee. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building which is used as a theater. 
Marquee sign. Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made part of a marquee. 
Monument sign. Any freestanding sign whose base is in contact with or within one foot of the ground. Where permitted, only one monument sign shall be allowed per lot in lieu of a freestanding sign and shall have a maximum sign area of 50 square feet and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. Maximum sign height shall be eight feet. 
Moving sign. Any sign moved by mechanical or natural means, such as wind. 
Murals. A picture or painting applied directly to a wall or roof of a structure containing no written copy or text. 
Nameplate. Material on which a name and/or professional designation is inscribed or painted. Professional nameplates shall indicate a name and/or professional designation and/or affiliation and shall not exceed one square foot per professional occupant. Residential nameplates shall display the name and address or resident and shall not exceed one square foot in area. All such nameplates shall be affixed either to a door, adjacent wall of the premises or a lamp post/mail box. 
Neon. See "gas filled sign." 
Nonconforming sign. Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. Off-premises sign, any sign advertising or calling attention to an activity, product or service not available within a building or upon the parcel of land where it is located. Temporary off-premises signs for nonprofit events are permitted for a period of seven days prior to the scheduled event and shall be removed within two days following the event. Such signs are prohibited from public property including rights-of-way and may not exceed six square feet in total sign area. Written notification shall be made to the building official and planning department prior to installation of the signs. Such notification shall include, but not be limited to, written permission or private property owner(s), location of signs, size of signs, dates of display and removal. 
Peddler's signs. Any wall sign or perpendicular sign which is a part of and affixed to a permitted peddler's vehicle. 
Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, string, or line usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
Political sign. Any sign displayed so as to advise voters of a candidate or position in a forthcoming election. Each lot shall be allowed without permit one sign per candidate or issue, each sign not to exceed eight square feet. Off-premises political signs are prohibited. All political signs must be removed within seven days of the political election or event. 
Portable sign. Any mobile sign not permanently attached to the ground or permanent structure, or a sign which may be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. Sandwich board signs as described and regulated elsewhere in this chapter shall not be considered portable. 
Principal building. The building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Projecting sign. Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that it extends more than ten inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. Such signs shall be permitted in lieu of freestanding signs or monument signs. Only one projecting sign shall be permitted per business and shall be perpendicular to the wall to which it is attached, its nearest edge being no less than three inches and its furthest edge projecting no greater than 48 inches from the wall. The projecting sign shall have a maximum sign area of ten square feet and its lowest edge shall be a minimum of eight feet from the ground. Refer to section 20-8 for indemnification provisions. 
Real estate sign. Any temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease or sale. Residential real estate signs shall be permitted for individual residential properties and shall not exceed six square feet in area. Only one residential real estate sign per lot shall be permitted. Commercial and industrial real estate signs shall be permitted for industrial and commercial properties and shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. All residential, commercial and industrial signs shall be removed within two weeks of the sale or lease of the property or unit. Subdivision real estate signs shall be permitted for subdivisions of five or more lots. One common sign with a maximum sign area of 32 square feet shall be permitted. 
Residential sign. Any single faced wall sign or freestanding sign in a residential zone including, but not limited to, preservation plaques, bed and breakfast signs, and political signs. Freestanding signs of this nature shall have an area not exceeding four square feet, shall be no greater than four feet in height overall and shall be located a minimum of five feet from all property lines. 
Residential zone use sign. A wall sign or freestanding sign whose sign display is not to exceed 12 square feet and is used on premises for church, hospital, library, museum, art gallery or charitable purposes. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building and which is supported by the roof structure. 
Sandwich board sign. Any double-sided portable sign designed as an "A" or "T" frame, typically hinged or joined at one or more points. One such sign shall be permitted in the village commercial zone only, and shall be located so as to provide a public passage of a minimum of three feet on any public right-of-way. Each face of the double-sided sign shall not exceed six square feet in area. No driveways, doorways, walkways or handicap ramps may be blocked by the sign. Sandwich board signs shall not be attached to any public structure or street furniture. 
Searchlight. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Sign. Any device, fixture, display, placard or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, and/or writing to advertise, announce the purposes of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate the information of any kind to the public. A wall sign shall consist of both a sign face and bracket. 
Subdivision identification sign. One freestanding permanent sign may be installed at all exclusive entrances to a development. Each sign shall have a maximum sign area of 16 square feet. These signs shall not be located within the public right-of-way or on town owned or controlled land. 
Temporary sign. Any sign that is used for a limited time and is not permanently installed or erected. 
Town. All governmental entities of the Town of West Warwick, including, but not limited to, town municipal offices and the school department. 
Wall sign. Any sign attached parallel to, but within ten inches of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface, and is attached flush with such wall or building. One such sign shall be permitted per business per building face. The maximum width of the sign display shall not exceed 70 percent of the linear frontage associated with the business unit and may either be a total of 30 square feet in area or a maximum of 36 inches in height and no greater than six inches from the wall in the village commercial zone, or a maximum of 48 inches in height and not greater than ten inches from the wall in the business, commercial-industrial and business park zones. 
Window sign. Any sign that is placed inside a window, upon the window panes or glass, or within 12 inches of the window (exclusive of merchandise display). Permanent window signs may be applied to, painted on or attached to the inside of each window associated with a business. Temporary interior paper signs advertising business openings, specials, sales, events and greetings shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 30 days. All window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the total window area. Each window shall be counted separately. 
Electronic message display devices are prohibited as a window sign. 
5.10-3. Computations. The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height: 
(1)  Sign display. The sign display is a portion of the permitted sign area. The area of a sign display shall be computed by means of the smallest square or rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display. 
(2)  Sign area, single-faced signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face), shall be computed as the area of sign display together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. 
(3)  Sign height. The height of a freestanding or monument sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the sign area. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to the construction, or (2) the newly established grade, after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. 
_____ 
(4)  Zones. For the purpose of this sign ordinance, the districts shall be defined as tabulated on the sign table included herein as part of this chapter. 
SIGN TABLE 
Type R-10 R-8 R-7.5 R-6 B CI BP VC Addresses Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Animated signs N N N N N N N N Balloons/Inflated Objects N N N N N N N N Banners: Street N N N N N N N Y Storefront N N N N N N N Y Billboards N N N N N N N N Bulletin board Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Canopy signs Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Construction signs Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Directional signs Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Electronic Message 
 Display Device N N N N S S S S Directory signs Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Flags Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Freestanding signs N N N N Y/S Y/S Y/S Y/S Government signs Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Marquee signs N N N N Y Y N Y Memorial sign/tablet Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Monument signs Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Murals Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Nameplates: 
 Professional Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Residential Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Off-premise: 
  Private N N N N N N N N Nonprofit N N N N Y Y Y N Pennants N N N N Y N N Y Political signs Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Portable signs N N N N N N N N Private parking lot sign Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Real estate: 
 Residential Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Commercial Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Industrial Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Roof signs N N N N N N N N Sandwich board signs N N N N N N N Y Wall Sign N N N N Y/S Y/S Y/S Y/S  
_____ 
5.10.4. General provisions. 
(a)  Permitted signs. The installation, enlargement, reduction or relocation of (permitted) signs in all zones are allowed as indicated in the sign table following approval by the building official. 
(b)  Changes to nonconforming signs. Enlargement or relocation of legal nonconforming signs require additional approval from the zoning board of review as described elsewhere in the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  State building code. Within all zones and districts, all signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the state building code and the National Electric Code. 
(d)  Sign maintenance. Within all zones, all signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with section 20-4(c) and in conformance with this chapter (unless otherwise allowed through the zoning board of review) at all times. 
(e)  Illumination. Within all zones, all signs may be illuminated under the following criteria: 
(1)  Internal illumination or back lighting of signs is permitted in all zones, except that in the village commercial zone restrictions are (a) the background is darker than the letters placed against it; (b) the background is opaqued; (c) the background is ivory or similar shade to give the impression of opaquing. 
(2)  Signs may be illuminated by a stationary white or off-white steady light only. These lights shall not provide glare, nor shall they direct lights or shine off the premises. 
(f)  Alteration of sign faces. Any legally existing sign faces (including legal nonconforming sign faces) may be altered either to update the sign content or to reflect new information provided the alteration does not result in any change in the sign's size, extent, location or illumination. 
(g)  Criteria for review. All sign proposals shall be evaluated under the following guidelines: 
(1)  Compliance with ordinances; 
(2)  Clarity of design and message; 
(3)  In addition to the criteria listed in subsections (1) and (2), all proposals will be subject to any design district guidelines adopted subsequent to this chapter. 
(h)  Brackets. All sign brackets which have been abandoned for a period of one year shall be removed. (See also section 20-5 regarding sign abandonment). 
5.10.5. Prohibitions. In addition to the signs described as prohibited under the sign table in section 20-4, the following signs and sign materials are also expressly prohibited by this chapter. 
(a)  Off-premises signs unless otherwise permitted under provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Signs which advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. No such sign shall remain in place or on vacated premises for more than one year from the date the vacancy commenced. 
(c)  Signs which are attached to natural features, stone walls, utility poles, utility boxes, traffic signs, fences or highway structures. 
(d)  Signs placed on or against trailers or vehicles, whether registered or unregistered. 
(e)  Signs in the public right-of-way, except as provided for elsewhere in this chapter and except for those installed by the government. 
(f)  Signs which imitate, and may be confused with, an official traffic control sign or signal, or an emergency or road equipment vehicle. 
(g)  All other signs which have not been expressly permitted within this article. 
(h)  All existing signs erected without the necessary approvals and/or permits. 
(i)  Sign materials identified as pennants, streamers, spinners and other moving devices are prohibited in all zones with the exception of village commercial. 
(j)  Sign material identified as exposed polycarbonate, fluorescent and phosphorescent signs are prohibited in all zones, except that traditional "neon" signs shall be permitted in all zones and districts. 
5.10.6. Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  A sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming status when: 
(1)  The sign is enlarged or reduced without approvals (see also section 20-8 of this chapter). 
(2)  The sign is relocated without approvals (see section 2-8). 
(3)  The sign advertises or calls attention to any products, businesses or activities which have not been carried on or sold at the premises for the past one year. 
(4)  The sign shall not have been repaired or properly maintained within 30 days after written notice to that effect has been given by the building official. 
(5)  The sign is removed and replaced with another nonconforming sign, regardless of its size. 
(b)  A sign shall not lose its legal nonconforming status when: 
(1)  A wall sign is removed for construction, painting and/or restoration of the building provided that the sign is returned to its location within 30 days of completion of the building work. 
(2)  The sign is removed to facilitate repair, maintenance and/or repainting and replaced immediately upon completion of such work. 
(c)  No sign that had been erected in violation of any previously existing sign provisions of the town zoning ordinance shall, by virtue of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, become legal nonconforming. 
(d)  The town reserves the right to remove any signs located in a public right-of-way that are in violation of: (1) zoning provisions preceding the ordinance from which this chapter derives; (2) provisions of this chapter. Such removal cost will be charged to the business or party responsible for placement of the nonconforming sign. 
5.10.7. Exempt signs. The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, and may be installed without a permit from the building official: 
(a)  Residence signs, not exceeding a total of two square feet, displaying the name and address of the occupant or resident of the premises. 
(b)  Real estate signs advertising sale or rent, or signs naming the builder, architect, developer, or engineer of a project in progress, placed on the premises and in conformance with dimensions under section 20-2, Definitions. 
(c)  Notices of tag, yard or garage sales may be erected. A maximum of four signs per sale, not to exceed a total of two square feet per sign, may be erected on their own post, provided the sale is licensed by the town clerk. All signs must be removed within 48 hours of the sale. 
(d)  Signs prohibiting trespass, hunting and the like, signs warning of danger, such as "high voltage," and necessary public utility signs, not to exceed a total area of two square feet. 
(e)  Temporary window signs, such as advertising a sale. Normal displays of merchandise in windows shall not be considered to be signs. 
(f)  Traffic and other governmental signs, erected by any public safety agency in the discharge of any governmental function. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with section 20-4(e) of this chapter. 
(g)  Signs designating historical places or points of interest, erected by governmental authority or the like, not to exceed a total area of 12 square feet. 
(h)  Signs indicating entrance, exit, parking, erected on a premise for the direction of people and vehicles, not to exceed a total area of one and one-half square feet. Such signs shall incorporate conventional instructions and symbols, but shall be integrated by style and materials with other signage and landscape elements in the development. 
(i)  Church, school, or other public use may have one sign, not to exceed a total area of 12 square feet. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with section 20-4(e) of this chapter. 
(j)  Temporary political signs where attached to/or erected on a mobile trailer or other mechanical/vehicular device. 
5.10.8. Owner, permittee indemnification. Any permit granted or permission given pursuant to this chapter, or provisions under section 5.10 of the town zoning ordinance in effect prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, shall be upon the express condition that the permittee and/or grantee and every owner, person or entity maintaining any such sign shall be liable for and save the town harmless from and indemnify said town against any and all liability, costs and expenses incurred and any damages sustained by persons or property caused by the construction, existence or maintenance of any such sign. 
5.10.9. Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  A permit shall be applied for and received from the building and zoning department prior to erecting, re(placing), re(building), re(constructing), or re(locating) any sign. A permit is not necessary for sign repair and maintenance provided the work is done in conformity with this chapter. 
(b)  The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a sketch plan of site and elevation drawings of the proposed sign, caption of the proposed sign, and such other data as are pertinent to the application and consistent with this chapter as determined by the building official. 
5.10.10. Appeals. The zoning board of review may hear and grant relief from the provisions of this section 5.10 by way of special use permit as provided in section 10. In addition, any person who has been denied a sign permit for any reason my appeal the decision of the building official to the zoning board of review as provided in section 32 hereof. 
5.11  Residential mobile home parks. The purpose of this section is to continue to permit the creation of residential mobile (RMH) parks and to continue the procedures for RMH park creation existing as of the date of adoption of this ordinance. It is the intent of this section to regulate the location and design of RMH's in such a manner as to create neighborhoods designed for long-term occupancy, to ensure compatibility with surrounding areas and with the natural environment and to provide safe, sanitary and attractive living conditions for occupants of mobile homes located in such parks. 
5.11.1 Procedure. 
5.11.2 Application for special use permit to create an RMH park shall be made according to section 10 of this ordinance. The fee for such application shall be set by the town council, plus advertising costs. A site plan, prepared by a registered architect or engineer, shall be required that, as a minimum, shows the following, together with appropriate dimensions and descriptive material, as necessary: 
5.11.2.1 Items (a) through (h) of section 17-3 of the Code of Ordinances entitled, "Subdivisions"; 
5.11.2.2 Proposed location of riser pipes; 
5.11.2.3 Refuse disposal facilities; 
5.11.2.4 Location of electrical system; 
5.11.2.5 Location and details of underground gas and oil systems; 
5.11.2.6 Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed, or to be constructed in the park; 
5.11.2.7 Number, location, dimensions and size of lots; 
5.11.2.8 An impact analysis of the proposed development, which shall contain detailed economic, social and physical studies of the area and a proposed population analysis. The zoning board may request additional information if it desires. 
5.11.2.9 Type and size of home to be used in the development; 
5.11.2.10 Applicable rules and regulations for the development. 
5.11.3  Development plan review. 
5.11.3.1 All applications for an RMH park shall be referred to the planning board by the zoning board. 
5.11.3.2 The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning board that: 
The granting of approval will be in the best interest of the public health, safety, morals and welfare; 
The granting of such approval will not adversely affect the use of property in the surrounding area or district; 
The plans for such project will comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance; and 
The plans for such project are in conformance with the comprehensive plan of the town. 
5.11.3.3 In recommending an action to the zoning board, the planning board shall enumerate its reasons for approval or denial and any special conditions. 
5.11.3.4 After receipt of the planning board recommendation, the zoning board of review shall hold a public hearing and shall act on the special use permit within 45 days of the hearing and may attach conditions to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare. Approval of the permit shall require that the final development plan shall conform to the permit as approved by the board. Any changes to the plan after approval shall require a resubmittal of the application, following all procedures of this section. 
5.11.3.5 The development plan as finally approved with any conditions stipulated thereon shall be recorded in the town clerk's office within 14 days of the zoning board approval. 
5.11.4  Permitted uses. In an RMH park, the following uses shall be permitted. 
5.11.4.1 Mobile homes. 
5.11.4.2 Accessory uses. Uses directly accessory to a mobile home, including parking areas, carports, patios and semi-enclosed outdoor living areas not intended for overnight occupancy. Service building, recreation areas and facilities for the exclusive use of occupants of the mobile home park as further provided herein; offices intended for management and/or service to the mobile home park; and central laundry facilities designed for residents. 
5.11.5  Prohibited uses. 
5.11.5.1 Garages. 
5.11.5.2 The addition to or expansion of a mobile home, so as to make it a permanent structure, shall not be permitted. 
5.11.6  Site standards. 
5.11.6.1 Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage by a mobile home on an individual mobile home lot shall not exceed 30 percent of the gross area of the lot. 
5.11.6.2 Width and depth. For portions of the tract used for general vehicular entrances and exits only, the lot width shall be a minimum of 50 feet; for portions containing mobile home lots and buildings open generally to occupants, the width of the lot shall be a minimum of 50 feet. The ratio of width to depth shall not exceed one to five. 
5.11.6.3 Buffering. Along all exterior property lines of a mobile home park, a landscaped buffer strip shall be maintained. Such buffer strip shall be no less than 100 feet wide. Such buffer strip shall be planted screened and maintained in order to provide year-round visual obstruction of the mobile home lots from abutting land and streets. Such buffer strip may be used for recreation of a nonintensive character; provided, however, that no structure be located thereon. 
5.11.6.4 Recreation and Open Space. At least ten percent of the usable land area of the mobile home park shall be reserved for recreational and open space uses. Such recreation and open space may be located within the required buffer strip. However, this figure is in addition to any other open areas required by yard provisions or other sections of this ordinance. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the topography permits, be centrally located. 
5.11.6.5 Access. All mobile home parks shall have a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet on a public street. 
5.11.6.6 Distance from boundary. All mobile homes shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet from any park boundary line abutting a public street. 
5.11.7  Lot requirements. Individual mobile home lots in a RMH park shall conform to the following requirements. 
5.11.7.1 Lot size. Each individual mobile home lot shall contain a minimum of area of 5,000 square feet. Lot size shall be increased by five square feet for each square foot that the mobile home and accessory buildings exceed the allowable size of 1,500 square feet. 
5.11.7.2 Lot width and depth. The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet. 
5.11.7.3 Required separation between mobile homes. Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least 30 feet. Any accessory structure which has a horizontal area exceeding 25 square feet is attached to a mobile home and has an opaque top or roof that is higher than the nearest window shall, for purposes of all separation requirements, be considered to be part of the mobile home. 
5.11.7.4 Setback. No mobile home shall be located closer than 15 feet to a lot line abutting an internal street, common parking area or other common areas. 
5.11.7.5 Frontage. Each mobile home lot shall have frontage on an internal street. 
5.11.8  Streets. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of chapter 17 (Subdivisions) of the code of ordinances of the town. Storm drainage and sewerage plans must be provided and approved by the town Engineer. 
5.11.9  RMH Park Size. There shall be a maximum of 200 mobile homes per RMH park. 
5.11.10  Occupancy. No lot shall be rented for residential use in an RMH park, except for periods of 30 days or more; and no mobile home shall be admitted to any park, unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of the BOCA Basic Building code, as amended. 
5.11.11  Service building. All mobile home parks shall be provided with a service building consolidating all sanitary, laundry, management and other service facilities. The floor area of such service building shall not exceed 2,500 square feet. 
5.11.12 Sale of mobile homes. No mobile home shall be sold in an RMH park, unless it is located on a mobile home stand and connected to permanent utilities. 
5.11.13 Change of lot size. The size of mobile homes in an approved park shall not be changed to a larger home, unless the size of the mobile home lot is increased. For any changes in an RMH park that would differ in any respect from the approved site plan or from any of the special use permit conditions, the proposed changes shall be submitted to the zoning board as an amendment thereto. The zoning board shall consider said amendment in the same manner and procedures as an original application. 
5.12  Multifamily dwellings. All multifamily dwellings and multifamily dwelling development plans proposed and constructed shall comply with the requirements listed below in addition to other requirements of this ordinance. 
5.12.1  Density. 
(A)  Density shall be 7,500 square feet per dwelling unit for all multifamily development projects located on any development site containing five acres or less of usable lot area. 
(B)  Density shall be 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit for all multifamily development projects located on any development site containing more than five acres of usable lot area; provided that all multifamily development projects containing more than five acres of usable lot area shall provide a minimum of 2500 square feet per dwelling unit of usable open space for active and passive recreational use by the residents of the development or provided to the town for use by the general population. Such usable open space cannot include roadways, driveways, parking areas, wetlands, slopes greater than 12 percent, or any required landscape buffer zones. 
5.12.2  Wastewater treatment. Prior to granting final development plan approval, for sites not connected to the town's wastewater collection system, approval by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management of an on-site treatment system shall be required. 
5.13 Village design control district (VDCD) zone. 
5.13.1 Purpose and intent. The purpose and the intent of the village design control district zoning is to follow the long held urban planning philosophy of the doctrine of appropriateness, and by that, encourage the responsible growth and vitality of the traditional town villages (i.e. Natick, Crompton, Phenix, etc.). Development in this zoning district should meet the following objectives: 
(A)  Provide areas within and adjacent to residential neighborhoods where groups of small businesses may be located to: 
  Serve the frequent small commercial and service needs of residents within convenient traveling distances. 
  Serve as a transitional zone between more intensive business areas and residential neighborhoods. 
  Provide a district for small business and community activities which do not generate the traffic, noise, glare, or parking gluts associated with larger-scale business use. 
(B)  Encourage traditional development design and mixed use development appropriate to village centers. 
(C)  Serve the traffic-carrying capacity of the town s road system by concentrating certain uses within village centers, thereby reducing the overall traffic burden. 
(D)  Preserve the residential and historic characteristics of the community by encouraging responsible new development to its village centers. 
(E)  Strengthen the role of the neighborhood as a support for the village center and in turn to keep each village center to a scale that services its neighborhood without an undue dependence on automobile-borne customers. 
(F)  Provide for a visual center or village green for each traditional village. 
(G)  Promote unified physical, visual and spatial characteristics that are compatible with each villages traditional development pattern. 
5.13.2 Permitted uses. The uses which will be considered in a design control district shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(A)  Residential, retail, commercial, non-retail, or industrial uses lawfully existing prior to adoption of this ordinance. 
(B)  New 1-2 family residential dwellings. 
(C)  Public parks and recreation facilities. 
(D)  Libraries and museums. 
(E)  Government buildings including public utility structures or right-of-way. 
(F)  Churches or similar places of worship. 
(G)  Public or private elementary, middle, and high school. 
(H)  Any other use approved by the planning board as being harmonious with the spirit and the intent of the design control district. A finding of appropriateness for a requested use will consider, but not be limited to, uses that will not disrupt the general limited retail and service standard as well as the residential character and function of the village center and its more pedestrian orientation. Quasi-industrial, commercial, or large retail oriented uses, or uses traditionally reliant upon high truck and auto traffic, as determined by the planning board as being not appropriate, are prohibited. Solicitation of public comment is an integral component of this decision making process. 
5.13.3 Dimensional requirements. Yard, setback, lot size, height, and frontage requirements are hereby waived, provided that the spirit and the intent of this section are complied with in the development plans as determined by the planning board. In consultation with the town planner and technical review committee, the planning board may determine that certain dimensional requirements shall be required within all of or a portion of the perimeter of the site and shall exercise ultimate discretion as to whether the development plan does comply with the spirit and the intent of this section. 
5.13.4 Parking requirements (non-residential developments). The planning board in consultation with the town planner and technical review committee, may reduce or waive the parking requirement if they determine that the proposed uses, location of the site, and the related facilities existing or proposed by the applicant will result in the generation of pedestrian, bicycle, and mass transit trips in sufficient volume to warrant the parking reduction. All other parking requirements in section 5.9.10.7 of these zoning regulations, excluding the required number of spaces for each use, shall be met. Parking or vehicle access shall be avoided in front of any structure within the VDCD and off-street parking to the rear of the structure will be emphasized. The parking requirement shall be two spaces per dwelling unit. 
5.13.5 Signs. The planning board in consultation with the town planner and the technical review committee may impose stricter requirements than are required in the town zoning code for signage when, in their judgment, the specific proposal and site so necessitates. All exterior lighting and signs shall be shown on the development plan and detailed design (i.e. material, illumination, etc.) shall also be provided. The reasons for the stricter requirements shall be part of the motion to approve any development. 
5.13.6 Residential density. In the case of other than a single family dwelling on an individual lot, residential density may be approved for up to four dwelling units per acre, provided that all requirements and standards for the proposed residential use or for other proposed uses are met. 
5.13.7 Expansion of legal non-conforming non-residential uses. 
(A)  Any non-residential use lawfully existing prior to adoption of this ordinance may be permitted expansion on the existing lot only. However, if expansion is to take place on a parcel of land that is contiguous to the existing developed lot, and owned by the applicant at the time of a request for expansion is filed, said new lot shall be considered as part of the existing developed lot for the purposes of this section of the zoning regulations only. Requests for expansion may be declined if, in the determination of the planning board in consultation with the town planner and technical review committee, said expansion proposal is found to be detrimental to the spirit and the intent of the VDCD and/or the uses adjacent to the subject existing lot. 
(B)  Commercial or industrial uses permitted prior to adoption of this ordinance may continue under new ownership provided the use of the property does not change. Failure to submit a development plan for determination as to whether a potential change in use could exist may result in a finding, by the planning board in consultation with the town planner and technical review committee, of the existence of an illegal, non-conforming use. Requests for a change in use may be permitted if, in the determination of the planning board in consultation with the town planner and technical review committee, said change is found to be consistent with the spirit and intent of the VDCD. 
5.13.8  Architectural controls and review process . 
(A)  An intention of the VDCD zoning classification is to preserve the character and the charm of the village motif as found in the town just after the turn of the 20th Century. 
(B)  The planning board reviews proposals for any construction within the VDCD zone including new renovations, alterations, repairs, removal, and/or demolition of buildings. The review includes proposed changes to major buildings, structures (gazebos, walls), secondary buildings (garages, sheds), and appurtenances (pavings, signs, fences, lighting, landscaping), roofing material, exterior siding, windows, doors, accessories (shutters, sidelights, transoms, crossheads, door pediments), dormers, eaves, trim, gutters and downspouts, fences, walkways, paving, and foundations. 
(C)  When authentic building materials are unavailable, synthetic and/or engineered products that emulate and replicate the architectural style may be substituted. Authentic restoration is not a requirement of development with the VDCD, however, replication of the authentic materials/features/styles is required for development plans submitted following adoption of this ordinance. 
(D)  Prior to the start of any work, proposed changes to major buildings, structures, secondary buildings, and appurtenances must be submitted by the owner or the owner's agent to the town planner, who will determine whether the proposed work is major or minor, as defined below. If the work is determined to be "major", the town planner will submit the completed application packet to the planning board in the form of a site development plan, which shall include architectural elevations and/or construction details. A site development plan is required for all proposed developments except single family residences. All site development plans shall meet the requirements of sections 17.7 and 17.8 inclusive of the town zoning code. This site development plan must receive a certificate of appropriateness within the VDCD even if a building permit from the local building official is not required. 
(E)  If the town planner deems the proposed work to be "minor", he will consult with the technical review committee and the building official and either grant approval, require changes for approval or refer the application to the planning board. Approval from either the planning board or the town planner shall be required even if a building permit from the local building official in not required. 
(F)  "Major" work is defined as proposed changes to major buildings, secondary structures (garages, sheds, gazebos, etc.), structural walls and expansion and changes in use of any buildings and structures, removal and/or demolition of buildings. 
(G)  "Minor" work is defined as changes in paving materials, new signage, new outdoor decks, above ground pools, new fencing, landscaping and other appurtenances. 
(H)  No review is required for ordinary exterior maintenance and repair provided there is no significant change in design, architectural features, or type of materials used. Interior alterations do not require review for appropriateness within the VDCD, however, type of use, standard building laws and codes, etc. still exist and must be adhered to. 
(I)  The VDCD may or may not include historical areas. In the case where the structure in question is located within a historical designation area, historical building regulations take precedence over VDCD requirements provided that those historical building regulations are determined by the planning board to be more strict than VDCD requirements. 
(J)  As part of the application process, an informational packet providing greater detail on architectural controls will be provided. 
5.13.9  Other provisions. 
(A)  The geographic footprint for the VDCD boundaries for the various districts will be as from time to time recommended by the planning board and adopted by the town Council and as shown on the town zoning map. 
(B)  The geographic footprint may be expanded or reduced as deemed appropriate by the planning board with the recommendation of the zoning board of review, and approved by the town council. 
(C)  Any lot that falls within two or more zones will be considered to be subject to the provisions of the design control district. 
(D)  All other questions, disputes, etc. not specifically covered within this regulation shall be revolved by the determination of the planning board, acting in consultation with the town planner and technical review committee and shall focus on the appropriateness of the subject vis-a-vis the spirit and the intent of the VDCD zone. 
5.13.10 Public hearing. The review process by the planning board shall be at a public hearing for all applications for "major" activities as defined by this ordinance. Public notice of the date of the hearing shall be given at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. Notice shall be sent by the applicant to each record owner within 200 feet of the subject property, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the time and place of the hearing not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Said notice shall also include the street address of the subject property. The cost of all such notice shall be borne by the applicant. 
5.13.11 Fees. There will be an application fee, of $500.00 for each application for approval for major work, and an application fee of $50.00 for minor work as defined in this zoning code. The application fee shall be paid with five days from the date of notification to the applicant as to whether the application is a major or minor. No further processing of the application shall be done until the application fee is paid in full. 
5.13.12 Expiration dates. Any approval granted by the planning board of any application submitted pursuant to section 5.13 of this zoning code shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless the applicant shall within that one year period exercise the right granted by the decision. Exercise of the right as stated herein shall mean that the applicant shall commence work on the project approved and that there shall be no interruption of such work for a period in excess of six months at anytime until completion of the project. The board may upon application filed within the one year period and for good cause shown, extend the limitation for one additional one year period. The application for an extension need not be advertised. 
5.14 Vacant historical mill structures. 
5.14.1 Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to recognize that certain existing mill structures and properties in various zoning districts are desirable for conversion to mixed use and occupancy. However, uncontrolled conversion may lead to potential adverse impact on adjacent areas. These properties can be permitted to convert to a variety of limited housing, business and professional office uses. The full range of potentially acceptable uses and the limits of size and intensity that are acceptable are not able to be predetermined and therefore the final determination of acceptability must be made on an individual basis, predicated upon a definitive statement of proposed use and operation. 
This regulation is established to facilitate the most harmonious relationship possible between the development, the site and the surrounding area than is possible under conventional zoning regulations while maintaining the protection to the community and abutting properties. A Re-Use Development is an optional development which is a change in use and may be permitted instead of development under the requirements of the underlying zone(s). Permission to develop property under this section of the zoning regulations is at the discretion of the planning board. 
A "major" re-use development is defined as proposed changes to the major buildings and secondary structures which shall constitute a major change in the use and/or construction or configuration of the structures. 
A "minor" re-use development is defined as proposed changes in use to secondary structures which do not require any major change in the construction of the particular structure. 
5.14.2 General provisions. In recognition of the potential complexities of development under this section, and to provide the planning board (hereinafter "Board") with timely and appropriate information, data and plans to insure adequate control, review and compliance with the intent of the comprehensive plan of development and these regulations, the following requirements are established for all re-use developments. 
5.14.3 Application procedure. A detailed plan application shall be submitted for review and consideration for any re-use development. In considering the detailed plan application, the board shall: 
(A)  Hold a public information hearing for each plan application in accordance with the procedures listed below: 
  Public notice for the public informational hearing is required and shall be given at least seven days prior to the date of the meeting the in the newspaper of general circulation within the municipality. The town planner shall instruct the town clerk to advertise. Postcard notice shall be mailed by the applicant to all property owners within a 200-foot radius of the subject parcel. A list of property owners within the notice area, certified by the tax assessor, shall be provided by the applicant to the town planner. 
  At the public informational meeting, the applicant shall present the proposed development project. The board shall allow oral and written comments from the general public. All public comments shall be made part of the public record of the project application. 
(B)  Consider reports and recommendations from the technical review committee and other agencies deemed relevant by the board. 
(C)  Render a decision within 45 days of the public hearing. The board may decide either at its regular or special meeting, to approve, disapprove or approve with modification the proposed plan. If a decision is not rendered within 45 days of the public information hearing, the proposal shall be considered approved, however, the board may, with the written concurrence of the applicant, extend the time for its decision an additional 30 days. 
(D)  Prescribe rules and forms as it deems necessary for: the filing of re-use development applications, postponement and extension of time, rehearing and any other matters. The board shall not be required to hear the same application more than once during any period of twelve consecutive months, provided however, that such re-application may be heard in less than 12 consecutive months if the town planner determines there has been a substantial change to such application. 
(E)  In considering the detailed plan application, the board shall apply the same procedures and standards as for development plan review (hereafter referred to as site plan review). 
5.14.4 Application approval. In order to approve any re-use development application, the board shall make the following determinations: 
(A)  That the proposal is in harmony with the overall objectives, spirit and intent of the zoning regulations and comprehensive plan. 
(B)  That the proposal will not detrimentally affect development in the surrounding area nor excessively impact existing roads, and other municipal facilities, public utilities and drainage systems. 
5.14.5 Application modifications. Any proposed non-technical modification to an approved application shall be considered by the board at a public hearing unless the town planner finds that the proposed modification is minor in nature, in which case a public hearing will not be required. When unforeseen field conditions require technical modifications, such as material changes or pipe locations, etc., an amended plan shall be submitted to the town planner for consideration and approval, and a copy shall be filed in the planning office file. 
5.14.6 Bulk requirements for new construction. Yard, setback, lot size, height, and frontage requirements are hereby waived, provided that the intent of this section are complied with in the development plans as determined by the board. In consultation with the technical review committee, the board may determine that certain setbacks, etc. for new construction be required within all of or a portion of the perimeter of the site and shall exercise ultimate discretion as to whether the development plan does comply with the spirit and the intent of this section. 
5.14.7 Additional requirements. An existing principal building(s) may be rehabilitated, modernized and/or expanded provided that such construction shall reflect the architectural design and scale of the original building and that the exterior building material, color, roof line and building elevations shall be compatible with the original building. New construction shall reflect the original building design. Both existing reconstruction and/or new construction shall adhere to the following design guidelines: 
(A)  New buildings shall be designed to achieve a similar appearance to the original building. 
(B)  New roof-top mechanical equipment, other than solar energy panels, shall be concealed from all sides. 
(C)  Buildings shall be designed and located on the site so as to retain the existing topography and natural features of the land to the greatest extent possible. 
(D)  To the extent possible, parking areas shall be so located and designed as to be screened from the public road to the extent possible. 
(E)  Every effort will be made to locate new parking facilities or drives at least ten feet from any property line. Where reasonable and economically reasonable the ten-foot areas shall be planted by evergreen and deciduous plantings and/or fences and/or walls to screen the parking area and block auto headlight glare to adjacent properties. 
(F)  The applicant shall be required to show to the extent possible and the board shall find that the building will be in acceptable exterior and interior condition. Acceptable exterior condition shall mean that the building will have no physical evidence from the exterior of cracks in walls, foundations or chimneys; no peeling or peeled paint; or no broken, misplaced or damaged parts, members, siding, or shingles. Acceptable interior condition shall mean, in part, that interior spaces will be subdivided to appropriately provide for the intended uses and that reasonable equipment, appliances, etc., will be installed. 
(G)  There shall be no exterior storage of material and no other exterior indication of nonresidential use except for those expressly permitted by the board, under the town sign ordinance. 
(H)  Off-street parking shall be required as follows (unless otherwise permitted by the board): One (1) parking space for every 250 square feet of net of non-residential floor area. Net floor area shall be deemed to be 85 percent of gross floor area. 1.5 parking spaces for each residential unit. 
(I)  Any building addition proposed in conjunction with an application for a conversion shall not exceed 25 percent of existing gross floor space. 
(J)  Estimates of the peak hour traffic generation derived from the proposed development and the relation of the peak traffic to surrounding roads and intersections, including methods developed for alleviating traffic problems created by the re-development. 
(K)  All exterior lighting shall be located and arranged so as not to cause off-site glare onto adjacent properties. 
5.14.8 Fees. Every application for a major re-use development shall be accompanied by a fee of $1,000.00 to help defray the costs of processing the application. Every application for a minor re-use development shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.00 to help defray the costs of processing the application. 
5.14.9 Plan requirements. The applicant shall submit an appropriate application, including but not limited to maps, sketch plans and other relevant data to adequately describe and illustrate the proposed development and its appropriateness for the proposed location; to indicate its effects and impact on the surrounding area and development, roads, and other municipal facilities, public utilities and transportation, and drainage systems, and to indicate compliance with the intent of the comprehensive plan of development and these regulations. The requirements of the plan are: 
(A)  Locality map, no smaller than 1 = 1000, showing zone(s) of parcel and surrounding area. 
(B)  Map at appropriate scale, no smaller than 1 = 200, showing property lines, names of adjacent owners, existing and proposed contours at 2 intervals, special flood hazard areas (as per federal flood hazard maps), designated wetlands and Watercourses, existing public utility lines, and public facilities (schools, fire houses, etc.), existing street widths, street classifications, mass transit systems and stops within 100 of the site, the layout of proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, open spaces, etc., as well as any proposed improvements to existing facilities which might be overburdened by the proposed development and thereby endanger the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(C)  Site plans as required by these regulations, site sections, elevations and sections of buildings, models and renderings, and any other material requested by the board. 
(D)  Drawings shall be stamped by relevant design professionals licensed in the State of Rhode Island (i.e., land surveyor, engineer, landscape architect, and architect). All surveys for a major Re-Use Development shall be Class I surveys. The drawings shall show in detail all data relevant to the design of the site and buildings including site and building working drawings, elevations, sections, models, etc. Unless otherwise specified, the standards established for site plans (Section 17.7-17.7.7 and 17.8.3-17.8.3.27). The land proposed for a re-use development may be owned by one or more persons or corporations but shall be presented as a single, contiguous parcel of land at the time the Plan Application is filed. The application shall be jointly filed by all owners and, if approved, shall be jointly binding on all of them as well as on any additional and/or future or partial owners. 
(E)  If the applicant fails to commence and proceed with actual construction within 12 months of the date of endorsement of approval of the development plan, or within any time extension granted in writing by the town planner, the approval of the application shall become null and void. 
(F)  Developments may be phased. If the approved development phase is not completed within two years of plan approval and if an extension has not been granted, the plan approvals shall be null and void, and construction shall cease until the board reviews and reapproves the project to insure compliance with current standards. 
(G)  Prior to the issuance of any building permits, an appropriate performance bond for public improvements shall have been received and accepted by the board in order to insure to the town, the construction and installation of all site improvements such as storm drainage, water and sewer systems, landscaping, and any other items on the plan deemed for the benefit of public health, safety and convenience. The amount and time period of the bond shall be established by the town engineer. A maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent of all bonded or bondable improvements shall be submitted and held for a period of one year after completion of all bonded improvements. 
(H)  Notwithstanding the requirements and provisions of subsection (G) above, no building permit shall be issued until sewer and water system plans have been approved by the town sewer authority and Kent County Water Authority all other requirements of the water pollution control authority have been met. All re-use developments shall be served by water and sewer. If possible, all new utility lines within the project shall be underground. 
(I)  The applicant shall show and the board must find that the physical characteristics of the particular property (including site location, size and geometry) and the building size and design can be used as proposed within the intent of these regulations and that it will not result in excessive impact on adjacent properties. 
1.  In reviewing the plan, the board may impose such other controls and restrictions as it deems necessary to protect adjacent properties and to assure compatibility with the adjoining residential neighborhood and the intent and objective of the re-use development section of these regulations. 
2.  Any change of use or occupancy permitted under the provisions of this section shall be subject to the review by the board for approval. 
5.14.10 Expiration dates. Any approval granted by the planning board of any application submitted pursuant to section 5.14 of this zoning code shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless the applicant shall within that one year period exercise the right granted by the decision. Exercise of the right as stated herein shall mean that the applicant shall commence work on the project approved and that there shall be no interruption of such work for a period in excess of six months at anytime until completion of the project. The board may upon application filed within the one year period and for good cause shown, extend the limitation for one additional one year period. The application for an extension need not be advertised. 
5.15  Arctic Design Control District (ADCD) [2] 
5.15.1  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the ADCD is to encourage the revitalization of the historic downtown area while maintaining the traditional development characteristics of the historic village center through rehabilitation and new construction, by providing unified physical, spatial, visual, and architectural design standards to guide all future changes to the district. 
5.15.2  Permitted uses. The uses which will be considered in the ADCD shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(A)  Residential, retail, commercial, non-retail, or industrial uses lawfully existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance, 
(B)  Retail, except for mobile homes and auto dealers, gas stations, fuel dealers and storage, 
(C)  Commercial/office uses except motor vehicle rental, auto repair and service, car detailing and washing, truck repair, service or terminals, 
(D)  Government facilities, including public utility structures or rights-of-way, 
(E)  Libraries and museums, 
(F)  Public parks and recreation facilities, 
(G)  Restaurants, 
(H)  Multifamily residential, 
(I)  Medical facilities, 
(J)  Private amusement and recreation facilities, 
(K)  Hotels and motels, 
(L)  Private parking lots or garages, 
(M)  Personal services, 
(N)  Churches or similar places of worship, 
(O)  Public or private elementary, middle and high schools, 
(P)  Any other use approved by the planning board as being harmonious with the spirit and the intent of the ADCD. A finding of appropriateness for the requested use will consider, but not be limited to, uses that will not disrupt the general retail/commercial/residential mixed use as well as the downtown village character and function of the Arctic Revitalization District as a pedestrian oriented area. 
5.15.3  Dimensional requirements. Yard, setback, lot size, height, and frontage requirements are hereby waived, providing that the spirit and the intent of this section are complied with in the development plans as determined by the planning board. In consultation with the town planner and the technical review committee, the planning board may determine that certain dimensional requirements shall be required within all or a portion of the site, and shall exercise ultimate discretion as to whether the development plan does comply with the spirit and the intent of this section. 
5.15.4  Parking requirements. The planning board, in consultation with the town planner and the technical review committee, may reduce or waive the parking requirement if they determine that the proposed use, location of the site, and proximity to existing public parking or other private parking facilities, will result in the generation of pedestrian trips in sufficient volume to warrant the parking reduction. All other parking requirements in section 5.9.10.7 of the zoning ordinance, excluding required number of spaces for each use, shall be met. Parking location and access shall be consistent with the design guidelines listed in appendix A*. The residential parking requirement will remain at two spaces per unit unless waived by the planning board. 
5.15.5  Signage. The Planning Board, in consultation with the town planner and technical review committee, may impose stricter requirements than are required in the zoning ordinance for signage when, in their judgment, the specific proposal and site so necessitates in order to comply with the intent and spirit of the design guidelines contained in appendix A. All exterior lighting and signs shall be shown on the development plan and detailed design (i.e. material, illumination, etc.) shall also be provided. The reasons for the stricter requirements shall be part of the motion to approve any development. 
5.15.6  Density. The planning board, in consultation with the town planner and the technical review committee, may waive density requirements for multifamily housing, provided that all requirements and standards for the proposed residential use is met, and the proposal, in the judgment of the planning board, is consistent with the design guidelines in appendix A. 
5.15.7  Expansion of legal nonconforming uses. Any nonconforming use lawfully existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance may not be expanded. However, in all cases, any use change proposal should be submitted to the planning board for determination as to whether a proposed change of use, after consultation with the town planner and the technical review committee, is consistent with the allowed uses in this ordinance. 
5.15.8  Architectural controls and review process. 
(A)  An intention of the ADCD zoning classification is to preserve the character and the charm of the village commercial district character of the Arctic area. 
(B)  The planning board reviews proposals for any construction within the ADCD zone including new renovations, alterations, repairs, removal, and/or demolition of buildings. The review includes proposed changes to major buildings, structures (gazebos, walls), secondary buildings (garages, sheds), and appurtenances (pavings, signs, fences, lighting, landscaping), roofing material, exterior siding, windows, doors, accessories (shutters, sidelights, transoms, crossheads, door pediments), dormers, eaves, trim, gutters and downspouts, fences, walkways, paving, and foundations. The planning board, in consultation with the town planner and the technical review committee, will determine the appropriateness and consistency of the architectural design of all new development or rehabilitation of existing structures as it relates to the design guidelines outlined in appendix A. The planning board has sole discretion to disapprove of any architectural design that does not comply with the intent and spirit of the design guidelines outlined in appendix A. 
(C)  When authentic building materials are unavailable, synthetic and/or engineered products that emulate and replicate the architectural style may be substituted. Authentic restoration is not a requirement of development with the ADCD, however, replication of the authentic materials/features/styles is required for development plans submitted following adoption of this ordinance. 
(D)  Prior to the start of any work, proposed changes to major buildings, structures, secondary buildings, and appurtenances must be submitted by the owner or the owner's agent to the town planner, who will determine whether the proposed work is major or minor, as defined below. If the work is determined to be "major", the town planner will submit the completed application packet to the planning board in the form of a site development plan, which shall include architectural elevations and/or construction details. A site development plan is required for all proposed developments. All site development plans shall meet the requirements of sections 17.7 and 17.8 inclusive of the town zoning code. This site development plan must receive a certificate of appropriateness within the ADCD even if a building permit from the local building official is not required. 
(E)  If the town planner deems the proposed work to be "minor", he will consult with the technical review committee and the building official and either grant approval, require changes for approval or refer the application to the planning board. Approval from either by the planning board or the town planner shall be required even if a building permit from the local building official in not required. 
(F)  "Major" work is defined as proposed changes to major buildings, secondary structures (garages, sheds, gazebos, etc.), structural walls and expansion and changes in use of any buildings and structures, removal and/or demolition of buildings. 
(G)  "Minor" work is defined as changes in paving materials, new signage, new outdoor decks, above ground pools, new fencing, landscaping and other appurtenances. 
(H)  No review is required for ordinary exterior maintenance and repair provided there is no significant change in design, architectural features, or type of materials used. Interior alterations do not require review for appropriateness within the ADCD, however, type of use, standard building laws and codes, etc. still exist and must be adhered to. 
(I)  The ADCD may or may not include historical areas. In the case where the structure in question is located within a historical designation area, historical building regulations take precedence over ADCD requirements provided that those historical building regulations are determined by the planning board to be more strict than ADCD requirements. 
(J)  As part of the application process, an informational packet providing greater detail on architectural controls will be provided. 
5.15.9  Other provisions. 
(A)  The geographic footprint for the ADCD boundaries for the Village of Arctic will be as follows, as shown on the town zoning map. 
(B)  The geographic footprint may be expanded or reduced as deemed appropriate by the planning board with the recommendation of zoning board of review, and approved by the town council. 
(C)  Any lot that falls within two (2) or more zones will be considered to be subject to the provisions of the design control district. 
(D)  All other questions, disputes, etc. not specifically covered within this regulation shall be revolved by the determination of the planning board, acting in consultation with the town planner and the technical review committee and shall focus on the appropriateness of the subject vis-a-vis the spirit and the intent of the ADCD zone. 
5.15.10. Public hearing. The review process by the planning board shall be at a public hearing for all applications for "major" activities as defined by this ordinance. Public notice of the date of the hearing shall be given at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. Notice shall be sent by the applicant to each record owner within 200 feet of the subject property, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the time and place of the hearing not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Said notice shall also include the street address of the subject property. The cost of all such notice shall be borne by the applicant. 
5.15.11 Fees. There will be an application fee, of $500.00 for each application for approval for major work, and an application fee of $50.00 for minor work as defined in this zoning code. The application fee shall be paid with five days from the date of notification to the applicant as to whether the application is a major or minor. No further processing of the application shall be done until the application fee is paid in full. 
NOTE: *Appendix A is not included herein but is available at the town planning office for public inspection. The planning board shall have authority, from time to time, to amend the appendix A design guidelines without the necessity to amend this ordinance. 
5.15.12 Expiration dates. Any approval granted by the planning board of any application submitted pursuant to section [5.15] of this zoning code shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless the applicant shall within that one year period exercise the right granted by the decision. Exercise of the right as stated herein shall mean that the applicant shall commence work on the project approved and that there shall be no interruption of such work for a period in excess of six months at anytime until completion of the project. The board may upon application filed within the one year period and for good cause shown, extend the limitation for one additional one year period. The application for an extension need not be advertised. 
5.16  Telecommunications tower ordinance. 
5.16.1  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to recognize that telecommunication towers are necessary to provide the consumer with adequate service and coverage by the cellular communications industry. However, uncontrolled location and design of telecommunication towers may lead to an adverse impact on residential neighborhoods and the visual environment of the town. 
This regulation is established both in a manner to be consistent with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, and to facilitate the most harmonious relationship possible between the telecommunications industry, the visual environment, and the residents of the town. However, any provision of this ordinance that is found to be in conflict with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 that will be controlling. 
5.16.2  General provisions. The ordinance hereby establishes standards for the siting of telecommunications towers and antennas; protects residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts; minimizes the total number of towers throughout the community; encourages the use of existing structures as an alternative to new tower construction; encourages the joint use of towers; encourages the design and construction of towers and antennae which minimize adverse visual impacts; ensures compliance of all proposed facilities with current federal, state, and local regulations; facilitates the provision of wireless telecommunication services; and prevents harm to the health, welfare, and visual environment of the town and its citizens. 
5.16.3  Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Antenna. Any exterior transmitting or receiving devise mounted in or on a tower; building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
FAA. Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC. Federal Communications Commission. 
Height. When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point of the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance [Aug. 12, 2006], including permitted towers and antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as approval is current and not expired. 
Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio, and other communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto. 
5.16.4  Applicability. 
5.16.4.1  New towers and antennas. All new towers and antennas in the town shall be subject to these regulations. 
5.16.4.2  Amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas. This ordinance shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator, or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
5.15.3.3  Pre-existing towers or antennas. Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this ordinance, other than the requirements of section 5.16.5.7 and 5.16.5.8. 
5.16.4.4  AM array. For the purposes of implementing this ordinance, an am array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the array by right. 
5.16.5  General requirements. 
5.16.5.1  Permitted zoning districts. Telecommunication towers shall be permitted by special use permit issued after public hearing by the zoning board of review in Business B), Commercial/Industrial (CI), and Business Park (BP) districts subject to the provisions of this ordinance and the underlying zoning district. Telecommunications towers shall be prohibited in all other zoning districts except by use variance from the zoning board of review. 
5.16.5.2  Antennas. Telecommunication antennas not attached to a telecommunications tower may be permitted by special use permit issued after public hearing by the zoning board of review to any commercial, industrial, office, institutional or public utility structure provided that: 
a.  Any communication equipment or accessory building complies with all other applicable zoning requirements and building codes. 
b.  All requirements for public notice and public hearing as otherwise required by this ordinance and by any other section(s) of the zoning ordinance. 
5.16.5.3  Public notice. For the purposes of this ordinance, any special use permit request or use or dimensional variance request shall require public notice to all abutting property owners within 200 feet of the perimeter of the applicant's site, in addition to any other notice required by the zoning ordinance. It is the responsibility of the petitioner to provide any and all notice to the abutters in conformance with the requirements of the zoning code. 
5.16.5.4  Planning board review. The application shall be reviewed by the town planning board and a recommendation shall be submitted to the zoning board of review prior to their public hearing on any variance or special permit requested under this ordinance. After any approvals, the planning board shall review and approve the proposed development under the normal site plan or development plan review requirement of the zoning ordinance. 
5.16.5.5  Location of facilities on or near historic structures, historic districts, scenic corridors, or residential areas. Telecommunication towers shall be prohibited in any local historic district, and within 500 feet of any individual structure or site identified by the town, and/or the Rhode Island Historic Preservation and Heritage Commission as historically significant to the town or the state. Towers and antennas may be approved within 200 feet of designated scenic corridors and any residential property by dimensional variance, and only if so constructed as to be substantially concealed. The views of, and vistas from, such structures, corridors, and residential areas shall not be impaired or diminished by the placement of telecommunications tower or antenna. 
5.16.5.6  Evidence. Applications for a use or dimensional variance or a special use permit as required by section 5.16.5.5 shall be accompanied by evidence that shall consist of the following information for a minimum of three sites: 
 Site plans. 
 Photographs of the site and surrounding areas. 
 Written documentation of the lack of a site in a permitted district. 
5.16.5.7  Removal of abandoned towers. Any telecommunication tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the abandoned tower is required to remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the town notifying the owner of the abandonment. The owner of the facility shall establish a $10,000.00 cash security fund or provide the town with an irrevocable letter of credit in the same amount to secure the cost of removing the antenna, antennas array, or tower that has been abandoned. In the event of a transfer of ownership, the seller shall be responsible for notifying the buyer of this requirement and for notifying the town of the transfer. Failure to remove an abandoned tower shall be grounds for the town to utilize the cash surety to remove the tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users shall cease using the tower. 
5.16.5.8  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the building official and the town planner an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, and/or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the town or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower or antenna. The building official and town planner may share such information with other applicants applying for special use permits or use variances under this ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the town provided, however, that the building official or town planner are not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
5.16.5.9  State or federal regulations. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the towers and antennas at the owner's expense. 
5.16.5.10  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers and antennas, the owner of the tower or antenna shall ensure that it is constructed and maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state and local building codes and the applicable standards for towers and antennas that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. Construction and maintenance of the towers and antenna in compliance with said standards shall be certified by a professional engineer registered with the state at the time of construction. The certification shall be filed with the town building official. If, upon inspection, the town concludes that the tower or antenna fails to comply with such codes and standards, and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower or antenna, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower or antenna into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower or antenna into compliance with such standards within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the towers and antennas at the owner's expense. 
5.16.5.11 Municipal use. Towers shall provide space for town municipal use at no cost to the town. 
5.16.6  Development standards. The following standards shall apply to all applications: 
5.16.6.1  Town owned locations. Town owned sites or facilities that are located in the prospective development area which could potentially accommodate the new tower and/or antenna shall be considered first and given priority for locations of said tower and/or antenna. 
5.16.6.2  Co-location. In all applications for a special use permit or use variance for the construction of a new facility, the applicant must prove by substantial evidence that a bona fide need exists for the facility and that no reasonable combination of locations, techniques, or technologies will obviate the need. The applicant must further prove that it has made all reasonable efforts to procure antenna space on existing facilities and that the cost of co-location exceeds the cost of a new facility by at least 50 percent. 
a.  The applicant requesting the special use permit or use or dimensional variance shall submit evidence to the town demonstrating that a genuine effort has been made to solicit additional users for the proposed new tower. Evidence of this shall include, at a minimum, copies of notices sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, to all other providers of cellular and wireless communications services within the town, adjacent communities, and the county, advising of the intent to construct a new tower, identifying the location, inviting joint use and sharing of costs, and requesting a written response within 15 business days. 
5.16.6.3  Setbacks. No new tower shall be constructed without a setback from the tower's base of at least one and one-half times the tower height to the public or private road and at least two times the tower height to the nearest property line. All tower supports, guy wires, and peripheral anchors shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the development site and shall be set back from the property lines the minimum of the zoning district in which the tower is located, but no less than 25 feet. All guy wires and guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times. When located in or abutting a residential district or historic district, the minimum setback distance shall be 35 feet. All supports and anchors shall have, at a minimum, a ten foot horizontal setback from any overhead utility line. 
5.16.6.4  Height restrictions. No new telecommunications facility shall exceed 90 feet in height. Telecommunication facilities located atop or within existing buildings or structures may result in an overall increase in height of the structure of no more than ten percent of the structures height without the facility or the maximum height allowed in the zoning district in which the structure is allowed and located, whichever is less. 
5.16.6.5  Equipment buildings. Equipment structures for a telecommunications facility shall not exceed 400 square feet in area and 12 feet in height. All such structures shall be erected with vegetation or other aesthetically pleasing materials. Furthermore, all such structures shall be secured with approved fencing and a locked gate. The applicant shall submit to the planning board and zoning board a landscaped site plan, prepared by a Rhode Island registered landscape architect for the entire property. 
5.16.6.6  Screening and landscaping. Communication towers shall be constructed and situated to fit in with the topography and features of the surrounding environment. Plantings shall be of a height and density to provide screening approved by the zoning board. Screening shall consist of plants and/or trees accepted by the town's subdivision regulations, or as accepted by the town planner. Screening shall comprise ten percent of the minimum established setback requirement, but shall not be less than five feet in width unless located in or abutting a residential district or historic district which will require that it not be less than ten feet in width. Screening may be waived by the zoning board of review on those sides or sections that are adjacent to undeveloped land or land not in public view. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible and may be used as a substitute for or supplement towards meeting the landscaped screening requirement. The owner of the property shall be responsible for all maintenance and shall replace any dead plantings within 30 days. 
5.16.6.7  Security and lighting. Communication towers shall be enclosed by a fence no less than eight feet in height and no more than ten feet in height from finished grade. Access shall be through a locked gate. Communication towers in or abutting a residential district or historic district shall have opaque fencing made of wood or stone. The town reserves the right to choose the color of the tower. Communication towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required for public safety purposes, by the FAA, or by the town. Written proof of FAA requirement must be provided to the town. 
5.16.6.8  Tower location. Communication towers shall be located so as to comply with the following standards for the minimum separation distance from existing communications towers and/or communications towers that have received a valid special use permit: 
_____ 
Proposed Tower Type Self Supporting Guyed Monopole 
75+ Feet 
In Height Monopole 
< 75 Feet 
In Height Self Supporting 3 Miles 3 Miles 1.5 Miles 2,500 Feet Guyed 3 Miles 3 Miles 1.5 Miles 2,500 Feet Monopole 75+ Foot Height 1.5 Miles 1.5 Miles 1.5 Miles 2,500 Feet Monopole <75 Foot Height 2500 Feet 2500 Feet 2,500 Feet 2,500 Feet  
Separation distances shall be calculated and applied irrespective of jurisdictional boundaries. 
_____ 
5.16.6.9  Signage. No signs shall be allowed on any communication tower except as required for public safety purposes, by the FCC, or by the town. An identification sign of not greater than six square feet shall be placed on the site of any tower facility. 
5.16.7 Nonconforming uses. 
5.16.7.1 Not expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
5.16.7.2 Pre-existing towers. Pre-existing towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such pre-existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a pre-existing tower shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
5.16.7.3 Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas. Notwithstanding section 5.16.4.3, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain a special use permit. The type, height, and location of the tower onsite shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approved. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in section 5.16.5.6. 
5.16.8  Electronic emissions and electromagnetic radiation. Prior to commencing regular operation of the facility, all facility owners and operators must submit a certificate of compliance with all current Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations concerning electromagnetic radiation and other electronic emissions applicable to the facility. 
All facility operators and owners must sign an agreement, to be maintained by the town, agreeing to bring facilities into compliance with any new federal, state, or local laws or regulations concerning electromagnetic radiation and other electronic emissions applicable to the facility within 120 days of the effective date of the regulations. 
5.16.9  Fees. Every application for a special permit under this ordinance shall be accompanied by a fee of $500.00 to help defray the costs of processing the application. The applicant shall also be required to bear the expense of any outside technical assistance which the town deems necessary to assist the town in the review of the technical aspects of the telecommunications tower or antenna proposal up to a maximum amount of $50,00.00. 
5.17 Wind energy systems (WES). 
5.17.1 Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to recognize that WES are becoming a more popular alternative energy source for both the public and private sector. However, uncontrolled location and design of the WES and components may lead to an adverse impact on residential neighborhoods and the visual environment of the Town of West Warwick. 
This regulation is established both in a manner to be consistent with applicable federal and state laws and regulations and to facilitate the most harmonious relationship possible between the alternative energy industry, the visual environment, and the residents of West Warwick. However, any provision of this section that is found to be in conflict with any federal or state law or regulation, it is the federal and state law and regulation that will be controlling. 
5.17.2 Applicability. This section applies to all WES proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section. 
5.17.3 Definitions. 
    Capacity factor. A capacity factor is a ratio or percentage that represents a wind turbine's actual energy output versus its maximum potential energy output. The value is typically reported as an annual figure, not monthly, hourly or instantaneously. The maximum potential energy output assumes that the turbine can operate at its maximum nameplate capacity continuously throughout one year. 
    Critical electric infrastructure (CEI). The electric utility transmission and distribution infrastructure, including but not limited to substations, transmission towers, transmission and distribution poles, supporting structures, guy-wires, cables, lines and conductors operating at voltages of 13.8 kV and above and associated with telecommunications infrastructure. CEI also includes all infrastructure defined by any federal regulatory agency or body as transmission facilities on which fault or disturbances can have a significant adverse impact outside of the local area, and transmission lines and associated equipment generally operated at voltages of 100 kV or higher. 
    Decibel (d/BA). The decibel is a unit used to measure the intensity of sound. Specifically, it is a logarithmic measure of sound pressure levels. An A-weighted decibel measurement has been filtered to better represent how humans sense sound. It discounts frequencies near the top and bottom of the human range of hearing. 
    FAA. Federal Aviation Administration. 
    Fall zone. The calculated area of the land surrounding a wind turbine that may be affected by debris should the supporting structure collapse or any component of the wind turbine or anything attached to it fall to the ground. 
    Height. The distance measured from the natural grade surrounding the support pad to the tip of the blade in a vertical position measured along the vertical axis of the tower. This measure is commonly referred to as the maximum tip height (MTH). 
    Nacelle. The housing component located at the top of the tower that contains much of the turbine's mechanical systems. It is connected to the turbine's rotor. 
    Occupied building. Any building regularly occupied by one or more persons on a daily basis. Buildings ordinarily used for storage, such as garages, sheds and the like, are not considered occupied buildings even though they may be entered for brief periods on a daily basis. 
    Rated nameplate capacity. The maximum rated output of electric power production equipment. This output is typically specified by the manufacturer with a nameplate on the equipment. 
    Setback. The distance measured from the closest edge of the wind turbine base to the closest point of the boundaries of the site parcel, to a private or public road or way, and to an occupied building not located on the site parcel. 
    Shadow flicker. The moving shadows on an observer's location caused by the rotating blades of the wind turbine located between the sun and the observer. 
    Site parcel. The parcel of land or lot, including contiguous lots owned by the same party on which the WES is erected. 
    Small WES. A wind energy system that is designed and intended to generate electrical output primarily for the use or benefit of the structures on the same lot or on contiguous commonly owned lots. Small wind energy systems have a rated nameplate capacity of 80 kW or less and a total height not exceeding 160 feet. 
    Utility-scale WES. A commercial wind energy system, where the primary use of the facility is electrical generation to be sold to an electric distribution company, commercial net-metered renewable wind energy systems and/or wind energy systems that sell a portion of the energy produced back to National Grid under the Renewable Energy Growth Program. 
    Wind energy system (WES). All of the equipment, machinery and structures together utilized to convert wind into electricity. This includes, but is not limited to, developer-owned electrical equipment, storage, collection and supply equipment, service and access roads, and one or more wind turbines. 
    Wind turbine. A device that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy to drive an electrical generator. A wind turbine typically consists of a structural support system, tower, nacelle, and a rotor with two or more blades. 
5.17.4 General requirements for all WES. 
5.17.4.1. The construction and operation of all such proposed WES shall be consistent with all applicable West Warwick Ordinances and federal and state laws and regulations, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, environmental, electrical, communications and aviation requirements. 
5.17.4.2 No WES may be constructed or substantially modified without obtaining a special use permit from the zoning board of review. 
5.17.4.3 WES shall be constructed and operated in a manner that minimizes any adverse visual, safety and environmental impacts. 
5.17.4.4 Wind turbines shall have automatic braking, governing or feathering systems to prevent uncontrolled rotation, over speeding or excessive pressure on the wind turbine structure, rotor blades and other turbine components. 
5.17.4.5 WES shall comply with all applicable requirements of the FAA. 
5.17.4.6 The fall zone for all wind turbines shall be measured at ground level below the center of the wind turbine as a circular area with a radius of 150 percent of the MTH or the manufacturer recommended fall zone, whichever is greater, and no occupied building shall be located within the fall zone of the wind turbine. 
5.17.4.7 Wind turbine shall be set back: 
A.  200 percent of the MTH from the site parcel property lines, and 
B.  200 percent of the MTH from any public or private roadway, excluding and access driveway or roadway to the wind turbine. 
C.  from any occupied building located within a 200-foot radius of the site parcel boundary lines. 
5.17.4.8 The minimum ground clearance for the wind turbine blades shall be 20 feet. 
5.17.4.9 At all times from the installation of a WES until its removal the owner shall maintain liability insurance in an amount to be determined by the town manager and planning director. The insurance policy shall provide for notification to the department of building and zoning and the town manager a minimum of 30 days prior to its expiration or cancellation. 
5.17.5 Design standards. 
5.17.5.1 Monopole. All WES shall be of monopole design. 
5.17.5.2 Color and finish. All components of the wind turbine shall be painted a neutral, non-reflective exterior color designed to blend with the surrounding environment, such as white, light gray or light blue. 
5.17.5.3 Lighting. Wind turbines shall be lighted only if required by the FAA. Lighting of non-tower parts of the wind turbine, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety, security, and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties and except as required by the FAA be directed downward and directed away from and/or shielded from abutting properties with full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution. 
5.17.5.4 Shadow/flicker. Wind turbines shall be sited to minimize the shadowing or flicker effect on neighboring property. The applicant has the burden of proving that the wind turbine will not produce significant adverse impacts by shadowing or flicker on neighboring property. A failure to meet this burden of proof shall result in denial of the wind turbine application. 
5.17.5.5 Noise. Noise levels resulting from operation of a wind turbine shall not exceed 50 dB(A) as measured at the property line, and averaged over a ten minute time period. This provision is to be considered a minimum standard, and the zoning board of review may impose more restrictive requirements as deemed necessary. The applicant shall present appropriate documentation and/or analysis from a qualified acoustics professional to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the zoning board of review that the proposed installation will comply with this requirement. 
5.17.5.6 Signs. A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be placed at the base of all wind turbines. No other signs shall be permitted on any wind turbine, except signs necessary to identify the owner, provide emergency contact information, and warn of other dangers associated with the wind turbine. 
5.17.5.7 Prior approvals. Before issuance of any permits for the WES and/or wind turbines: 
A.  An applicant for a utility-scale WES shall submit documentation from the electric distribution company to whom the electrical generation is to be sold, approving the proposed connection. All electrical connections, including transformers, shall be installed underground unless the utility, as shown by the documentation, requires the electrical connections to be installed above-ground. 
B.  An applicant for a small WES shall submit documentation from an electrical engineer licensed by the State of Rhode Island approving the proposed connections. 
5.17.5.8 Unauthorized access. WES shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access. When deemed reasonably necessary because of the location of the wind turbine on the site and the surrounding neighborhood, the zoning board of review may require protective fencing. 
5.17.5.9 Accessory structures. Accessory structures, such as equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be contained within the WES site whenever technically and economically feasible; shall be used only for housing of equipment for this particular site; and, whenever reasonable, shall be shielded from view by vegetation and/or located in an underground vault and joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts. Accessory structures to wind turbines are subject to regulations pertaining to accessory buildings in section 5.6. Supplemental use regulations, of the Zoning Code. 
5.17.5.10 Other considerations. In deciding whether to grant a special use permit for a WES, the zoning board of review may consider all relevant matters not expressly mentioned in this section 5.17, such as the potential adverse impacts of the wind turbine on wildlife habitats and scenic vistas, and interference with electromagnetic communications, such as telephone, radio, and television. Wind turbines shall not interfere with any telecommunications transmissions, including local emergency responders, military and civilian personal radio use. 
5.17.6 Site plan review. 
5.17.6.1 No WES shall be erected, constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first having been filed with the planning director a site plan as hereinafter provided. The planning director shall within 45 days from receipt of the site plan file a report of his or her findings regarding the site plan with the applicant. The application for site plan approval shall be accompanied by a site plan review fee. 
5.17.6.2 All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a professional surveyor licensed to practice in State of Rhode Island. 
5.17.6.3 Pursuant to the site plan review process, the project applicant shall provide the following documents: 
(A)  A Class I survey showing: 
(1)  Property lines and physical dimensions of the site parcel and adjacent parcels within a radius of 200 feet from the boundaries of the site parcel; 
(2)  Outline of all existing buildings, including purpose (e.g., residence, garage, etc.) on the site parcel and all adjacent parcels within a radius of 200 feet from the boundaries of the site parcel, including distances from the wind turbine to each building shown; 
(3)  Location of the proposed wind turbine, foundations, access roads, and associated equipment; 
(4)  Location of all existing and proposed roads and ways, both public and private, and including temporary roads or driveways, on the site parcel and adjacent parcels within a radius of 200 percent of the MTH from the boundaries of the site parcel; 
(5)  Location of all existing above ground or overhead gas or electric infrastructure, including CEI, and utility rights-of-way (ROW) and easements, whether fully cleared of vegetation or only partially cleared, within a radius of 200 feet from the boundaries of the site parcel; 
(6)  Existing areas of tree cover, including average height of trees, on the site parcel and any adjacent parcels within a within a radius of 200 feet from the boundaries of the site parcel: 
(7)  Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting (other than FAA lights), screening vegetation or structures. 
(B)  Color photos of the wind turbine site and color photo simulations, by a qualified graphics professional of said site parcel and surroundings with the proposed WES super-imposed thereon. 
(C)  Wind turbine foundation blueprints or drawings signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Rhode Island; 
(D)  Wind turbine blueprints or drawings signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the State of Rhode Island; 
(E)  One or three line electrical diagram detailing wind turbine, associated components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all National Electrical Code and National Electrical Safety Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices; 
(F)  Documentation of the wind turbine's manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, and foundation type/dimensions; 
(G)  Name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant, as well as all co- applicants and/or property owners; 
(H)  The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the applicant; 
(I)  An operation and maintenance plan for the WES; 
(J)  Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site together with documentation of all applicable title encumbrances (e.g., utility ROW easements); 
(K)  An operation and maintenance plan for the WES indicating that such plan is in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations for the operation of the WES. 
(L)  Zoning district designation for the subject parcel and all property located within a radius of 200 percent of the height of the wind turbine from the boundaries of the site parcel. 
(M)  A current zoning certificate from the building official. 
(N)  A current municipal lien certificate. 
(O)  Proof of liability insurance, in an amount to be determined by the town as recommended by the town engineer, planning director and building official. 
(P)  Certification of height approval from the FAA. 
5.17.7 Special use permit. 
5.17.7.1 Upon receipt of the report of the planning director as provided in section 6.17.6.1 an application for a special use permit shall be filed with the zoning board of review. 
5.17.7.2 The provisions of section 10. Special use permits, shall govern the application for a special use permit for a WES in addition to all other requirements stated in this section 5.17.4 and section 5.17.5 hereof. 
5.17.7.3 Upon receipt of the report of the planning director as provided in section 6.17.6.1 the documentation as submitted to the planning director for site plan review in accordance with section 5.17.6 and the report of the planning director shall be submitted with the application for the special use permit in as many copies as the zoning board of review shall from time to time be determined as required. 
5.17.8 Monitoring/decommissioning/abandonment. 
5.17.8.1 All permitted wind turbines shall be maintained in good working condition. Maintenance shall include painting, structural repairs, and the integrity of security and life safety measures. A report demonstrating compliance with an acceptable maintenance schedule shall be submitted annually to the building official on the anniversary of the date on which final approval of construction of the wind turbine was given by all town officials as part of an annual safety certification process. 
5.17.8.2 An applicant for a WES project shall be required to post a bond of a type, of a duration, and in an amount to be determined by the town as recommended by the town engineer, planning director and building official. 
5.17.8.3 When a WES is scheduled for decommissioning, the applicant shall notify the town manager, building official and planning director by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operation and plans for removal. The owner/operator shall remove the entire WES within 150 days after the discontinuation. 
5.17.8.5 The owner/operator of a WES shall implement current industry practices during removal to ensure minimal adverse impacts on the public health, safety and welfare. Environmental impacts shall also be minimized with appropriate notice to state regulatory agencies as required. 
5.17.8.4 At the time of removal, the site parcel shall be restored to its state from before the WES was constructed. Removal shall include all associated equipment with appropriate disposal of any hazardous materials. Stabilization and re-vegetation of the parcel site shall occur as necessary to minimize erosion. The building official and planning director may allow the owner to leave established vegetation and possibly below-grade foundations where they would minimize erosion and limit site disturbance. 
5.17.8.8 The owner of an abandoned or de-commissioned WES shall remove the turbines, towers, bases and associated structures and components. After 12 months or one year of inoperability of any WES, the building official may reasonably determine the WES to be abandoned and shall issue a notice of abandonment to the property owner. The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice within 30 days of receipt. If the owner fails to do so, the town, through the zoning official, shall pursue all legal remedies available to it and/or seek satisfaction through the posted bond and/or place a lien against the property. The town reserves the right to salvage the WES demolition debris to defray the cost of demolition and site stabilization. 
5.17.9 Building permit. 
5.17.9.1 No WES shall be erected, constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining all permits required by federal or state law or regulation or West Warwick Ordinance. 
5.17.9.2 The application for such permits must be accompanied by the fees required for such permits. 
5.18 Adult entertainment uses ordinance. 
5.18.1 Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to address and mitigate the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses that are referenced and defined herein. Secondary effects have been shown to include increased crime, adverse impact on the public health, adverse impact on the business climate, adverse impact on the property values of residential and commercial properties, and adverse impact on the quality of life. All of said secondary impacts are adverse to the health, safety, and general welfare of the town. 
This ordinance has neither the purpose nor intent of imposing a limitation on the content of any communicative matter or materials, including sexually oriented matters and materials. Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to adult entertainment establishments or to sexually oriented matter or materials that is protected by the Constitution of the United States or of the state, nor to restrict or deny rights that distributors or exhibitors of such matter or materials may have to sell, rent, distribute or exhibit such matters or materials. Neither is it the purpose or intent of this ordinance to legalize the sale, rental, distribution or exhibition of obscene or other illegal matter or materials. 
It is the purpose of this ordinance to conclusively state that the live performance of sex acts which are obscene or illegal are not made allowable by virtue of this ordinance. 
5.18.2 Definitions. Adult entertainment uses shall include: 
Adult arcade. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, or other image producing machines or devices, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or any other type of photographic or image reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore. An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade and offering for sale or review, for any form of consideration, books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, CDs, DVDs or any other visual representations and other materials which are distinguished or characterized by its emphasis depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater. An establishment used for presenting material distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult paraphernalia store. An establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock and offering for sale or review, for any form of consideration devices, objects, tools or toys, which are distinguished or characterized by their association with specified sexual activities. 
Adult video store. An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade and offering for sale or review, for any form of consideration, videos, movies or other film, material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Establishments which display live nudity. Any establishment which provides live entertainment for its patrons, which include the display of nudity which shall include specified anatomical areas. Certain uses under this category are also regulated by chapter 12, article II of the Code of Ordinances. 
Specified anatomical areas. This term means and includes any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, anal cleft or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolas, or 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities. This term means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The fondling or other erotic touching or human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts, 
b.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy, 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated, or 
d.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth as noted above. 
RIGL. Rhode Island General Laws, as amended. 
ZBR. The West Warwick Zoning Board of Review. 
5.18.3 General requirements. 
5.18.3.1 Adult entertainment uses. 
A.  Adult entertainment uses shall be prohibited in all zoning districts in town, except by special use permit in the CI (Commercial Industrial) zoning district. 
B.  All uses granted under this ordinance shall not be located within: 
1.  1,500 feet from the nearest residential zoning district: 
2.  1,500 feet from the nearest house of worship, school (public or private), park, playground, play field, youth center licensed day care center, or other location where groups of minors regularly congregate or any establishment rendering funeral or crematory services; 
3.  2,000 feet from the nearest adult entertainment or sexually oriented business use as defined herein; 
4.  500 feet from any establishment having a liquor license granted by the town or any other municipality. 
5.  1,000 feet from the entrance to the West Warwick Business Park (John P Murphy Highway). 
All distances specified above shall be measured by a straight line from the nearest property line of the premises on which the proposed adult entertainment or sexually oriented business use is to be located to the nearest boundary line of a residential zoning district or to the nearest property line of any of the other designated uses set forth above. 
C.  All building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in such a manner as to prevent visual access to the interior of the establishment by the public. 
D.  No use shall be allowed to display for advertisement or other purposes any signs, placards, or other like materials to the general public on the exterior of the building or on the interior where the same may be seen through glass or other like transparent material any explicit figures, words or symbols concerning specified anatomical areas or sexual activities. 
E.  No use permitted under this ordinance shall be allowed to disseminate or offer to disseminate adult matter or paraphernalia to minors or suffer minors to view displays or linger on the premises. 
F.  The proprietor, owner, or personnel of the establishment shall prohibit access to the premises by any person who is under 18 years of age. 
G.  No use permitted under this Ordinance shall be allowed within a building containing other retail, consumer, or residential uses. 
H.  All uses permitted under this ordinance shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements and regulations of the zoning ordinance. 
I.  No use permitted under this ordinance shall be allowed to have any flashing lights or electronic message boards or other devices visible from outside the establishment. 
J.  No use permitted under this ordinance shall be allowed a freestanding accessory sign. 
K.  No use permitted under this ordinance shall be established prior to submission and approval of a site plan by the planning board with input from the technical review committee and the building official. 
L.  The site plan shall show all existing and proposed buildings, parking spaces, driveways, service areas and other open uses as well as the distances between the proposed use and the boundary of the nearest residential zone and the property line of all other abutting uses. The site plan shall also locate by dimension the distance from the proposed use to any other use defined in B above. 
M.  All uses permitted under this ordinance shall comply fully with all licensing requirements of the town, including but not limited to all business and entertainment license requirements. 
N.  Any and all rubbish, boxes, containers, packages, trash, waste or other debris generated from the operation of such permitted adult entertainment business shall be disposed of in a manner which is discreet and invisible to passers-by. Furthermore, such debris shall be stored in a padlocked container until time of final disposal. 
5.18.3.2 Conditions. In addition to the conditions stated in section 5.18.3.1 hereof, the ZBR may impose reasonable conditions, safeguards and limitation on time or use of any special use permit granted under this ordinance and shall require that any such special use permit granted herein be personal to the applicant, shall not run with the land and shall expire upon the sale, conveyance or transfer of the ownership of the adult entertainment use or of the property on which it is located. 
5.18.3.3 Expiration. A special use permit granted under this ordinance shall expire after a period of one calendar year from its date of issuance and shall be automatically renewable for successive one year periods thereafter, provided that a written request is made to the ZBR and that no objection to said renewal is made and sustained by the ZBR based upon the public safety factors at the time that the original special use permit was granted pursuant to section 5.18.1 above. The request for renewal shall require public notice in the same manner as is provided for in section 5.18.3.4 hereafter. 
5.18.3.4 Public notice. For the purposes of this ordinance, any application for a special use permit shall require public notice to all property owners within 200 feet of the perimeter of the applicant's site, as required by section 9.5 and 10.7.3 of the town zoning ordinance. It is the responsibility of the petitioner to provide any and all required notice. 
5.18.3.5 Application process. The application shall, in addition to the application for a special use permit, include a site plan. The site plan shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 40 feet and shall be a Class One survey. 
The application shall first be reviewed by the technical review committee (TRC), which shall comment and make recommendations to the town planning board no later than 14 days prior to the date scheduled for the planning board meeting at which application is to be considered. When reviewed by the TRC, the report to the planning board shall state the reasons for a favorable or unfavorable recommendation. 
The application shall be reviewed by the town planning board. The planning board shall review the site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 17.7 of the town zoning ordinance. Upon completion of review, the planning board shall submit a written recommendation, stating whether the application is consistent with the town comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance, to the ZBR prior to their public hearing on any special use permit requested under this ordinance. 
5.18.4 Submission requirements. The application for the special use permit shall provide and be signed by the name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the legal owner(s) of the adult entertainment use, the legal owner(s) of the property where the adult entertainment use is to be located and the manager(s) of the adult entertainment use and shall include the following: 
1.  A class 1 survey of the property prepared by a Rhode Island registered land surveyor indicating all existing structures and the proposed location of the adult entertainment establishment. 
2.  A map showing all principal structures on properties within 200 feet of the adult entertainment establishment location. 
3.  The plan must show minimum distances from all designated uses described in section 5.18.4.1 B of this ordinance. 
4.  A current zoning certificate from the building official. 
5.18.5 Nonconforming uses. 
5.18.5.1 Pre-existing adult entertainment establishments. Pre-existing adult entertainment establishments shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted. Any expansion of a pre-existing adult entertainment establishment shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance. Any sale or change in ownership of the establishment shall require a new request for a special use permit under the terms of this ordinance. 
5.18.5.2 Rebuilding damaged or destroyed adult entertainment establishments. Notwithstanding section 5.18.5.1, bona fide nonconforming adult entertainment establishments that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain a special use permit. The type, height, and location of the adult entertainment establishment shall be of the same type, height and intensity as the original establishment approved. Building permits to rebuild the establishment shall comply with applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the adult entertainment establishment is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained, or if said permit expires, the adult entertainment establishment shall be deemed abandoned as specified in this ordinance. 
5.18.5.3 Abandoned establishments. Any existing establishments defined under this ordinance that are not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the properly that contained the abandoned establishment must remove any and all remaining material related to the establishment within 90 days of receipt of notice from the town notifying the owner of the abandonment. In the event of a transfer of ownership, the seller shall be responsible for notifying the buyer of this requirement and for notifying the town of the transfer. 
5.18.6 Fees. Every application for a special use permit under this ordinance shall be accompanied by a fee of $500.00 to help defray the costs of processing the application. 
5.18.7 Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are severable and, in the event that any provision of this ordinance is determined to be invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
5.19  Floodplain hazard areas. 
5.19.1  Statement of purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure public safety; minimize hazards to persons and property from flooding, to protect watercourses from encroachment, and to maintain the capability of floodplains to retain and carry off floodwaters. The town elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended). 
5.19.2  Applicability. 
5.19.2.1  Special flood hazard areas. The special flood hazard areas are herein established as a floodplain overlay district. The district includes all special flood hazard areas within the town designated as zone A, AE and AO on the Kent County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and digital FIRM issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Kent County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the town, community number 44007, are panel numbers 0106H, 0107H, 0108H, 0109H, 0116H, 0117H, 0126H, 0128H, and 0136H dated October 2, 2015. The exact boundaries of the district may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Kent County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated October 2, 2015. The FIRM and FIS report and any revisions thereto are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the building official and in the office of the town planner. 
5.19.2.2  Administrative procedures. 
5.19.2.2.1  Building permit. All proposed construction or other development within a special flood hazard area shall require a permit. 
The National Flood Insurance Program Special Flood Hazard Area requires permits for all projects that meet the definition of development, not just "building" projects. Development projects include any filling, grading, excavation, mining, drilling, storage of materials, temporary stream crossings. If the construction or other development within a Special Flood Hazard Area is not covered by a building permit, all other non-structural activities shall be permitted by either the Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Council and/or the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management as applicable. Therefore if another State agency issues a permit, the local building official must have the opportunity for input and keep a copy of the respective permit in their files. 
If the construction or other development within a Special Flood Hazard Area is not covered by a building or other approved permit application, a flood hazard development permit shall be required. The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be submitted to the Building Official and shall include: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  An address or a map indicating the location of the construction site; 
c.  A site plan showing location of existing and proposed structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and the dimensions of the lot; 
d.  A statement of the intended use of the structure; 
e.  A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed; 
f.  Specification of dimensions of the proposed structures; 
g.  The specific datum used for all elevations; 
h.  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, and if the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above; 
i.  Base flood elevation data for all new, relocated or substantially improved structures; 
j.  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure will be floodproofed; 
k.  The description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
Prior to the issuance of a building or development permit, the applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary permits and approvals have been received from all government agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. 
A permit fee (based on the cost of the construction) may be required to be paid to the town and a copy of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application. An additional fee may be charged if the code enforcement officer and/or board of appeals need the assistance of a professional engineer. 
5.19.2.2.2  Disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by the ordinance is considered reasonable but does not imply total flood protection. 
5.19.2.2.3  Severability. If any section, provision, or portion of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected. 
5.19.2.2.4  Abrogation and greater restriction. This ordinance shall not in any way impair/remove the necessity of compliance with any other applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, etc. Where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
5.19.3  Notification of watercourse alteration. In a riverine situation, building official shall notify the following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
Adjacent communities; 
NFIP state coordinator 
Rhode Island Emergency Management Agency 
645 New London Avenue 
Cranston, RI 02920 
Risk Analysis Branch 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I 
99 High Street, 6th Floor Boston, MA 02110 
The carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
5.19.4  Use regulations. 
5.19.4.1  Reference to Existing Regulations. The special flood hazard areas are established as a floodplain overlay district. All development in the district, including structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit must be in compliance with the following: 
 Rhode Island State Building Code (as established under G.L.  23-27.3); 
 Coastal Resources Management Program, Coastal Resource Management Council (G.L.  46-23); 
 Endangered Species Act, Department of Environmental Management (G.L.  20-1-2); 
 Freshwater Wetlands Act, Department of Environmental Management (G.L.  2-1-18); 
 Minimum Standards Related to Individual Sewage Disposal Systems, Department of Environmental Management (G.L.  5-56, 5-56.1, 23-19.15, 23-24.3, 42-17.1 and 46-13.2); 
 Water Quality Regulations, Department of Environmental Management (G.L.  42-17.1, 42-17.6 and 46-12) 
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above referenced state regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of these state regulations. 
5.19.4.2  Other use regulations. 
1.  Within zone AH and AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths must be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
2.  Within zone AO on the FIRM, new and substantially improved residential structures shall have their lowest floor at least as high as the FIRM'S depth number above the highest adjacent grade and non-residential structures shall be elevated or flood-proofed above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth number on the FIRM. On FIRMs without a depth number for the AO zone, structures shall be elevated or flood-proofed to at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
3.  In zones A and AE, along watercourses that have a regulatory floodway designated on the town FIRM or flood boundary and floodway maps encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
4.  All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that: 
a.)  Such proposals minimize flood damage; 
b.)  All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
5.  Detached accessory structures in zones A, AE and AO, (i.e., garages, sheds) do not have to meet the elevation or dry flood-proofing requirement if the following standards are met: 
a.)  The structure is no more than 100 square feet in size and has a value less than $1,000.00. 
b.)  The structure has unfinished interiors and must not be used for human habitation. An apartment, office or other finished space over a detached garage is considered human habitation and would require the structure to be elevated. 
c.)  The structure is used solely for parking of vehicles and/or limited storage. 
d.)  The accessory must be wet floodproofed and designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood water. 
e.)  The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
f.)  Service facilities such as electrical, mechanical and heating equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood elevation. 
g.)  The structure must not increase the flood levels in the floodway. 
h.)  The structure is not in a floodway. 
i.)  The structure is not used for hazardous materials. 
6.  Existing contour intervals of site and elevations of existing structures must be included on plan proposal. 
7.  No person shall change from business/commercial to residential use of any structure located in a floodway of a Special Flood Hazard Area so as to result in a use or expansion that could increase the risk to the occupants. 
5.19.4.3  Base flood elevation and floodway data. 
1.  Floodway data. In zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state, local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  Base flood elevation data. Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones. 
3.  Base flood elevations in A zones. In the absence of FEMA BFE data and floodway data, the best available federal, state, local, or other BFE or floodway data shall be used as the basis for elevating residential and non-residential structures to or above the base flood level and for floodproofing non-residential structures to or above the base flood level. 
5.19.5 Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this ordinance pertain to floodplain management, have the same meaning as they have in common usage and to give this ordinance it's most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure - A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of shallow flooding - A designated AO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard - See definition for "Special Flood Hazard Area." 
Base flood - The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) - The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height, as established in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum where specified), in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
Basement - Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building - see definition for "Structure". 
Cost - As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, costs to correct code violations subsequent to a violation notice, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
Development - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment. 
Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision - A manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or existing manufactured home subdivision - The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) - The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
Flood or flooding - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) - The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM). 
Flood insurance study (FIS) - The official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted a technical engineering evaluation and determination of local flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface elevations. The flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations, and may provide the regulatory floodway limits. 
Flood proofing - Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "regulatory floodway" is synonymous in meaning with the term "floodway." 
Freeboard - A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade (HAG) - The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure - Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a buildings lowest floor; Provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of any applicable non-elevation design requirements of 60.3. 
Manufactured home - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value - Market value is the price of a structure that a willing buyer and seller agree upon. This can be determined by an independent appraisal by a professional appraiser; the property's tax assessment, minus land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation of the structure; the structure's actual cash value. 
New construction - Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision - A manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations adopted by the community. 
Recreational vehicle - A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway - see definition for "Floodway". 
Sheet flow area - see definition for "Area of Shallow Flooding". 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) - The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, Zoning A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A 99, AR, AR/A 1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE or V. For purpose of these regulations, the "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard". 
Start of construction - For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure - For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
For insurance purposes, means: 
1.  A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site; 
2.  A manufactured home ("a manufactured home," also known as a mobile home, is a structure; built on permanent chassis, transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation); or 
3.  A travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community's floodplain management and building ordinances or laws. 
For the latter purpose, "structure" does not mean recreational vehicle or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in paragraph (3) of this definition, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, additions or other improvements to a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include: 
1.  Any project to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Variance - A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management ordinance that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Violation - Failure of a structure or other development to be fully complaint with the community's floodplain management ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
5.20 Compassion center/licensed cultivator. 
5.20.1 Definitions. 
A.  "Compassion center" means a not-for-profit person subject to the provisions of G.L. Chapter 6 of Title 7, registered under G.L.  21-28.6-12 that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies or dispenses marijuana, and/or related supplies and educational materials, to patient cardholders and/to registered caregiver cardholder or authorized purchaser. 
B.  Licensed cultivator means a person, as identified in G.L.  43-3-6 who has been licensed by the Department of Business Regulation to cultivate marijuana pursuant to G.L.  21-28.6-16. 
C.  "Person" means any natural person, partnership, firm, joint stock company, corporation, any employee thereof or any other legal entity. 
5.20.2 Permitted zone. Compassion center and license cultivator uses, as established under G.L.  21-28.6-1 et seq., shall be prohibited in all zoning districts in the town except in the commercial industrial districts (CI) of the town and only upon: 
(1)  Approval by the town planning board (PB); and 
(2)  The granting of a special use permit by the town zoning board of review (ZBR) in accordance with section 10 of this zoning code. 
Provided however, that a person who at the time of the effective date of this amendment shall have obtained approval from the West Warwick Fire Marshall and building official and is in receipt of a valid certificate of occupancy (C.O.) to maintain a cooperative cultivation, shall upon presentation to the West Warwick Planning Director verification of such approvals and certificate of occupancy (C.O.), shall be issued a letter of authorization to be filed with the West Warwick zoning official and provided for submission to the department of business regulation pursuant to G.L.  21-28.6-16, approving the establishment as a licensed cultivator in the zoning district in which the cooperative cultivation exists any other provisions of this zoning code notwithstanding. 
5.20.3 Approval standards. Except as provided in 5.20.2(2) such PB and ZBR approvals shall not be granted unless each of the following standards has been met: 
A.  The application pursuant to this section shall include and provide the legal name and address of the compassion center and/or of the licensed cultivator, a copy of the registration documents on file with the Secretary of State of the compassion center and/or the licensed cultivator, and the name, address and date of birth of each individual and/or the principal officer and board member or partner of the compassion center and/or the license and the address and tax assessors plat and lot number of the location of the compassion center or the license cultivator's grow. 
B.  Location. 
(1)  All uses granted under this article shall not be located within: 
(a)  Five hundred feet from the nearest residential zoning district or lot line of a residence which is a nonconforming use in a non-residential zone in existence as of the effective date of the section; or 
(b)  One thousand feet from the nearest pre-existing house of worship, school, public or private, park, playground, youth center licensed day-care center or other locations where groups of minors regularly congregate, or 
(c)  No compassion center shall be located within 2,000 feet from any other compassion center. 
(2)  The distances specified above shall be measured by a straight line from the nearest property line of the premises on which the proposed compassion center or license cultivator's grow is to be located to the nearest boundary line of the residential zoning district or the nearest property line of any of the other designated uses set forth above. 
C.  The proposed compassion center or license cultivator hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
D.  Lighting shall adequately illuminate the compassion center or freestanding license cultivator grow area, its immediate surrounding area, and accessory uses including storage areas, the parking lots, the front facade and any adjoining sidewalks and shall be hooded or oriented so as to deflect light away from adjacent properties. 
E.  The proposed compassion center or license cultivator grow areas shall implement the appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas containing marijuana and shall ensure that each location has an operational security alarm system. 
F.  All uses permitted under this article shall comply with the off-street parking requirements and regulations in section 5.9 of this zoning code. 
G.  All signs for a use permitted under this article shall be approved by the PB at the hearing held pursuant to section 5.20.2, provided however, that no freestanding accessory sign shall be permitted at any such permitted use. 
5.20.4. Findings to be made by PB and ZBR. 
A.  That the requested use at the proposed location will not adversely affect the economic welfare of the nearby community. 
B.  That the requested use at the proposed location will not adversely affect the use of any property used for school, public or private, park, playground, play field, youth center, licensed day-care center, or other location where groups of minors regularly congregate existing on the effective date of this section. 
C.  That the requested use at the proposed location is sufficiently buffered in relation to any residential area in the immediate vicinity so as not to adversely affect said area. 
D.  That the exterior appearance of the structure will be consistent with the exterior appearance of structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood, so as to prevent blight or deterioration or substantial diminishment or impairment of property values within the neighborhood. 
5.20.5 Site plan. No use permitted under the section shall be established prior to submission and approval of a site plan and building plan, prepared by the appropriate Rhode Island licensed individual in each discipline, by the PB with the technical advice of the technical review committee. The site plan shall depict all existing and proposed buildings, parking spaces, driveways, service areas and other open uses. The site plan shall show the distances between the proposed use and the boundary of the nearest residential zoning district and the property line of all other abutting uses including those uses stated in section 5.20.3.B.d(a), (b) and (c). Provided however, all site plans filed with any application to the PB or ZBR shall include only the exterior boundaries of the structure in which the compassion center and licensed cultivator grow area shall be located. For security purposes in the interior layout of the compassion center or license cultivator grow area shall not be required with any such application. 
5.20.6 Licensing. All uses permitted under this section shall comply fully with all licensing requirements of the town and the laws of the state. 
5.21.  Green, renewable or alternative energy installations and facilities, (green project). 
5.21.1  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the creation of new green projects by providing standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such green projects that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources, are compatible with the general neighborhood in which they are located and are compatible with comprehensive plan of the town. 
5.21.2  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to construction, operation and/or repair of all green projects proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section. This section also applies to physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration or size of these green projects or related equipment. All green projects shall be considered major land developments and approval of all green projects shall be in accordance with the provisions of subdivision regulations related to major land developments. 
5.21.3  Definitions. 5.21.3.1 Green, renewable or alternative energy installation and facilities (green project). For purposes of this section 5.21 green, renewable or alternative energy installation and facilities (green project) any installation or facility, excluding wind energy systems, at which electrical or any other type of energy is produced by a source other than fossil fuels, is renewable and which is safe for people and the environment. 
5.21.3.2  Major plan review. Review by the town planning board in accordance with the town subdivision regulations to determine conformance with the town comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. 
5.21.4  General requirements. 
5.21.4.1  Location. All green projects shall be located in a CI or BP zone. 
5.21.4.2.  Required area. Each green project shall be located on a parcel of land of a square footage of not less than shall be determined by the planning board as shall be required pursuant to engineering, scientific or such other expert advice received by the planning board for the efficient, safe and reasonably necessary for the operation of the green project. 
5.21.4.3  Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction and operation of all green projects shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal laws, ordinances, regulations and requirements, including but not limited to, all applicable safety, construction, electrical and communications requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part of a green project shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the Rhode Island Building Code. 
5.21.4.4  Site plan review. All green projects shall receive final plan approval from the town planning board prior to issuance of ay building permit or construction, installation or modification of the green project as provided for herein. 
5.21.4.5  Building permit and building inspection. No green project shall be constructed, installed or modified without first obtaining a building permit and being subject to such periodic inspections as shall be deemed necessary in the discretion of the building official. 
5.21.4.6  Fees and surety. All applicable fees, including but not limited to a building permit fee, as provided for herein or in this Code shall be paid and all surety bonds as required by section 5.21.14.4 shall be posted, prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
5.21.4.7  Plans and surveys. All plans submitted in any way related to construction, installation or modification of a green project shall be prepared, signed and stamped by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. All surveys submitted in any way related to the construction, installation or modification of a green project shall be Class I surveys prepared, signed and stamped by a professional surveyor licensed to practice in the state. All architecture or landscaping architecture submitted in any way related to the construction, installation or modification of a green project shall be prepared, signed and stamped by an architect or landscape architect licensed to practice in the state. 
5.21.5  Required documents. Pursuant to the major plan review process, the applicant shall provide the following documents, provided however, the planning board may in its uncontrolled discretion, waive any document requirement that that it deems appropriate. 
5.21.5.1. A Class I survey site plan showing: 
(a)  Property lines and all physical features for the project site; 
(b)  Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting and screening vegetation or structures; 
5.21.5.2. Blueprints or drawings of the green project showing the proposed layout of all buildings and structures related to the green project. 
5.21.5.3. Engineering documentation regarding all equipment, components or facilities to be used in the conversion of the source of energy into usable energy, electrical or otherwise. 
5.21.5.4. A report from any outside technical or expert consultant, who shall be chosen by the planning board, which the planning board or technical review committee deems necessary to assist the planning board or technical review committee in the review of the application. 
5.21.5.5. Name, address and contact information for proposed green project proponent. 
5.21.5.6. Names, addresses, phone numbers and signatures of all persons with an interest of any type in the real estate on which the green project will be located. 
5.21.5.7. Names, addresses, contact information and signatures of all agents and/or attorneys representing the green project proponents. 
5.21.5.8. Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site pursuant to the provisions of section 5.21.6. 
5.21.5.9. An operation and maintenance plan pursuant to the provisions of section 5.21.7. 
5.21.5.10 Proof of liability insurance in an amount approved by the planning board. 
5.21.5.11. Description of financial surety that satisfies the requirements of section 5.21.14.4. 
5.21.6  Site control. The green project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed green project. 
5.21.7.  Operation and maintenance plan. The green project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the green project which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the green project, as well as general procedures for operational maintenance of the green project. 
5.21.8  Utility notification. No green project shall be constructed until evidence has been given to the planning board that national grid or any other utility company that operates the electrical grid or other related energy source where the green project is located has been informed of the green projects owner or operator's intent to install an energy producing facility and that national grid or any other related or energy utility company has granted any and all approvals the may be required by law or otherwise. Any off-grid green project shall be exempt from this requirement. 
5.21.9  Dimensional requirements. All green projects shall be subject to lot size requirements as provided in section 5.21.4.2 and all other dimensional requirements for the CI or BP zone in which the green project is located as provided by section 5.4 standard dimensional regulations table. 
5.21.10  Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to the green project shall be subject to all zoning regulations for structures as provided for structures located in the CI or BP zone in which green project is located. All such appurtenant structures, including but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other. Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts as shall be determined by the planning board. Any required variances must be approved by the planning board as part of the major land development process. 
5.21.11  Design standards. 
5.21.11.1  Lighting. Lighting of all green projects shall comply with all requirements and regulations of the town zoning code and subdivision regulations. Lighting shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where feasible, lighting of all green projects shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution. 
5.21.11.2  Signage. All signs on green project shall comply with the town zoning code. There shall be a sign identifying the owner and the operator of the green project and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number. There shall be no signs displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer and operator of the green project. 
5.21.11.3  Utility connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined by the planning board, shall be made to place all utility connections from the green project underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical or other connections for utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility provider. 
5.21.12  Safety and environmental standards. 
5.21.12.1  Emergency services. The owner or operator of all green projects shall provide a copy of the project summary, schematic and site plan to the town fire chief, police chief and building official (hereinafter local officials). The owner and operator shall cooperate with local officials in developing an emergency response plan, which plan shall include, but not be limited to, means of emergency access to the green project for local officials. All means of shutting down the green project shall be clearly marked. The name, address and contact information for a person responsible for public inquires shall be on file at all times with local officials and the town clerk. 
5.21.12.2  Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction. Operation and maintenance of all green projects and shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
5.21.13  Monitoring and maintenance. 
5.21.13.1  Green project conditions. The green project shall be maintained in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained as required by local officials and emergency medical services. 
5.21.13.2  Modifications. All material modifications to the green project after issuance of the required building permit shall require either minor land development plan or major land development plan approval by the planning board prior to being made. The town planner shall determine whether minor or major land development approval is required. 
5.21.14.  Abandonment or decommissioning. 
5.21.14.1  Removal requirements. Any green project which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned consistent with the provisions of section 5.21.14.2 shall be removed. The green project shall be removed within 180 days after the date of discontinued operations. Notice shall be given to the town planner and local officials by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and a detailed set of the removal plans. Decommissioning shall consist of: 
(1)  Physical removal of all green project structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission or other utility lines, pipes or conduits of ever nature and kind from the site, 
(2)  Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with all federal, state and local laws, regulations and ordinances. 
(3)  Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion and in compliance with all state and local laws, regulations and ordinance and shall be approved by the town building official or his/her designee. 
5.21.14.2  Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances, the green project shall be considered abandoned when it fails to operate for a continuous period of 365 days without prior approval of the planning board. The green project shall be removed within 90 days after the 365th day. 
5.21.14.3  Failure to remove. If the owner and operator shall fail to remove the green project in accordance with the provisions of sections 5.21.14.1 and 5.21.14.2 the town may enter the property and physically remove the green project in the same manner as provided for in section 5.21.14.1. The cost of such removal shall be the responsibility of the owner and operator of the green project. 
5.21.14.4  Financial surety. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for a green project a surety bond to cover the cost of removal in the event of removal and remediation by the town, in an amount determined to be reasonable during major land development plan review by the planning board shall be posted with the town. In no event shall the amount of the bond be more than 125 percent of the cost of removal and remediation as determined by the town engineer. 
(Ord. of 3-5-96,  2-6; Res. No. 96-217,  1, 2, 9-17-96; Res. No. 99-18,  1, 1-19-99; Res. No. 99-207,  1, 8-3-99; Res. No. 2000-66,  1-3, 4-4-00; Res. No. 2000-220, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2000-24, 2-2-01; Ord. No. 2001-18, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 2004-11, 8-11-04; Ord. No. 2004-12, 8-11-04; Ord. No. 2005-4, 3-1-05, eff. 3-23-05; Ord. No. 2006-2, 4-24-06, eff. 5-13-06; Ord. No. 2006-3, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2006-5, 3-24-06, eff. 4-12-06; Ord. No. 2006-13, 7-11-06, eff. 8-12-06; Ord. No. 2006-14, 7-11-06, 8-7-06; Ord. No. 2006-28, 12-5-06; Ord. No. 2007-2, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 2007-3, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 2007-4, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 2007-15, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 2007-21, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2007-22, 2-19-08; Ord. No. 2007-23, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2008-1, 2-5-08; Ord. No. 2008-4, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 2008-5, 4-1-08; Ord. No. 2008-14, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 2008-19, 11-18-08; Ord. No. 2008-20, 11-18-08; Ord. No. 2009-09, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 2009-13, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 2010-5, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2010-6, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2010-7, 10-5-10; Ord. No. 2011-13, 6-27-11; Ord. No. 2011-20, 8-2-11; Ord. No. 2011-23, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 2012-3, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 2013-2, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 2013-3, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 2013-49, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2013-52, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 2014-1 , 2-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-4 , 6-23-15; Ord. No. 2015-7 , 8-11-15; Ord. No. 2015-13 , 10-6-2015; Ord. No. 2015-14 , 10-1-2015; Ord. No. 2017-3 , 2-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-4 , 2-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-25 , 10-3-17) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-14, adopted July 11, 2006, set out provisions for  5.14-5.14.10. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2006-28 renumbered the provisions as  5.15-5.15.10 

Section 6. - Substandard lots of record. 
    6.0  [Generally.] Except as required herein, a lot or group of contiguous lots having dimensions and/or area of lesser amounts than required in the table of standard dimension regulations for the district in which such lot is located, or which does not meet road frontage or other access requirements, may be considered as coming within the minimum lot requirements of same, provided that such lot or group of contiguous lots was shown on a recorded plat or on a recorded deed on the original effective date of this ordinance which rendered the lot(s) nonconforming and singly and separately owned and not adjoining any lot or land in the same ownership at any time subsequent to such date, may be used, or a building or structure may be erected on such lot for use, in accordance with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance, provided that proof of such separate ownership is submitted in the form of a certified abstract or chain of title showing that no contiguous property was owned by an owner of the lot(s) since the date of any previously applicable zoning ordinance. 
    6.1  Merger with contiguous lots under common ownership. It is the intent of this section to require merger of contiguous unimproved or improved substandard lots of record in the same ownership in order to create dimensionally conforming lots or to reduce the extent of dimensional nonconformance and to remove lots that fail to meet road frontage or other access requirements. Accordingly, except as provided in subparagraphs 6.1.1 through 6.1.3, if two or more contiguous lots having continuous frontage are under common ownership after August 10, 1965 (the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance) and one or more of these lots fails to meet the requirements of the Table of Standard Dimensional Regulations with regard to minimum lot area or minimum lot width, such lots shall be considered to be an individual lot of land for the purpose of this ordinance, and any lot that does not meet road frontage or access requirements that is contiguous with a lot having sufficient road frontage or access under common ownership, such lots shall be considered to be an individual lot of land for the purpose of this ordinance. Contiguous lots or parcels shall: 
a.  Share common and abutting boundary lines; 
b.  Not be separated by a street or other property. 
No single lot shall be used in violation of the requirements with regard to minimum lot area or minimum lot width, except as hereinafter provided. 
    6.1.1 Where the substandard lots of record are each occupied by principal structures, the lots are not to be considered to have merged. 
    6.1.2 Where the principal structures exist on multiple substandard lots of records, the owner may submit and the Town Planner may approve an Administrative Subdivision Plat pursuant to the Town of West Warwick Land Development and Subdivision Review Regulations which merges all or portions of the various lots into two or more undersized lots for the purpose of providing each principal structure with a separate and distinct lot; provided, however, no undeveloped substandard lot of record owned by the parties to the Administrative Subdivision shall be allowed to remain. In approving the Administrative Subdivision Plat as permitted in this subparagraph, the Town Planner may disregard any setback encroachments by preexisting buildings where the encroachments a.) arise through the creation of the new lots by the new subdivision plat or b.) are preexisting; provided no building is located on a property line. However, any new development which occurs on the lots after the date of approval of the Administrative Subdivision Plat shall be required to conform to the setback requirements of the Zoning Ordinance unless a Variance is granted pursuant to Section 9 of the Zoning Ordinance. This provision does not permit waiver of the requirement that all lots have frontage on a town-accepted public road. 
    6.1.3 Lots subject to 6.1.1 or 6.1.2 shall be considered as being subject to Section 6.2 of the Town of West Warwick Zoning Ordinance. 
    6.2  Residential use of nonconforming lots. In R-10 and R-8 residential districts, a dwelling may be erected, enlarged or altered on a nonconforming lot or on two or more abutting nonconforming lots under common ownership. R-7.5 and R-6 residential districts are specifically excluded from the below listed provisions, except in those instances where involuntary destruction or damage occurs. The use of the provisions in R-10 and R-8 residential districts is subject to the following: 
6.2.1 Where such lot or lots contain less than 75 percent of the required minimum lot area or have less than 70 feet of continuous frontage, it shall be necessary for the owner thereof to receive a variance from the zoning board in order to construct a new dwelling thereon. The zoning board shall stipulate the maximum size of the dwelling to be placed thereon and its location on said lot or lots and any other conditions it deems reasonably necessary to promote the purposes of this ordinance taking into consideration in its findings the availability of infrastructure, the character of the neighborhood, and consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
6.2.2 Where such lot or lots contain a minimum of 75 percent of the lot area and have a minimum continuous frontage of at least 70 feet, a new dwelling may be constructed thereon, without approval from the zoning board being necessary; provided, that such construction complies with the front and corner side yard, side yard, rear yard height and lot coverage requirements of the table of standard dimensional regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
6.2.3 Where there is an existing dwelling on a nonconforming lot prior to the original effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereof, such dwelling may be enlarged or altered without approval from the zoning board being necessary; provided, that such alteration or enlargement complies with the front and corner side yard, side yard, rear yard, height and lot coverage requirements of the table of standard dimensional regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    6.3  Nonresidential use of nonconforming lots. In any nonresidential district, a structure may be erected, enlarged or altered on a nonconforming lot with at least 70 feet of frontage; provided, that such alteration, enlargement or construction complies with the front and corner side yard, side yard, rear yard, height and lot coverage requirements of the Table of Standard Dimensional Regulations for the district in which such lot is located; and further provided, that the requirements of subsection 6.1 are met, if applicable. 
    6.4  Merger by death. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 6.1 above, where a legally existing substandard lot comes into the same record ownership as one or more adjacent lots solely by reason of death of a previous record owner, the owner of said lots in the same record ownership shall have three years from the date of death of the previous owner causing the lots to be in the same ownership to reconvey the lots into single and separate ownership. Failure to reconvey the lots into single and separate ownership shall result in the automatic merger of substandard lots for purposes of this ordinance. 
(Res. No. 99-19,  1, 1-19-99; Ord. No. 2001-19, 10-2-01; Ord. No. 2010-5, 9-21-10) 
Section 7. - Nonconforming development. 
    7.1  Purpose. Buildings, structures or land nonconforming by use and/or nonconforming by dimension as defined in section 7.3 herein are incompatible with and detrimental to permitted uses in the zoning districts in which they are located, cause disruption of the comprehensive land use pattern of the town, inhibit present and future development of nearby properties, and confer upon their owners and uses a position of unfair advantage. It is a fundamental principal of this chapter that nonconformities may be continued but shall not be increased and should be eventually abolished or reduced to conformity according to the fair interests of the parties involved. It is also intended that existing nonconformities shall not cause further departures from this ordinance for any properties. 
    7.2  Application. These provisions shall apply to all uses of land, buildings or structures or lots lawfully existing prior to the original effective date of this ordinance or of subsequent amendments, revisions or reenactments of this ordinance, which uses, buildings, structures or lots do not conform to the provisions of said original zoning ordinance or to such amendments, revisions or reenactments on their effective dates. 
    7.3  Unlawful conditions. No unlawful use, building, structure or lot existing at the original effective date of this ordinance or any subsequent amendment, revision or reenactment shall be deemed to be a nonconforming building, structure or use. 
    7.4  Continuation. The lawful uses of any building, structure, sign, premises, or land existing on the original effective date of the ordinance or as of any subsequent amendment of this ordinance may be continued although such use or structure or sign does not conform with the provision of this chapter. This shall not, however, be interpreted to prevent the regulation of nuisances or other conditions associated with their continuation. 
    7.5  Lot size reduction exceptions. Existing lots on which a primary structure is situated, whether conforming or non-conforming by dimension or use, may be further reduced in area even if such lot is smaller than is hereby required in the table of standard dimension regulations for each zoning district if such reduction is the result of a taking by eminent domain or by a conveyance for a public purpose. 
(Res. No. 2000-66,  4, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 2006-19, 9-5-06) 
Section 8. - Alteration to nonconforming development. 
    8.1  Alteration of nonconforming use. No addition, enlargement, expansion or intensification in the extent of the nonconforming use of premises or land shall be made. Except as provided herein, a nonconforming use, if changed, shall be changed to a permitted use and once changed to a permitted use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use of land or of a structure shall not otherwise be changed to another nonconforming use that is substantially different in nature and purpose unless a variance is granted by the zoning board which shall find that the proposed use will have a lesser undesirable impact upon the surrounding area than the preceding nonconforming use before granting same. 
    8.2  Alteration of structure nonconforming by dimension. No addition, enlargement, or expansion to a structure or building nonconforming by dimension shall be made except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. This shall not apply to second story additions, providing that there is no projection into a required yard. A conforming use within a building or structure which is nonconforming by dimension may be changed to any other conforming use. 
    8.3  Moving. A building or structure nonconforming by use or dimension shall not be moved in whole or in part unless such building or structure is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district. 
    8.4  Restoration of damaged structures. A structure nonconforming by dimension which is involuntarily destroyed or damaged in any manner or from any cause may be repaired or rebuilt within the limits of the original dimensions and upon the original location of such structure without conforming to the provision of this ordinance, provided that a reasonable attempt has been made to comply with this ordinance. 
    8.5  Abandonment. If a nonconforming use is abandoned, it may not be reestablished. Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of some overt act, or failure to act, which would lead one to believe that the owner of the nonconforming use neither claims nor retains any interest in continuing the nonconforming use unless said owner can demonstrate an intent not to abandon the use. An involuntary interruption of nonconforming use, such as by fire and natural catastrophe does not establish the intent to abandon the nonconforming use. However, if any nonconforming use is halted for a period of one year, the owner of such nonconforming use will be presumed to have abandoned such nonconforming use, unless such presumption is rebutted by presentation of sufficient evidence of intent not to abandon the use. 
    8.6  Demolition. If a building or structure nonconforming by dimension or a building or structure housing a nonconforming use, is demolished at the direction of the owner or other authorized parties, the building or structure or nonconforming use shall not be reestablished, and any future building, structure or use of the lot, or premises shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
    8.7  Maintenance and repair. A structure nonconforming by dimension or a building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall be properly maintained in good repair as may be required by any other ordinance or statute, provided that any such work does not enlarge or extend any nonconforming use or otherwise increase any nonconformity. 
    8.8  Prior building permits. Any building permit issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto shall be activated within one year from the date of issuance or otherwise automatically become null and void. Any such permit for use which by virtue of the adoption of this ordinance or any amendment thereto would become nonconforming shall become null and void and shall not be renewed if not activated within one year from the date of original issuance. 
    8.9  Destruction exceeding 50 percent of replacement cost. Any structure containing a nonconforming use or located on a nonconforming lot, including a nonconforming structure which is damaged by fire, or natural disaster to the extent that the cost of reconstruction or repair exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost of such structure as determined by the building inspector, shall not be reestablished as a nonconformance unless granted a variance by the zoning board. It is the intent of this subsection that the zoning board, if granting such variance, shall require that any reestablishment of nonconformance conform to the terms of this ordinance to the greatest extent possible. 
    8.10  Destruction equal to or less than 50 percent of replacement cost. Any structure containing a nonconforming use or located on a nonconforming lot, including a nonconforming structure which is damaged by fire, or natural disaster to the extent that the cost of reconstruction or repair equals or is less than 50 percent of the replacement cost of such structure, as determined by the building inspector, shall be permitted to reestablish its nonconformance status; provided that reconstruction and repairs be fully completed within one year of the date of the destructive event and that such reestablishment of nonconformance shall not exceed the extent of nonconformance existing prior to the damage. 
Section 9. - Variances. 
    9.1 An application for relief from the literal requirements of the zoning ordinance because of hardship may be made by any person, group, agency, or corporation by filing with the town clerk an application describing the request and supported by such data and evidence as may be required by the zoning board of review or this ordinance. The town clerk shall immediately transmit each application received fully completed to the zoning board of review and shall transmit a copy of each application to the planning board. 
    9.2 In granting a variance the zoning board of review may apply special conditions as provided for in this ordinance. 
    9.3 The zoning board of review, immediately upon receipt of an application for a variance in the application of the literal terms of the zoning ordinance may request that the planning board or town planner report its findings and recommendations, including a statement on the general consistence of the application with the goals and purposes of the comprehensive plan of the town, in writing to the zoning board of review within 30 days of receipt of the application from that board. The zoning board of review may refer a copy of the application to any other town departments, such as the public works department or fire department, for findings and recommendations on matters related to public health, safety and welfare. 
    9.4 Ten complete copies of the application must be submitted. The application shall include the following completed data in order to be placed on a hearing agenda. 
9.4.1 A completed variance form indicating the variance sought and the grounds for the variance; 
9.4.2 Names and addresses of all owners of the property within a 200-foot radius as measured from the perimeter of the subject property and as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records of the town; 
9.4.2.1 If the subject property for which the variance is being requested lies within the BP business park zoning district, then the applicant shall also include the names and addresses of all owners of the property within said zoning district; 
9.4.3 An accurate site map drawn at a scale of 1? = 20' (or 1? = 40') on a sheet(s) 24 inches by 36 inches showing the following for the subject property: 
9.4.3.1 The shape, dimension, area and street number of the subject property; 
9.4.3.2 The location, size and use of all existing and proposed conditions; 
9.4.3.3 The zoning use district boundaries; 
9.4.3.4 North arrow; 
9.4.3.5 Title block in the lower right hand corner showing names(s) of the property owners; Assessor's plat and lot number of the subject property; date of plan; and a blank signature space for the Chairperson of the zoning board of review; and 
9.4.3.6 Parking areas and all existing and proposed impervious surfaces, groundcover, and topography to a two-foot contour (existing and proposed) if any change in lot coverage, change in topography or impervious surface is proposed. 
9.4.3.7 Such other information as may be necessary for the execution and enforcement of this chapter. 
9.4.4 An accurate radius map drawn at a scale of 1" = 100' which includes: 
9.4.4.1 A title block in the lower right hand corner showing name(s) of the property owner; assessor's plat and lot number of the subject property; and, date of plan; 
9.4.4.2 For all property within a 200-foot radius as measured from the perimeter of the subject property: 
The shape, dimension and area of the property; 
The location of all zoning use district boundary lines; and 
The street numbers and assessor's plat and lot numbers; 
9.4.4.3 The general location, shape and use of all existing buildings and structures within a 200-foot radius of the subject property; and 
9.4.4.4 Such other information as may be necessary for the execution and enforcement of this ordinance. 
9.4.4.5 The application fee as set by the town council, to cover the costs associated with review, hearing, notice, and recording fee. 
    9.5 Variance procedure. The zoning board shall hold a public hearing on any application for variance in an expeditious manner after receipt in proper form of an application and shall give public notice thereof at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. 
9.5.1 Notification, including the date, time, place, purpose of the hearing, and street address of the subject property shall: 
9.5.1.1 Be sent by first class mail to the applicant; 
9.5.1.2 Be sent registered mail, return receipt requested, to all owners of real property whose property is located at or within a 200-foot radius of the perimeter of the subject area, as measured from the corners of the subject area; such notice shall be sent to the last known address of such owners as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records of the town; 
9.5.1.3 Be sent by first class mail to the city or town council of any city or town which is located at or within 200 feet of the perimeter of the subject area; 
9.5.1.4 Be sent first class mail to the city or town council of any city or town where there is a public or quasi-public water source or private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, at or within 2,000 feet of the subject property, regardless of the municipal boundaries; 
9.5.1.5 Be sent to the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district, or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or watersheds and parcels of land within 2,000 feet thereof. 
9.5.1.6 If the subject property for which the variance is being requested lies within the BP business park zoning district, then the notification is to also be sent registered or certified mail to all owners of real property whose property is located within the BP business park zoning district; such notice shall be sent to the last known address of such owners as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records of the town. 
9.5.1.7 The cost of notification shall be borne by the applicant. 
    9.6 Determination. Any party may appear at the hearing in person or by attorney. The hearing held by the zoning board of review is a public meeting and all decisions reached by the zoning board of review shall be made and voted upon at a public meeting. The board shall hear all evidence on the variance request, and consider the written reports of town staff when reaching a decision on the findings required. 
    9.7 Implementation, appeal. 
9.7.1 The town clerk, acting in capacity as clerk for the zoning board of review, shall be responsible for the recording in the land evidence records of the town of West Warwick, all decisions on variance applications. The decision shall also be posted in a location visible to the public in the town Hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the decision. 
9.7.2 Any variance granted by the zoning board of review shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless the applicant shall within that one year period exercise the right granted by the decision. The board may upon application filed within the one-year period and for good cause shown, extend the limitation for one additional one-year period. The application for an extension need not be advertised. 
9.7.3 No application for a variance involving the same parcel and same request, which was denied or withdrawn with prejudice may be resubmitted for a variance for a period of one-year from the date of such denial or withdrawal with prejudice, unless the zoning board of review determines there is substantial change of circumstances, which justifies a variance application. 
9.7.4 If the board allows an amendment to an original application which changes the terms under which the application as advertised or which alters the basic facts upon which the application was presented, the amended application shall be readvertised and referred to the planning board. 
9.7.5 Any aggrieved party may appeal decisions of the zoning board of review to the superior court for Kent County. 
9.7.6 All work approved by the issuance of a variance shall be carried out only in conformity with the application and any conditions, modifications and restrictions set by the zoning board of review. Minor changes, not exceeding six inches, shall be submitted to the building inspector for approval. Changes exceeding six inches shall be resubmitted to the zoning board of review in the form of a new application. Any work carried out in violation of this provision shall be ordered halted and fully removed. 
    9.8 Findings required. In granting a variance, the zoning board of review shall require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
9.8.1 That the hardship from which the applicant seeks relief is due to the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure and not to the general characteristics of the surrounding area; and is not due to a physical or economic disability of the applicant; 
9.8.2 That the hardship is not the result of any prior action of the applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the applicant to realize greater financial gain; 
9.8.3 That the granting of the requested variance will not alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or purpose of the zoning ordinance or the comprehensive plan upon which the ordinance is based; and 
9.8.4 That the relief to be granted is the least relief necessary. 
    9.9 The zoning board of review shall, in addition to the above standards, require that evidence be entered into the record of the proceedings showing that: 
9.9.1 In granting a use variance the subject land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is required to conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. Nonconforming use of neighboring land or structures in the same district and permitted use of lands or structures in an adjacent district shall not be considered in granting a use variance; and 
9.9.2 In granting a dimensional variance, that the hardship that will be suffered by the owner of the subject property if the dimensional variance is not granted shall amount to more than a mere inconvenience, which shall mean that there is no other reasonable alternative to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of one's property. The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief. 
    9.10 Decisions shall be recorded and filed in the office of the zoning board of review within 30 working days from the date when the decision was rendered, and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. of 3-5-96,  7; Ord. No. 2007-5, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 2008-17, 10-7-08; Ord. No. 2012-4, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 2013-43, 8-20-13; Ord. No. 2017-23 , 10-3-17) 
Section 10. - Special use permits. 
    10.1 The zoning board of review is designated the approval authority for special use permits. 
    10.2 In granting a special use permit, the zoning board of review shall require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
10.2.1 The special use permit shall: 
10.2.1.1 Be compatible with neighboring land uses; 
10.2.2.2 Not create a nuisance in the neighborhood; 
10.2.2.3 Not hinder the future development of the town; 
10.2.2.4 Conform to all applicable sections of this ordinance; and 
10.2.2.5 Be in conformance with the purposes and intent of the West Warwick comprehensive plan and applicable standards of this ordinance. 
    10.3 In granting a special use permit, the zoning board of review may apply such special conditions as provided in this ordinance. 
    10.4 Intent and eligibility. Within the town generally and in particular some zoning districts, certain uses are specified in the table of use regulations as allowed by special use permit only. These uses are of a nature requiring review, in accordance with the General Laws of Rhode Island, to determine whether they should be permitted in specific locations; if they meet special conditions and safeguards; and what additional conditions may be required if permission is granted. 
    10.5 Application process. Applications for special use permits shall be filed with the town clerk acting in capacity as clerk for the zoning board of review. Eighteen complete copies of the application must be submitted. The application shall include the following completed data in order to be placed on a hearing agenda: 
10.5.1 A completed special use permit form indicating the special use permit sought, the grounds for the permit, and information on the scale and size of the proposed use as applicable. 
10.5.2 Names and addresses of all owners of property within a 200-foot radius as measured from the perimeter of the subject property, and as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records of the town. 
10.5.2.1 If the subject property for which the special use permit is being requested lies within the BP business park zoning district, then the applicant shall also include the names and addresses of all owners of property within said zoning district, and as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records of the town. 
10.5.3 An accurate site map drawn at a scale of 1 inch equals 20 feet (or 1 inch equals 40 feet) on a sheet(s) 24 by 36 inches showing for the subject property the same information as is required by subsections 9.4.3 and 9.4.4. 
10.5.4 Such other information as may be necessary for the execution and enforcement of this chapter. 
10.5.5 The application fee as set by the town council, to cover the costs associated with review, hearing, notice, and recording fee. 
    10.6 An applicant may apply for, and be issued, a dimensional variance in conjunction with a special use permit. If the special use could not exist without the dimensional variance, the zoning board of review shall consider the special use permit and the dimensional variance together to determine if the granting the special use is appropriate based on both the special use criteria and the dimensional variance evidentiary standards. 
    10.7 Review process. 
10.7.1  Reserved. 
10.7.2 Upon receipt of a special use permit application, fully completed, in proper form, the town clerk shall refer a copy to the technical review committee for findings and recommendations on matters related to public safety, health and welfare. 
10.7.3 The board shall in an expeditious manner fix a date and time for a public hearing on a special use permit application. Notification including the date, time, place, purpose of the hearing, and street address of the subject property shall: 
10.7.3.1 Be published at least 14 days prior to the date of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; 
10.7.3.2 Be sent by first class mail to the applicant; 
10.7.3.3 Be sent registered mail, return receipt requested, by the applicant, to all owners of real property whose property is located at or within a 200-foot radius of the perimeter of the subject area, as measured from the corners of the subject area; such notice shall be sent to the last known address of such owners as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records of the town; 
10.7.3.4 Be sent by first class mail, by the applicant, to the city or town council of any city or town which is located at or within 200 feet of the perimeter of the subject area; 
10.7.3.5 Be sent first class mail, by the applicant, to the city or town council of any city or town where there is a public or quasi-public water source or private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, at or within 2,000 feet of the subject property, regardless of the municipal boundaries; 
10.7.3.6 Be sent, by the applicant, to the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district, or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as public water source and that is at or within 2,000 feet of the subject property, provided however, that the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district or private water company has filed with the building inspector in the town a map survey which shall be kept as a public record, showing areas of surface water resources and/or watersheds and parcels of land at or within 2,000 feet thereof. 
10.7.3.7 If the subject property for which the special use permit is being requested lies within the BP business park zoning district, then the notification is to also be sent registered or certified mail, by the applicant, to all owners of real property whose property is located within the BP business park zoning district; such notice shall be sent to the last known address of such owners as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records of the town. 
10.7.3.8 The cost of notification shall be borne by the applicant. 
    10.8 Determination. 
10.8.1 Any party may appear at the hearing in person, or by attorney. The hearing held by the zoning board of review is a public meeting and all decisions reached by the board shall be made and voted upon at public meeting. The board shall hear all evidence on the special use permit request; and consider the written reports of town staff when reaching a decision on the findings required. 
10.8.2 Decisions shall be recorded and filed in the office of the zoning board of review within 30 working days from the date when the decision was rendered, and shall be a public record. 
    10.9 Implementation, appeal. 
10.9.1 The town clerk, acting in capacity as clerk for the zoning board of review, shall be responsible for the recording in the land evidence records of the town of West Warwick, decisions on special use permits. The decision shall also be posted in a location visible to the public in town hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the decision. 
10.9.2 Any special use permit granted by the zoning board of review shall expire within one year from the date of its issuance, unless the applicant shall within that one-year period exercise the right granted by the decision. The board may upon application filed within the one-year period and for good cause shown, extend the limitation for one additional one-year period. The application for an extension need not be advertised. 
10.9.3 No application for special use permit involving the same parcel and same request, which was denied or withdrawn with prejudice, may be resubmitted for a special use permit for a period of one-year from the date of such denial or withdrawal with prejudice, unless the zoning board of review determines there is a substantial change of circumstances, which justifies a special use permit application. 
10.9.4 If the board allows an amendment to an original application which changes the terms under which the application was advertised or which alters the basic facts upon which the application was presented, the amended application shall be readvertised and referred to the planning board. 
10.9.5 Any aggrieved party may appeal decisions of the zoning board of review to the superior court for Kent County. 
10.9.6 All work approved by the issuance of a special use permit shall be carried out only in conformity with the application and any conditions, modifications and restrictions set by the zoning board of review. Minor changes, not exceeding six inches, shall be submitted to the building inspector for approval. Changes exceeding six inches shall be resubmitted to the zoning board of review in the form of a new application. Any work carried out in violation of this provision shall be ordered halted and fully removed. 
(Ord. of 3-5-96,  8; Ord. No. 2007-5, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 2008-17, 10-7-08; Ord. No. 2012-4, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 2013-43, 8-20-13; Ord. No. 2017-23 , 10-3-17) 
Section 11. - Special conditions. 
    11.1 In making any determination upon which it is required to pass after public hearing under the zoning ordinance, the zoning board of review or planning board may apply such special conditions that may in the opinion of the board, be required to promote the intent and purposes of the West Warwick comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance. Failure to abide by any special conditions attached to a grant shall constitute a zoning violation. Such special conditions shall be based on competent credible evidence on the record, be incorporated into the decision, and may include but are not limited to provisions for: 
11.1.1 Minimizing adverse impacts of the development upon other land, including the type, intensity, design and performance of activities; 
11.1.2 Controlling the sequence of development, including when it must be commenced and completed; 
11.1.3 Controlling the duration of use or development and the time within which any temporary structure must be removed; 
11.1.4 Assuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required public improvements; 
11.1.5 Designating the exact location and nature of development; and 
11.1.6 Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats, or specifications. 
Section 12. - Vested rights. 
    12.1 Any application for development under this ordinance including an application for a special use permit, variance, land development project, or development plan review, shall be considered vested when the submitted application is deemed to be substantially complete by the proper administrator and/or official(s) designated to receive such applications. To be considered substantially complete, an application shall include all required forms, plans, supporting documentation, and required fees. Any application considered by the town under the provisions of this section shall be reviewed according to the regulations applicable in this ordinance in force at the time the application was deemed substantially complete. 
    12.2 If an application for development under the provisions of this section is approved, the applicant shall initiate and substantially complete development of the property within the time limit established for each of these actions in the appropriate section of this ordinance. 
    12.3 Failure to initiate development of the property prior to the time limit established at approval, shall render the approval null and void. Any development of the property proposed after the lapse of the time limit established at approval, shall require a resubmission of development plans by the applicant subject to the regulations in the appropriate section of this ordinance. 
Section 13. - Publication and availability of the zoning ordinance and zoning map. 
    13.1 Printed copies of this ordinance and zoning map of the town shall be available to the general public and shall be revised to include all amendments. A reasonable charge shall be made for copies to reflect printing and distribution costs. The town clerk shall be responsible for providing these copies and collecting fees. 
    13.2 Upon publication of a zoning ordinance and zoning map and any amendments thereto, the town clerk shall send a copy, without charge, to the associate director of the division of planning of the department of administration of the State of Rhode Island and the state law library. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Section 14. - Modification. 
    14.1 The building inspector is authorized to issue modifications or adjustments from the literal dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance in the instance of the construction, alteration, or structural modification of a structure of record in the form of modification permits. The maximum percent allowed for a modification shall not exceed 25 percent of any of the dimensional requirements specified below. A modification shall not permit moving of lot lines. Vacant lots shall not be eligible for the application of a modification. 
_____
    14.2 [Minimum dimension schedule.] 
MINIMUM DIMENSION UPON MODIFICATION 
(X = No Modification Permitted) 
Dimension (Feet) District R-10 R-8 R-7.5 R-6 B CI Minima  Yards   Front 25 20 15 15 X 40   Principal bldg.:    Interior side X X X X X 15    Corner side 25 20 15 15 X 40    Rear 25 20 X X X 40   Accessory bldg.:    Interior side X X X X X 15    Corner side 15 15 15 15 15 40    Rear side X X X X X 40 Maxima  Height 35 30 40 40 X X  Lot coverage (%) 25 30 30 35 X 35  
_____
    14.3 Within ten days of receipt of a request for a modification, the building inspector shall make a decision as to the suitability of the requested modification based on the following determinations: 
14.3.1 The modification requested is reasonably necessary for the full enjoyment of the permitted use; 
14.3.2 If the modification is granted, neighboring property will neither be substantially injured nor its appropriate use substantially impaired; 
14.3.3 The modification requested is in harmony with the purposes and intent of the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance; and 
14.3.4 The modification requested does not require a variance of a flood hazard requirement. 
    14.4 Upon an affirmative determination, the building inspector shall notify, by registered or certified mail, all property owners abutting the property which is the subject of the modification request, and shall indicate the street address of the subject property in the notice, and shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the town that the modification will be granted unless written objection is received within 30 days of the public notice. If written objection is received within 30 days, the request for a modification shall be denied. In that case the changes requested will be considered a request for a variance and may only be issued by the zoning board of review following the standard procedures for variances. If no written objections are received within 30 days, the building inspector shall grant the modification. The building inspector may apply such special conditions to the permit as may, in the opinion of the inspector, be required to conform to the intent and purposes of the zoning ordinance. The building inspector shall keep public records of all requests for modifications, and of findings, determinations, special conditions, and any objections received. Costs of any notice required under this subsection shall be borne by the applicant requesting the modification. 
Section 15. - Reserved. 
Section 16. - Pre-application conference. 
    16.1 Applicability. Applicants for multifamily residential development, residential community facilities, general community facilities, and all proposed principal uses in nonresidential districts shall request a pre-application conference with the planning board, or its designated representative(s). A pre-application conference is intended to allow the designated agency to: 
16.1.1 Acquaint the applicant with the comprehensive plan and any specific plans that apply to the parcel, as well as the zoning and other ordinances that affect the proposed development; 
16.1.2 Suggest improvements to the proposed design on the basis of a review of the sketch plan; 
16.1.3 Advise the applicant to consult appropriate authorities on the character and placement of the public utility services; and, 
16.1.4 Help the applicant to understand the steps to be taken to receive approval. 
Section 17. - Development plan review. 
    17.1 Purpose. The purpose of the development plan review process is to establish procedures pursuant to the permitting process which will enable the town to perform a comprehensive review of certain proposed developments. The development plan review (DPR) procedure shall not be used to deny an applicant a permitted use of the property as established by the zoning ordinance. The development plan review requirements are designed to assure safe, orderly and harmonious development of property in a manner that shall: 
17.1.1 Provide suitable safeguard and consideration for land use and site and architectural design that is compatible with adjacent districts and uses, and to avoid adverse impacts on the public health, safety and welfare of the Town of West Warwick; 
17.1.2 Permit development to an extent commensurate with the availability and capacity of public facilities and services and promote the safe circulation of traffic throughout the town; 
17.1.3 Encourage the provision of open space and public access and give due consideration to the quality and design of landscaping; 
17.1.4 Encourage adequate consideration for the proper control of erosion, surface and subsurface drainage and pollution; 
17.1.5 Facilitate orderly and harmonious site development including safe and convenient provision and design of egress and ingress, off-street parking, truck loading, internal circulation, emergency access, refuse disposal, outdoor storage, signage, and lighting; 
17.1.6 Permit the development of business, commercial and industrial uses in designated districts, subject to the standards delineated in the applicable sections of this ordinance and the findings of the development plan review procedure; 
17.1.7 Give developers reasonable assurance of ultimate approval before incurring the cost of final design and engineering while providing assurances to the town and the general public that the approved project will meet the approved objectives and standards; 
17.1.8 Preserve natural, historical, and cultural resources to the maximum extent feasible; 
17.1.9 Protect appropriate vistas and environmental qualities of the town; 
17.1.10 Assure consideration of the various elements of the comprehensive plan of the town. 
    17.2 Sequence. No permit to build, alter or expand any of the uses requiring development plan review as outlined below shall be issued by the building official, until final approval in accordance with this section has been received. The applicant is responsible for obtaining a building permit as is required by the town ordinances. The applicant must submit all plans and documents normally required for a building permit. The approved final plan shall be part of this submission. The development plan review process will not preclude the need to meet other town requirements as they may apply to a particular development. No other town permit requirements, or any necessity to gain approval by another legal jurisdiction shall be deemed to be authority by virtue of the development plan approval under this ordinance. No prior issuance of approval by another legal jurisdiction shall have any influence whatsoever over the development plan review required by this ordinance. 
    17.3 Coordination with the zoning board of review. The development plan review process shall take place prior to consideration of a variance and/or special use permit. The zoning board of review shall not consider an application for a variance and/or special use permit until the applicant has received a decision from the planning board, if required in accordance with these regulations. In the event a variance and/or a special use permit is granted by the zoning board of review, its decision shall not impinge upon the ability of the planning board to establish and enforce all standards and objectives of development plan review. The decision of the planning board shall be considered by the zoning board of review in its decision of the matter before it. In the event of a variance, the report of the planning board is only advisory to the zoning board of review. 
    17.4 The development plan review process is intended to complement information provided to the zoning board of review in its deliberations and should not require further plan preparation therewith, except as necessary to meet legal requirements set forth under state statute or the town zoning ordinance for the consideration of any special use permit and/or variance. 
    17.5 Uses requiring development plan review. Any application for a building permit for any use, building or structure, shall require development plan review. Development plan review is intended to ensure that all proposed development is in compliance with the applicable provisions of the Town of West Warwick Zoning Ordinance and that there shall be no adverse impact on the public health, safety and welfare of the Town of West Warwick. No building permit shall be issued by the building official except upon the authorization of and in conformity with plans approved through the development plan review process. 
There are hereby established two classifications of development plan review (DPR): 
17.5.1 Administrative development plan review. Administrative development plan review shall be conducted by the building official in consultation with the town planner as part of the building permit review process and shall be necessary for all uses requiring a building permit or parking areas as described in section 17.7. A building permit shall be issued upon a finding by the building official in consultation with the town planner that a development is in full compliance with all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and that there will be no adverse impact on the public health, safety and welfare of the Town of West Warwick. A finding of noncompliance with applicable zoning and/or a determination of adverse impact will result in the development being referred to the planning board and/or the zoning board of review for the required development plan approval and/or zoning approvals. 
17.5.2 Planning board development plan review. A planning board development plan review shall be required for any nonresidential development project requiring a building permit that does not fully comply with all applicable zoning regulations and/or has been determined to potentially have an adverse impact on the public health, safety and welfare of the Town of West Warwick. 
Planning board development plan review shall also be required for any multi-family development, mixed use development, for the establishment of any residential mobile home park (RMH), any "major development" in a village design control district (VDCD) and/or the arctic design control district (ADCD), for the establishment of any telecommunications tower, wind energy conversion system (WECS), adult entertainment use, compassion center, licensed cultivator, green, renewable or alternative energy installations and facilities (green project) and/or any development requiring a zone change by the town council including but not limited to the establishment of a mill reuse zone. 
    17.6 Reserved. 
    17.7 Guidelines for planning board development plan review. The planning board shall review site plans and supporting documentation and shall conduct development plan review within 60 days of receiving a fully completed application (including appropriate revisions and conditions). No more than two extensions of 30 days may be granted by the planning board for reasons of insufficient data previously requested; indication that development plan standards may not be met unless the applicant amends the plan; lack of quorum; request by the applicant for good and sufficient reason and agreement thereto by the planning board. The applicant shall prove to the board that the following standards will be met: 
17.7.1 That the design of the proposed development will be consistent with the goals of the West Warwick comprehensive plan, and will implement the purposes of development plan review. 
17.7.2 That erosion will be adequately controlled during and after construction and will not adversely affect adjacent or neighboring property or public facilities and services. 
17.7.3 That provisions have been made for storm-water and drainage facilities, and that increased runoff due to development on the site will not exceed that runoff that would occur under vacant land conditions (zero net increase). 
17.7.4 That the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the site and in relation to the access street will be safe and convenient and adequate provision has been made for snow removal. 
17.7.5 That all utilities, infrastructure, streets, roadways, sidewalks, walkways and parking area improvements will be provided for the development in a manner meeting the applicable requirements and standards of the town. Construction standards for utilities and improvements serving the public, shall comply with the requirements of the department of public works. 
17.7.6 That the regulation standards as set forth in section 5.8 be complied with in all requests. 
17.7.7 That the proposed development and all uses and structures therein, shall comply in all respects with this ordinance, and the ordinance of soil erosion and sediment control, chapter 15.5 of the Code. 
    17.8 Application requirements. 
17.8.1 Generally. The applicant for planning board development plan review shall file with the planning board ten copies each of the application and the preliminary site plan. The application and plans must be accompanied by the required filing fee and any supporting documentation as determined in the pre-application conference no less than three weeks prior to a regularly scheduled meeting. The application shall be accompanied by a list of the names and addresses of all abutters as of 30 days prior to the date and time of filing. 
17.8.2 Fee. The filing fee as set by resolution of the town council shall accompany the application. 
17.8.3 Required contents of the preliminary development plan. 
17.8.3.1 All plans shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 40 feet. All distances shall be in feet and decimals of a foot and all bearings shall be given to the nearest ten seconds. Plan and survey standards shall meet the criteria set in the handbook entitled "Procedural and Technical Standards for the Practice of Land Surveying in the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations," effective April 1, 1994, as amended. Measurement standards for surveys shall be class I surveys. 
17.8.3.2 A radius map containing the requirements of subsection 9.4.4. 
17.8.3.3 North arrow, scale of map, assessor's plat information (plat and lot), and name address, license number and seal and signature of the person preparing the plan. 
17.8.3.4 Date of plan. All revisions must be noted and dated. 
17.8.3.5 Name of the proposed development, and the name and address of both the record owner and applicant. (If the owner of record is a corporation, the name and address of the president and secretary shall be submitted with the application). 
17.8.3.6 The assessor's plat information (plat and lot), and names of all owners of record of all properties within 200 feet of the subject property. 
17.8.3.7 Boundaries of the property and lines of existing streets, lots, reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use, including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way. The boundaries of the property shall also be marked in the field by survey flags, or some other means acceptable to the planning board to identify the limits of the property. 
17.8.3.8 Acreage of parcel to the nearest tenth of an acre. 
17.8.3.9 Zoning district(s) and boundaries. 
17.8.3.10 A zoning data table showing calculations necessary to determine conformance to zoning regulations. 
17.8.3.11 All distances as measured along the right-of-way lines and existing streets abutting the property to the nearest intersection with any other public street. 
17.8.3.12 Existing contours (with intervals of two feet where slopes are more than three percent but less than 15 percent and five feet where slopes are 15 percent or more) referred to town datum, are to be indicated by a dashed line. Where any changes in contours are proposed, finished grades must be shown as solid lines. Spot elevations must also be shown. At least two benchmarks shall be referenced. 
17.8.3.13 Location of existing environmental features including general soil types, rock outcrops, wooded areas and major street trees 12-inch dbh caliper and over, watercourses, depressions, ponds, marshes, wetlands, floodplains, and other significant environmental features including previous flood elevation of water courses, ponds and marsh areas as determined by survey. If any portion of the proposed development is located within a flood hazard area, base flood elevation data must be provided. 
17.8.3.14 Location and spot elevations of existing buildings, which shall remain and all other existing structures such as walls, fences, culverts, bridges, roadways, etc. Structures to be removed shall be indicated by dashed lines. 
17.8.3.15 A place for the signature of the town planner or planning board chairman must be provided on all plans and/or documents to be approved by the planning board. 
17.8.3.16 The proposed use or uses of land, buildings, structures, and equipment and the proposed location of buildings, structures, and equipment including proposed grades. Such features must be indicated on a separate drawing where required. Floor space of all buildings shall also be indicated. 
17.8.3.17 The location, type and density of land use to be allocated to parts of the site to be developed. 
17.8.3.18 Layout, floor plans, architectural elevations, (with measurements as needed for each interpretation) and height (including relationship to existing and proposed grades) of proposed buildings, structures and equipment. 
17.8.3.19 Sketches as needed to illustrate the visual impact on the community. 
17.8.3.20 Location, size, sketch, and illumination, if any of proposed signs. 
17.8.3.21 A drainage plan that incorporates the change in land use and routes of storm flow through the site to meet requirements set by the town shall be submitted. The drainage plan shall consist of a plan showing existing and proposed drainage structures, drainage basin areas and drainage flow paths. Also included shall be a report summarizing drainage calculations. The rational method, SCS TR55, SCS TR20 or accepted approved method shall be used for runoff calculations. The design storm condition shall be one with a 25-year return period. Where use of aboveground or underground retention or detention basins is proposed, the 25-year design storm shall be used in design calculations, unless such detention or retention system is located in a special flood hazard zone, in which case a 100-year design storm shall be used. Calculations shall include predevelopment and post-development conditions. Predevelopment runoff rates based on assumption of vacant land site conditions on the site shall be maintained, unless approved by the planning board. The planning board may make any referrals it deems necessary to evaluate proposed drainage plans. 
For all retention or detention basins, whether aboveground or underground, percolation tests or test pits shall be performed at the proposed site of the basin. This information will determine the suitability of the subsurface to accommodate the designed basin. 
17.8.3.22 Location of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers, water mains and other utilities, whether publicly or privately owned, above or underground showing pipe sizes, grades and directions of flow. All proposed sanitary sewers, water mains and other utilities shall conform with the applicable requirements and standards of the town and the appropriate utility. Final approval of utility plans by the appropriate utility authority shall be required prior to final development plan approval. 
17.8.3.23 The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and time of proposed outdoor lighting, and the location of any outdoor storage areas and dumpsters. 
17.8.3.24 The proposed screening and landscaping plan, as well as all other landscaping materials and treatments such as paving, lighting and street furniture. Such plan shall indicate the location, type and size of all plantings both at time of planting and maturity. The plan shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect. 
17.8.3.25 All means of vehicular access to and from the site onto public streets showing the size and location of driveways, curb cuts, parking and loading areas, and other offsite traffic improvements necessary to ensure public safety. The planning board may make any referrals and require of the applicant any studies it deems necessary to evaluate traffic and circulation plans. 
17.8.3.26 All proposed streets with profiles indicating grading, and cross-sections showing width of roadway and location and width of sidewalks. All proposed improvements must be designed and constructed according to the standards and specifications of the town. 
17.8.3.27 Such other information as may be required to show that the details of the development plan are in accordance with this section and all applicable requirements and standards of this ordinance. 
    17.9 Zoning compliance review. 
(A)  There are hereby established zoning compliance review fees for all requests to review issues of zoning compliance by the zoning enforcement officer. 
(B)  Said fees shall be set by the West Warwick town council through a resolution that may be amended from time to time. 
(Res. No. 97-09, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2004-2, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 2014-20 , 12-16-14; Ord. No. 2017-4 , 2-28-17) 
ARTICLE III. - ADOPTION 

Section 18. - Power of town council to adopt; consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    18.1 For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare, the town council shall have the power, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, to adopt, amend, or repeal, and to provide for the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of this zoning ordinance. The provisions of this zoning ordinance are set forth as contained herein and incorporates the official zoning map of the town. The zoning ordinance, and all amendments thereto, shall be consistent and in accordance with the town's comprehensive plan, and provides for the implementation of the West Warwick comprehensive plan. 
Section 19. - Procedure for adoption or amendment. 
    19.1 The town clerk shall be the officer to receive a proposal for adoption, amendment, or repeal of the zoning ordinance or zoning map. Immediately upon receipt of the proposal, the town clerk shall refer the proposal to the town council, and to the planning board for study and recommendation. The planning board shall, in turn, notify and seek the advice of the town planning department, and shall report to the town council within 45 days after receipt of the proposal, giving its findings and recommendations as prescribed in section 20 of this ordinance. Where a proposal for adoption, amendment, or repeal of the zoning ordinance or zoning map is made by the town planning board, the requirements for study by the board may be waived, provided that the proposal by the planning board include its findings and recommendations pursuant to section 20. The town council shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of receipt of a proposal, giving proper notice as prescribed in section 20. The town council shall render a decision on any proposal within 45 days after the date of completion of the public hearing. The provisions of this section pertaining to deadlines shall not be construed to apply to any extension consented to by an applicant. 
Section 20. - Review by planning board or commission. 
    20.0 Among its findings and recommendations to the town council with respect to a proposal for adoption, amendment, or repeal of the zoning ordinance or zoning map, the planning board shall: 
20.1. Include a statement on the general consistency of the proposal with the West Warwick comprehensive plan, including the goals and policies statement, the implementation program, and all other applicable elements of the comprehensive plan; and 
20.2 Include a demonstration of recognition and consideration of each of the applicable purposes of zoning, as presented in section 2 herein. 
Section 21. - Notice and hearing requirements. 
    21.1 The zoning ordinance may be adopted, repealed, or amended after a public hearing has been held upon the question before the town council. The town council shall first give notice of the public hearing by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least once each week for three successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing, which may include the week in which the hearing is to be held, at which hearing opportunity shall be given to all persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed ordinance. Written notice, which may be a copy of the newspaper notice, shall be mailed to the Associate Director of the Division of Planning of the Rhode Island department of Administration, and, where applicable, to the parties specified in subsections 21.2, 21.3, 21.4, and 21.5 of this section, at least two weeks prior to the hearing. The newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall: 
21.1.1 Specify the place of the hearing and the date and time of its commencement; 
21.1.2 Indicate that adoption, amendment, or repeal of a zoning ordinance is under consideration; 
21.1.3 Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the ordinance that may be printed once in its entirety, or summarize and describe the matter under consideration; 
21.1.4 Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under consideration may be obtained or examined and copied; and 
21.1.5 State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or amended prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising, as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing. Any alteration or amendment must be presented for comment in the course of the hearing. 
    21.2 Where a proposed general amendment to the existing zoning ordinance includes changes in an existing zoning map, public notice shall be given as required by subsection 21.1 of this section. 
    21.3 Where a proposed amendment to an existing ordinance includes a specific change in the zoning district map, but does not affect districts generally, public notice shall be given as required by subsection 21.1 of this section, with the additional requirements that: 
21.3.1 Notice shall include a map showing the existing and proposed boundaries, zoning district boundaries, and existing streets and roads and their names, and town boundaries where appropriate; and 
21.3.2 Written notice of the date, time, and place of the public hearing and the nature and purpose thereof shall be sent to all owners of real property whose property is located in or within not less than 200 feet of the perimeter of the area proposed for change, whether within the town or within an adjacent city or town. The notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the owners, as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records of the town. 
    21.4 Notice of a public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the city or town council of any city or town to which one or more of the following pertain: 
21.4.1 Which is located in or within not less than 200 feet of the boundary of the area proposed for change; or 
21.4.2 Where there is a public or quasi-public water source, or private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, within 2,000 feet of any real property that is the subject of a proposed zoning change, regardless of municipal boundaries. 
    21.5 Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district, or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source and that is within 2,000 feet of any real property which is the subject of a proposed zoning change, provided, however, that the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district, or private water company has filed with the building inspector in the town a map survey, which shall be kept as a public record, showing areas of surface water resources and/or watersheds and parcels of land within 2,000 feet thereof. 
    21.6 No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render the ordinance or amendment invalid, unless the defect is found to be intentional or misleading. 
    21.7 Costs of any notice required under this section shall be borne by the applicant. 
    21.8 In granting a zoning ordinance amendment, notwithstanding the provisions of section 5 (permitted uses), the town council may limit the change to one of the permitted uses in the zone to which the subject land is rezoned, and impose such limitations, conditions, and restrictions, including, without limitation: 
21.8.1 Requiring the petitioner to obtain a permit or approval from any and all state or local governmental agencies or instrumentalities having jurisdiction over the land and use which are the subject of the zoning change; 
21.8.2 Those relating to the effectiveness or continued effectiveness of the zoning change; and/or 
21.8.3 Those relating to the use of the land; as it deems necessary. 
    21.9 The town clerk shall cause the limitations and conditions so imposed to be clearly noted on the zoning map and recorded in the land evidence records, provided, however, in the case of a conditional zone change, the limitations, restrictions, and conditions shall not be noted on the zoning map until the zone change has become effective. If the permitted use for which the land has been rezoned is abandoned or if the land is not used for the requested purpose for a period of two years or more after the zone change becomes effective, the town council may, after a public hearing as hereinbefore set forth, change the land to its original zoning use before the petition was filed. If any limitation, condition, or restriction in an ordinance is held to be invalid by a court in any action, that holding shall not cause the remainder of the ordinance to be invalid. 
    21.10 Repetitive petitions. No petition involving the same lot or parcel of land or any part thereof, including a request for different zoning classification than requested in initial petition for an amendment to this ordinance or zoning map, shall be accepted by the town clerk, if a petition requesting an amendment, for the same lot or parcel of land or any part thereof has been denied or the petitions withdrawn the same within the preceding 24 months. However, such a petition may be accepted at any time with the consent of the town council if in the opinion of the council it sets forth facts indicating a substantial change of circumstances justifying a hearing on the petition. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 22. - Administration and enforcement of zoning ordinance. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by the building inspector, unless otherwise specified. No application, building or zoning permit, plan, specification or intended use which is not in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance shall be approved by the building inspector. 
22.1 The building inspector shall: 
22.1.1 Review and approve for zoning compliance, building permits and certificates of occupancy; 
22.1.2 Collect required fees in connection with applications under the building inspector's jurisdiction; 
22.1.3 Receive and review for proper form, all applications for zoning, building and occupancy permits. 
22.1.4 Transmit all applications to the zoning board of review, or planning board as specified in the ordinance. 
22.1.5 Keep records on compliance of uses of land. 
22.1.6 Inspect suspected violations and issue violation notices in cooperation with the town solicitor. 
22.1.7 Perform other such duties as may be deemed to implement the enforcement of this ordinance. 
22.2 Upon written request the building inspector shall, in order to provide guidance or clarification, issue a zoning certificate or provide information to a requesting party as to the determination by the building inspector on issues of compliance, applicability and interpretation of this ordinance. This response shall be issued within 15 days of receipt of the written request. In the event that no written response is provided within such time, the requesting party shall have the right to appeal to the zoning board of review for such determination. 
22.3 When in the opinion of the building inspector it is necessary or when required by this ordinance, the building inspector shall seek technical assistance or approval from other town officials in the administration of this ordinance. Such technical assistance or approval, unless otherwise specified, may suffice in whole or in part as the basis for the approval or disapproval of a zoning permit. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed null and void. 
22.4 Reserved. 
22.5 Minimum qualifications for the building inspector shall include: The building inspector shall have had at least five years experience in construction, design, or supervision. The building inspector shall be generally informed on the quality and strength of building materials, on the accepted requirements for safe exit facilities and on other items of equipment essential for the safety and comfort of occupants, and shall be certified under the provisions of subsection 23-27.3-107.6. 
22.6 Building permit. 
22.6.1 No building or structure shall be erected, extended, altered, enlarged or moved, and no use of any land or premises shall be begun or changed without a building permit having been issued by the building inspector. A permit or license issued by any other department of the town shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. Any application for such a permit shall be accompanied by a site plan, accurately drawn, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot or premises to be built upon; the exact location and size of all buildings or structures to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or enlarged together with the lines within which all buildings or structures are to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or enlarged; the existing or intended use of such building or structure; the location of all zoning district boundary lines as they may affect the lot or premises; the location and size of off-street parking and loading facilities where required, the location and design of trash storage areas and enclosures, including dumpsters, and other information as may be necessary to provide the execution and enforcement of this ordinance. The building permit shall be issued on the basis of the application and accompanying plans, where required, and shall authorize only the use arrangement and construction set forth in approved plans and applications. Any use, arrangement or construction not complying with that authorized under this ordinance shall be deemed in violation. 
22.6.2 No site plan shall be required with an application for such a permit involving only alterations of an existing building where the use and exterior surfaces of such buildings are not changed or enlarged in any manner and the use is not affected by any other section of this ordinance. 
22.6.3 A record of the applications, plans and permits shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours. 
22.6.4 In addition, the building inspector may require the submission of plans of any proposed machinery, operations and products and specifications for the mechanisms and techniques to be used for the purpose of restricting the emission of dangerous and objectionable elements referred to in this ordinance. An affidavit may be required from the applicant acknowledging his understanding of the applicable performance standards and his agreement to conform with such standards at all times. No applicant will be required to divulge confidential processes, and all information submitted will be treated confidentially if requested. 
22.6.5 In areas of special flood hazard as delineated on the flood maps, a permit shall be required for any land preparation, excavation, grading, filling or removal of earth for any purpose. 
22.7 Occupancy permit. 
22.7.1 An occupancy permit shall be required for any of the following: 
22.7.1.1 Occupancy and use of a building or structure hereafter erected, extended, altered, enlarged or moved; 
22.7.1.2 Change in use of an existing building, structure or premises to a use of a different classification; 
22.7.1.3 Occupancy and use of vacant land except for farming; 
22.7.1.4 Change in use of land to a use of a different classification other than farming; 
22.7.1.5 Any change in use of a nonconforming use. 
22.7.2 No such occupancy, use or change of use shall take place without the issuance of an occupancy permit approved by the building inspector. The permit shall not be issued until the building, structure, premises or land, its uses and the uses incidental thereto have been inspected and approved by the building inspector and, if required, a business registration certificate has been secured from the town clerk's office. A record of all occupancy permits shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours. 
22.8 Conflict/construal [interpretation] with other laws. 
22.8.1 This chapter shall not repeal, annul or impair any existing provisions of law, other ordinances or any rules or regulations previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises. However, wherever the terms of this ordinance require a greater width or size of yards of other open spaces, a lower height of building or less number of stories or a greater percentage of lots to be left unoccupied or impose other greater standards than are required in any other statute, ordinance or regulation, the provision of this ordinance shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other statute, ordinance or regulation require a greater width or size of yards, courts or other open spaces, a lower height of building or lesser number of stories, or a greater percentage of lots to be left unoccupied or impose other high standards than are required in this ordinance, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
22.8.2 All variances and special use permits heretofore granted by the zoning board of review, shall remain in full force and effect, and all terms, conditions and obligations imposed by the board shall remain in effect and be binding to the same extent as if this ordinance had not been enacted. All violations of previous provisions shall be punishable as if they had not been repealed and shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against such violations and/or the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
Section 23. - Maintenance of the zoning ordinance and zoning map. 
    23.1 The town clerk shall be the custodian of the zoning ordinance and zoning map(s) created thereunder. In addition, the town clerk shall be responsible for maintaining and updating the text and zoning map comprising the zoning ordinance. Changes which impact the zoning map shall be depicted on the map within 90 days of such authorized change(s) and changes to the text shall be included in the zoning ordinance within 30 days of such authorized change(s). 
23.1.1 In the case of a conditional zone change, the limitations, restrictions and conditions shall not be included on the zoning map until the zone change has become effective. 
23.1.2 It shall be the responsibility of the town clerk to receive, in proper form, petitions for amendments or repeals to the zoning ordinance and/or amendments to the zoning map. The town clerk shall collect the required fees for such petitions as set by the town council. 
    23.2 Annual review. The provision of this ordinance shall be reviewed annually by the planning board for the purpose of considering proposed amendments deemed appropriate in the light of changing conditions or policies. After such annual review the planning board shall make written report to the town council advising the council of its review and transmitting recommendations the planning board may have, if any, regarding the provisions of the ordinance. In addition, whenever the comprehensive plan is amended, the planning board shall identify any changes necessary to the zoning ordinance, to ensure consistency and forward these changes to the town council. 
Section 24. - Establishment and procedures of board of review. 
    24.1 There shall be a zoning board of review which shall consist of five members, each to hold office for a term of five years, with one member to be appointed each year by the mayor with the confirmation of the council. The board shall choose its chairperson and said chairperson or an acting chairperson in his or her absence, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All members and alternate members of said board shall be qualified electors and residents of the town during their term of office, and shall hold no other office in the service of the town. Each member shall continue in office until his successor has been duly appointed and qualified. In case any vacancy shall occur in the board for any cause, the vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided above, and the appointee shall serve for and during the unexpired term of the predecessor. 
24.1.2 Any member of the board may be removed by the town council for due cause including malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance generally and in particular: 
24.1.2.1 Failure to maintain reasonable familiarity with state statutes and local ordinances and rules affecting the board. 
24.1.2.2 Failure to disclose conflict of interest for purposes of disqualification when a member has personal or monetary interest in the matter involved or will be affected by a decision of the board. 
24.1.3 In addition to the five standing members, the town council shall annually appoint two alternates to be designated as the first and second alternate members. These alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member of the board is unable to serve at a hearing and the second shall vote if two members of the board are unable to serve at a hearing. In the absence of the first alternate member, the second alternate member shall serve in the position of the first alternate. The alternate members shall exercise the same duties and functions of a regular member when serving on the board and may be removed from office by the town council in the same manner as a regular member. 
24.1.4 Annually in the month of September, the zoning board of review shall organize by electing from its membership a vice chairperson, and secretary. The town clerk shall serve as clerk of the board and shall perform such duties as are provided by this ordinance. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson or as may be fixed by the board. 
24.1.5 All hearings and meetings of the board shall be open to the public and shall be conducted no earlier in the day than 7:00 p.m. All decisions shall be made and voted upon at a public hearing. 
24.1.6 No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the board unless they have attended all hearings concerning the matter. 
24.1.7 No member of the board shall pass on any matter in which he has a business, professional or personal interest. As soon as a conflict occurs for a member, that member shall recuse himself and shall not sit as an active member and shall take no part in the conduct of the hearing. 
24.1.8 For any proceeding in which the right of appeal lies to the Superior or Supreme court, the zoning board of review shall have the minutes taken either by a competent stenographer or recorded by a sound-recording device. 
24.1.9 The chairperson may appoint subcommittees as seem desirable to aid the functioning of the board. 
24.1.10 Members of the zoning board of review shall receive remuneration for their services on the board, as established by the approved budget. 
24.1.11 Members of the zoning board of review serving on the effective date of adoption of this zoning ordinance shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter respecting terms of originally appointed members until the expiration of their current terms. 
24.1.12 The chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by the issuance of subpoenas. 
Section 25. - Power and duties of the zoning board of review. 
    25.1 The zoning board of review shall have the following powers and duties: 
25.1.1 To hear and decide appeals in a timely fashion where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer or agency in the enforcement or interpretation of this ordinance, or of any amendment adopted pursuant hereto; 
25.1.2 To authorize, upon application, in specific cases of hardship, variances in the application of the terms of the zoning ordinance, pursuant to section 45-24-41 of the act; 
25.1.3 To authorize, upon application, in specific cases, special-use permits, pursuant to section 45-24-42(A) of the act, where the zoning board of review is designated as a permit authority for special use permits; 
25.1.4 To refer matters to the planning board, or to other boards or agencies of the city or town as the zoning board of review may deem appropriate, for findings and recommendations; 
25.1.5 To provide for issuance of conditional zoning approvals where a proposed application would otherwise be approved except that one or more state or federal agency approvals which are necessary are pending. A conditional zoning approval shall be revoked in the instance where any necessary state or federal agency approvals are not received within a specified time period; and 
25.1.6 To hear and decide other matters, according to the terms of the ordinance or other statutes, and upon which the board may be authorized to pass under the ordinance or other statutes; and 
    25.2 The zoning board of review shall be required to vote as follows: 
25.2.1 Five active members shall be necessary to conduct a hearing. As soon as a conflict occurs for a member, that member shall recuse himself or herself, shall not sit as an active member, and take no part in the conduct of the hearing. Only five active members shall be entitled to vote on any issue; 
25.2.2 The concurring vote of three of the five members of the zoning board of review sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building inspector from whom an appeal was taken; and 
25.2.3 The concurring vote of four of the five members of the zoning board of review sitting at a hearing shall be required to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter within the discretion of the board upon which it is required to pass under the ordinance, including variances and special-use permits. 
Section 26. - Application procedure. 
    For each application to the zoning board of review, the applicant shall follow the specific procedures including submission requirements as specified in this ordinance for appeals, special use permits and variances and any other matter. Failure to do so may result in a delay in processing the application. Any application not deemed complete shall not be placed on the hearing agenda. 
Section 27. - Fees. 
    27.1 The town council shall set and review annually reasonable fees, in an amount not to exceed actual costs incurred, to be paid by the appellant or applicant for the adequate review by the appropriate agency and hearing of applications, the issuance of zoning certificates, and for the recording of the decisions thereon. 
    27.2 The applicant shall also be required to bear the expense of any outside technical assistance which the zoning board deems necessary to assist the zoning board in the review of any application that shall be heard by the zoning board. 
(Ord. No. 2009-13, 11-3-09) 
Section 28. - Violations. 
    28.1 Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provision of this ordinance, any of the conditions under which a permit is used or any decision rendered by the zoning board of review, town council, building inspector, or planning board shall be fined not exceeding $500.00 for each offense, such fine to inure to the town and each day that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. The penalty shall be reasonably related to the seriousness of the offense. 
    28.2 The erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, enlargement or moving of any building or structure and the use of any land, premises, building or structure and the use of any land, premises, building or structure which is continued, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this ordinance is hereby declared to be a violation of this ordinance and unlawful. The town solicitor shall institute appropriate legal action to redress said violations. 
    28.3 The town may also cause suit to be brought in the supreme or superior court or West Warwick municipal court to restrain the violation of, or to compel compliance with, the provision of this ordinance. The town may consolidate an action for injunctive relief and/or fines under the ordinance in the superior court of Kent County. 
    28.4 Extension of deadlines by consent. The provisions of this ordinance pertaining to decision deadlines, shall not be construed to apply to any extension for good cause, consented to by an applicant. 
Section 29. - Decisions and records of the zoning board of review. 
    29.1 Following a public hearing, the zoning board of review shall render a decision within 60 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The zoning board of review shall include in its decision all findings of fact and conditions, showing the vote of each member participating thereon, and the absence of a member or his or her failure to vote. Decisions shall be recorded and filed in the office of the zoning board of review within 30 working days from the date when the decision was rendered, and shall be a public record. The zoning board of review shall keep written minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, findings of fact, and other official actions, all of which shall be recorded and filed in the office of the zoning board of review in an expeditious manner upon completion of the proceeding. For any proceeding in which the right of appeal lies to the superior or supreme court, the zoning board of review shall have the minutes taken either by a competent stenographer or recorded by a sound-recording device. 
    29.2 Any decision by the zoning board of review, including any special conditions attached thereto shall be mailed to the applicant, and to the associate director of the division of planning of the Rhode Island Department of Administration. In addition, a copy of the decision shall be sent to the office of the building inspector. 
    29.3 All decisions of the zoning board of review shall be posted in a location visible to the public in the town hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the decision. 
Section 30. - Judicial aid in enforcement. 
    30.1 The supreme court and the superior court, within their respective jurisdictions, or any justice of either of those courts in vacation, shall, upon due proceedings in the name of the town, instituted by its town solicitor, have power to issue any extraordinary writ or to proceed according to the course of law or equity or both: 
30.1.1 To restrain the erection, alteration, or use of any building, structure, sign, or land erected, altered, or used in violation of the provisions of any zoning ordinance enacted under the authority of the act, and to order its removal or abatement as a nuisance; 
30.1.2 To compel compliance with the provisions of any zoning ordinance enacted under the authority of the act; 
30.1.3 To order the removal by the property owner of any building, structure, sign, or improvement existing in violation of any zoning ordinance enacted under the provisions of the act and to authorize some official of the town, in the default of the removal by the owner, to remove it at the expense of the owner; 
30.1.4 To order the reimbursement for any work or materials which shall have been done or furnished by or at the cost of the town; 
30.1.5 To order restoration by the owner, where practicable; and/or 
30.1.6 To issue fines and other penalties. 
Section 31. - Right of appeal. 
    31.1 An appeal from any decision of the building inspector may be taken to the zoning board of review by an aggrieved party. 
    31.2 An appeal from a decision of the zoning board of review may be taken by an aggrieved party to the Kent County superior court. 
Section 32. - Appeals to zoning board of review. 
    An appeal to the zoning board of review from a decision of the building inspector may be taken by an aggrieved party. The appeal shall be taken with 30 days of the date of the recording of the decision of the building inspector by filing with the building inspector and the zoning board of review a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board of review all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Notice of the appeal shall also be transmitted to the planning board. 
Section 33. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector certifies to the zoning board of review, after an appeal shall have been duly filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the building inspector's opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction on application thereof and upon notice to the building inspector from whom the appeal is taken on due cause shown. 
Section 34. - Public hearing by zoning board of review. 
    The zoning board of review shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties of interest, and decide the matter within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne by the appellant. 
Section 35. - Participation in zoning hearing. 
    Participation in a zoning hearing or other proceeding by a party shall not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not in good faith, intentional misconduct, a knowing violation of law, transactions where there is an improper personal benefit, or malicious, wanton, or willful misconduct. 
Section 36. - Decisions and records of zoning board of review. 
    In exercising its powers the zoning board of review may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm wholly or partly and may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such orders, requirements, decisions, or determinations as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the building inspector. All decisions and records of the zoning board of review respecting appeals shall conform to the provisions of section 24 of this ordinance. 
Section 37. - Appeals to superior court. 
    37.1 An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the zoning board of review to the Kent County superior court by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of appeal within 20 days after the decision has been recorded and posted in the office of the town clerk. The decision shall be posted in a location visible to the public in the town hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the decision. The zoning board of review shall file the original documents acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed from, or certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the clerk of the court within 30 days after being served with a copy of the complaint. When the complaint is filed by someone other than the original applicant or appellant, the original applicant or appellant and the members of the zoning board shall be made parties to the proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
    37.2 If, before the date set for hearing in the superior court, an application is made to the court for leave to present additional evidence before the zoning board of review and it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the additional evidence is material and that there were good reasons for the failure to present it at the hearing before the zoning board of review, the court may order that the additional evidence be taken before the zoning board of review upon conditions determined by the court. The zoning board of review may modify its findings and decision by reason of the additional evidence and shall file that evidence and any new findings or decisions with the superior court. 
    37.3 The review shall be conducted by the superior court without a jury. The court shall consider the record of the hearing before the zoning board of review and, if it shall appear to the court that additional evidence is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may allow any party to the appeal to present the evidence in open court, which evidence, along with the report, shall constitute the record upon which the determination of the court shall be made. 
    37.4 The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the zoning board of review as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The court may affirm the decision of the zoning board of review or remand the case for further proceedings, or may reverse or modify the decision if substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because of findings, inferences, conclusions, or decisions which are: 
37.4.1 In violation of constitutional, statutory, or ordinance provisions; 
37.4.2 In excess of the authority granted to the zoning board of review by statute or ordinance; 
37.4.3 Made upon unlawful procedure; 
37.4.4 Affected by other error of law; 
37.4.5 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence of the whole record; or 
37.4.6 Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. 
Section 38. - Priority in judicial proceedings. 
    Upon the entry of any case or proceeding brought under the provisions of this ordinance, including pending appeals and appeals hereinafter taken to the court, the court shall, at the request of either party, advance the case, so that the matter shall be afforded precedence on the calendar and shall thereupon be heard and determined with as little delay as possible. 
Section 39. - Appeal of enactment of or amendment to zoning ordinance. 
    39.1 An appeal of an enactment of or an amendment to the zoning ordinance may be taken to the Kent County superior court by filing a complaint, as set forth herein, within 30 days after the enactment or amendment has become effective. The appeal may be taken by an aggrieved party or by any legal resident or landowner of the town or by any association of residents or landowners of the town. The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of the zoning ordinance, as enacted or amended, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
    39.2 The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area or areas in which the enactment or amendment does not conform with the comprehensive plan and/or the manner in which it constitutes a taking of private property without just compensation. 
    39.3 The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury. The court shall first consider whether the enactment or amendment of the zoning ordinance is in conformance with the comprehensive plan. If the enactment or amendment is not in conformance with the comprehensive plan, then the court shall invalidate the enactment or the amendment, or those parts of the enactment or amendment which are not in conformance with the comprehensive plan. The court shall not revise the ordinance to conform with the comprehensive plan, but may suggest appropriate language as part of the court decision. 
    39.4 In the case of an aggrieved party, where the court has found that the enactment or amendment of the zoning ordinance is in conformance with the comprehensive plan, then the court shall next determine whether the enactment or amendment works as a taking of property from the aggrieved party. If the court determines that there has been a taking, the court shall remand the case to the town council, with its findings that a taking has occurred, and order the town to either provide just compensation or rescind the enactment or amendment within 30 days. 
    39.5 The superior court shall retain jurisdiction, in the event that the aggrieved party and the town do not agree on the amount of compensation, in which case the superior court shall hold further hearings to determine and to award compensation. Furthermore, the superior court shall retain jurisdiction to determine the amount of an award of compensation for any temporary taking, if that taking shall exist. 
    39.6 The court may, in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its own motion, award reasonable attorney's fees to any party to an appeal, as set forth herein, including the town. 
Section 40. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this ordinance or of any rule, regulation, or determination made thereunder, or the application thereof to any person, agency, or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance, rule, regulation, or determination and the application of the provisions to other persons, agencies, or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the ordinance. 
APPENDIX B - FEES AND CHARGES 
OF THE TOWN OF WEST WARWICK 
TOWN CLERK Aerial bombs, fireworks & pyro 25.00/day Amplifier, loud speaker 25.00/day 
plus all cost of notice Antiques, second hand dealer & keeper-of-shop 100.00 license fee 
10.00 filing fee 
35.00 renewal fee Arts & crafts 25.00/day Auctions   One day 50.00   One year 250.00 Automobile body shop and repairs 100.00 Automobile sales, new and used 100.00 Automotive junkyard 100.00 Balloons & novelties 50.00/cart Bazaar & raffle 5.00 flat fee Bingo 100.00 for non tax exempt Black powder 5.00 Bowling alley 10.00/alley Business license (Not otherwise provided for)   Original registration 100.00   Renewal registrations 25.00 Carnival 200.00/event Cat breeding 100.00 per breeding cat Cemetery excavation 100.00 Christmas tree sales 100.00 W. W. resident 
200.00 non-resident Concert, 1 day dance & live band 100.00/event Constable   Police Constable 10.00   Constable with power to serve process 5.00 Dance & live band business 200.00/year Dance studio and music lessons 100.00 Day care center 100.00 Dog license   Neutered male or spayed female 8.00*   Unneutered male or unspayed female 16.00*   Duplicate or replacement of license tag 2.00  * $1.00 of each fee shall be a surcharge fee to be placed in the low cost spay/neuter program account. Dog show 100.00/event Filling station 150.00/year Fire works vendors 1,000.00 Flea market 100.00 (1-10 vendors) 
200.00 (11-20 vendors) 
300.00 (21 + vendors) Flower vendor 250.00/5 days Food Truck 75.00 W. W. resident 
100.00 non-resident Foundryman 25.00 Games of chance, Las Vegas nights, raffles 
  & 20-25-30-50 week clubs 25.00 for non tax exempt Hair and nail salons 100.00 Holiday sales 50.00 Juke box 20.00/box/year Junk dealer (not automotive) 200.00 license fee 
 10.00 filing fee 
 35.00 renewal adv. fee Junk gather 25.00 license fee 10.00 filing fee 35.00 renewal adv. fee Kennel 100.00 + advertising Kennel (thoroughbred dogs) (R.I.G.L. 4-13-10) 25.00 Laundry 150.00 Liquor   Class B Limited 500.00   Class D full 500.00   Class D limited 300.00   Class E 100.00   Class F - wine & beer 50.00/day   Class F - hard liquor 50.00/day Mechanical amusement device 100.00 up to 3 devices 10.00 filing + advertising New or unlicensed amusement device 100.00 application + adv. Open fire permit 25.00 Pawnbroker 250.00 
2,000.00 surety/yr Parade 100.00 flat fee Peddler 200.00 W. W. resident 
300.00 non-resident   Veterans only 1.00   One day food service only 100.00 Pet grooming 100.00 Pistols & revolver sales 200.00 Police constable 10.00 Pool table 100.00/table 
 10.00 filing + adv. Private detective 200.00 
5,000.00 surety/yr Road race 5.00 Rooming house 10.00 Secondhand indoor junk dealer 10.00 license fee 
10.00 filing fee Solicitors & canvassers 100.00/person/3 months Storage unserviceable or unused vehicles 100.00 Tobacco dealer's license   Original registration 300.00 per year or 
25.00 per month until first renewal   Renewal registration 300.00 per year or 
25.00 per month until Sept. 1 renewal date Tag days 5.00/week-end Tattoo shop 100.00 Theatrical shows, shows & exhibitions 100.00/yr or 
25.00/day Town sponsored events All fees waived Victualing house  Restaurant open 24/7 100.00/year  Restaurant open after 6 a.m. to before 2 a.m. 75.00  Seasonal (less than a year) to non-profit 10.00/month Yard sale (license to be clearly visible) 10.00/day  
BUILDING OFFICIAL Building Permits Valuation Formula Per Square Foot:   Main floor  65.00/sq. ft.   Second floor  30.00/sq. ft.   Unattached garage  30.00/sq. ft   Attached garage  20.00/sq. ft.   Open breezeway  30.00/sq. ft.   Enclosed breezeway  50.00/sq. ft.   Finished basement  25.00/sq. ft.   Foundation  10.00/sq. ft.   Enclosed porch  25.00/sq. ft.   Deck  10.00/sq. ft   Sheds over 120 sq. ft.  10.00/sq. ft.   Signs, canopies, awning & billboards   3.00/sq. ft.  
  
BUILDING OFFICIAL (cont'd) Building Permits (cont'd) Table One: Permit Fees Project Valuation Fee Schedule CEADA*   $1.00 to $10,000.00 $20.00 per $1,000.00 $1.00 per $1,000.00 $10,000.01 to $50,000.00 $200.00 plus $18.00 per $1,000.00 $1.00 per $1,000.00 $50,000.01 to no limit $920.00 plus $16.00 per $1,000.00 $1.00 per $1,000.00 Note: $75.00 minimum fee Note: Maximum CEADA fee $50.00 for one and two family dwellings R.I.G.L.  23-27.3-108.2(c)(1)  
  
BUILDING OFFICIAL (cont'd) Gasoline and Other Petroleum Products   Pump 50.00/pump   Tank, under 500 gallons 20.00/tank   Tank, 501 TO 1,000 gallons 30.00/tank   Tank, 1,001 TO 5,000 gallons 50.00/tank Certificate of Occupancy   Single family residential 25.00   Multi-family residential and commercial 50.00   Re-inspection fee of $25.00 for each additional inspection required when code violations exist or occur beyond the required scheduled inspection or when the work to be done is not ready for inspection or is not accessible to the inspector. Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Permit   0-2,000.00 50.00   Over 2,000.01 50.00 plus 
20.00/added 1,000.00 
or portion Commercial and Industrial Staff Electrician 50.00/year Staff Electrician 50.00/year Temporary Electrical Permit 50.00 Re-Inspection Fee 25.00/inspection Heating and Range License Fee   Master 50.00   Journeyman 25.00 Swimming Pool Permit See table one Structure Moving Permit 100.00 Demolition Permit See table one   Liability insurance not less than $10,000.00 discretion building official Zoning Certificate   Single family residential, sheds pools, decks, structures 25.00   Multi-family residential and commercial 50.00 Fire Prevention Plan Review    Construction Cost   Fee   0-5,000.00 50.00   5,001.00-10,000.00 100.00   10,001.00-15,000.00 150.00   15,001.00-20,000.00 200.00   20,001.00-25,000.00 250.00   25,001.00-50,000.00 300.00   50,001.00-100,000.00 350.00   100,001.00-500,000.00 400.00   500,001.00-1,000,000.00 500.00   Over 1,000,001.00 500.00 plus 
10.00/2,500.00 Dumpster Permit 25.00   Renewal 10.00 Fence Permit 10.00 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Approval Fee 100.00  
CIVIC CENTER Thomas A. Lamb  Amount of Courts Price per hour   1 court per hour 50.00   2 courts per hour 100.00   3 courts for our 125.00  Holiday Pricing Price per hour   1 court per hour 125.00   2 courts per hour 175.00   3 courts per hour 200.00 Benny Magiera Ice Rink  Ice Times Per 50 minutes   Before 9 pm 240.00   After 9 pm 220.00   Tournament Rate 275.00   Summer Rate-May through August 220.00  Holiday Pricing-Ice Times Per 50 minutes   Before 9 pm 315.00   After 9 pm 295.00   Tournament Rate 350.00   Summer Rate-May through August 295.00 West Warwick Civic Center Events  Amount per hour Price per hour   Under 200 people $150.00   Under 300 people 200.00   Over 301 people 250.00  Holiday Pricing Price per hour   Under 200 people 175.00   Under 300 people 225.00   Over 301 people 275.00  
FIRE DEPARTMENT Direct connect alarm system 10.00 per year Residential Smoke Detector (set by R.I.G.L.) 30.00   Re-Inspection (set by R.I.G.L.) 60.00 Values of Construction Costs Not Including Electrical, Plumbing and Mechanical Costs   0-5,000.00 50.00   5,001.00-10,000.00 100.00   10,001.00-15,000.00 150.00   15,001.00-20,000.00 200.00   20,001.00-25,000.00 250.00   25,001.00-50,000.00 300.00   50,001.00-100,000.00 350.00   100,001.00-500,000.00 400.00   500,001.00-1,000,000.00 500.00   1,000,001.00 and over 500.00 + 10.00 
per each additional 2,500.00 in valuation  Fee includes Fire Department plan review fee and rough and final inspections.  
PLANNING BOARD Administrative Subdivision 300.00     Sewer review 0 Minor Subdivision/Land Development   Pre-application 0     Sewer review 0   Preliminary plan 200.00 + 25.00/unit/lot     Sewer review 575.00   Final plan 100.00 + 25.00/unit/lot     Sewer review 300.00 Major Subdivision/Land Development   Pre-application 0   Master plan 200.00 + 25.00/unit/lot     Sewer review 300.00   Preliminary plan 200.00 + 25.00/unit/lot     Sewer review 875.00   Final plan 100.00 + 25.00/unit/lot     Sewer review 575.00 Non-Subdivision/Site Plan 300.00     Sewer review 875.00 Mill Re-Use Plan 1000.00     Sewer review 875.00 Design Control Districts   Major 500.00     Sewer review TBD   Minor 50.00     Sewer review 0  
POLICE DEPARTMENT Open Records (set by R.I.G.L.)   Copy 0.15/page   Copy electronic record Actual cost   Research 15.00/hr. 
(1st hr. free) VIN Inspection 10.00 Fingerprinting Services   FBI submission (30.00 billed by RI/FBI) 50.00   Print card only 15.00 Pistol Permit Fee (set by R.I.G.L.) 40.00 Pistol Permit Processing Fee 250.00 Police Car Use or Private Special Detail   Private company or agency 30.00/hour   RIDOT 20.00 Animal Control   Title transfer or disposal dogs & cats (R.I.G.L. 4-13-15)     Dogs 6 months and older 20.00     Dogs less than 6 months 5.00     Cats 6 months and older 10.00   Dog impound/storage (R.I.G.L. 4-13-15) 5.00/day   Adoption     Dogs 10.00     Cats 5.00   Turn in fees     Dogs 20.00     Cats 10.00   Quarantine (10 day minimum) 25.00/day Alarm Systems   Registration 50.00   Monitoring 100.00/year   Nuisance answering alarm 50.00/incident  
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT Road Opening Permit 100.00 Curb Cut Approval 50.00 Disposal   Mattresses and box springs    Premium service 20.00    Mattresses and box springs bags 4.00/bag    Drop off (prior to May 1, 2016) 10.00    Drop off (after to May 1, 2016) 0.00   White goods    Premium service 25.00/pick-up     Freon 25.00/item    Drop off-No Freon 0.00    Drop off-With Freon 25.00/item   Tires and rims    Premium service 20.00/pick-up    Drop off 0.00   Waste oil-Drop off 0.00   Electronics    Premium service 20.00    Drop off 0.00   Construction debris    Property owner or contractor to hire dumpster and pay for removal   Potential hazardous waste    Return to point of purchase or contact Rhode Island Resource Recovery   Bulk waste    Four pickups per year 0.00    Extra pickups 25.00/pick-up   Extra trash bins 75.00/year   Extra recycling bins 75.00/year Rubbish Removal License   W. W. Resident 50.00/vehicle/year   Non-resident 100.00/vehicle/year Solid Waste Haulers and Transfer Station   W. W. Resident hauler 50.00/vehicle/year   Non-resident hauler 100.00/vehicle/year   Transfer station 100.00/year  
RECREATION DEPARTMENT Amby Smith Field No Lights 35.00/game Amby Smith Field With Lights 50.00/game McCarthy Field 125.00/game   Use by:   American Legion Post 2 Sr. & Jr. teams 0.00   West Warwick Connie Mack 0.00   West Warwick High School 0.00 Ray Silva Field 50.00/game  
WEST WARWICK REGIONAL WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY Drainlaying   Permit application and annual fee 250.00   Insurance requirements     Property damage & bodily injury 500,000.00 ea. occurrence 
1,000,000.00 aggregate     Drainlayer's bond 10,000.00 Connection to Town Sewer System   Domestic users     Permit application fee 200.00/unit     Connection costs Paid by owner   Commercial users     Permit application fee 300.00/unit     Connection costs Paid by owner   Significant industrial users     Permit application fee 500.00/unit     Connection costs Paid by owner   Privately-owned pump stations     Permit application fee 1,000.00     Annual inspection fee 1,000.00   Sewer extension     Permit application fee 200.00   Inspection fee     Sewers within regional 2.00/linear foot     Wastewater service area   Repairs to service connections     Permit application fee 50.00 Pretreatment Program Charges   Significant industrial users-Annual permit     Classes 1 through 3 6,000.00     Class 4 1,500.00   Any and all commercial users     Pretreatment application 300.00   Grease interceptor     Permit application fee 400.00     Annual inspection fee 400.00     Installation costs (paid by owner)   Gas stations (grit traps)     Permit application fee 300.00     Annual inspection fee 250.00     Installation costs (paid by owner)   Photo finishing     Annual inspection fee 200.00   Laundromats and cleaners     Annual inspection fee 200.00   Silver users     Annual program administration charge 100.00 Annual Use Charges   Domestic and commercial users 
West Warwick & Regional Reserves $3.55 per hundred cubic feet based on 80% of the actual water meter reading with a 4,000 cubic food minimum charge per unit, set annually by Resolution of the West Warwick Sewer Commission   Well users-West Warwick & Regional $355.00 per year based on based on average consumption of 10,000 cubic feet, set annually by Resolution of West Warwick Sewer Commission   Industrial users 3.55/100 cubic ft. based on actual metered water or washwater flows; also $0.65/lb. of BOD over the design strength of 250 mg/L, $0.76/lb. of total suspended solids over the design strength of 250 mg/L, $0.82/lb. of total nitrogen over the design strength of 40 mg/L, and $1.17/lb. of total phosphorus over the design strength of 7 mg/L. Miscellaneous   Bonds repayment 135.00/dwelling unit 
(or EDU)   Quaker Lane Pump Station Upgrade fee     Facilities larger than duplex 1.17/gal. of wastewater discharged to pump station based on average daily flow   Brookfield Pump Station Upgrade fee 3,000.00/residential unit connecting to the sewer system upstream of the pump station   Out of town connections     Lien processing fee 50.00     Lien recording fee (Set by city or town where located)   Dye tests 50.00 (Reimbursable if testing determines property is not connected to the sewer system.)   Charges for copies Set by R.I.G.L. 38-2-4   Checks written with insufficient funds 25.00 following second redeposit attempt Sewer Assessment Fees   Residential-single-family and condominium units Assessment of $6,000.00 payable over 20 years at 7 percent interest on unpaid balance, charged yearly after first year.   Multi-family 2 to 5 units 5,000.00/unit   Multi-family 6 or more units 4,000.00/additional unit   Commercial 45.00/thousand for first one hundred thousand dollars of assessed value and, thereafter at a rate of 25.00 per thousand on the remaining assessed value, as established by the tax assessor of West Warwick or city or town where located, at a rate of 7 percent for a period of 20 years, and which assessment amount shall be based on the date of the assessment. Septage Haulers   Annual fee 250.00   Disposal fee 7.50/100 gallons   RI Uniform septage disposal fee 1.00/100 gallons 
(or fee as set by RIDEM)  
ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW Dimensional and Use Variances 50.00 Special Use Permit 100.00 All Other Partitions 50.00 Additional Fees (In addition to above fees)   Single family dwelling unit 60.00   Two family dwelling unit 100.00   Multi-family dwelling unit     No exterior construction 100.00 
plus 30.00/unit     With exterior construction 150.00 
plus 30.00/unit     Units in excess of two units 70.00 
plus 30.00 
per additional unit   Business in residential or restricted use zone 100.00   Industrial use in restricted use zone 100.00   Alterations and remodeling     No exterior construction 50.00     Exterior construction 60.00     Accessory dwelling unit 30.00 
plus 60.00 
exterior construction fee  
(Ord. No. 2013-180, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 2013-192, 10-1-13; Res. No. 2014-158 , 9-16-14; Res. No. 2015-41 , 4-14-15; Res. No. 2015-183 , 12-1-15; Res. No. 2015-194 , 12-15-15; Res. No. 2016-34 , 2-7-17; Res. No. 2016-107 , 6-21-16; Res. No. 2016-137 , 8-16-16; Res. No. 2017-12 , 2-7-17; Res. No. 2017-68 , 5-30-17; Res. No. 2017-96 , 6-20-17; Res. No. 2017-105 , 7-11-17; Res. No. 2017-106 , 7-11-17; Res. No. 2018-16 , 2-6-18; Res. No. 2018-27 , 2-6-18; Res. No. 2018-41 , 3-6-18; Res. No. 2018-57 , 4-13-18; Res. No. 2018-78 , 5-22-18; Res. No. 2018-83 , 5-22-18; Res. No. 2018-99 , 6-5-18; Res. No. 2018-114 , 6-19-18) 
APPENDIX C - TRAFFIC ORDINANCES[1] 
Table of Traffic Ordinances Ord. No. Adoption 
Date Location Sign Description 2000-13 Tanglewood Dr. at Iron Dr. 'Stop' sign Northbound 2000-13 Tanglewood Dr. at Iron Dr. 'Stop' sign Southbound 2000-13 Iron at Tanglewood 'Stop' sign 2000-13 Old Carriange Rd. No parking From Quaker La. to Pepin St. 2000-18 River St. One way traffic pattern River from Providence St. at Sheldon Ct. to the East Ave. bridge 2000-18 River St. Two way traffic pattern River St. from East Ave. bridge to intersection of Providence St. and Wakefield St. 2000-18 Kent St. One way traffic pattern Kent from West Warwick Ave. to Harbour Ave. Traffic direction from West Warwick Ave. to Harbour Ave. 2000-19 Weaver St. Taxi Only parking North side of Weaver St. 20 ft. west from intersection of Weaver St. & Main St., distance 50 ft. 2000-23 Woodbine St. 'Stop' sign Westerly direction Junction of Aberdeen St. 2000-25 Earl St. 'Stop' sign North at St. George St. 2000-25 Earl St. 'Stop' sign South at Border St. 2000-25 Border St. 'Stop' sign East at Earl St. 2000-25 St George St. 'Stop' sign West at Earl St. 2001-12 Maid Marion La. 'Stop' sign Entrance to Nottingham Dr. 2001-12 Nottingham Dr. 'Stop' sign Entrance to Greenbush Rd. 2001-13 Harris Ave. 'No Parking' sign North and south side of Harris Ave. South St. East to vicinity of 31 Harris Ave. 2001-13 Burkingame Rd. 'Stop' sign North and south All roads intersecting 2001-13 Sweet Briar La. 'Stop' sign North and south All roads intersecting 2001-13 Vincenzo Dr. 'Stop' sign North and south All roads intersecting 2001-16 Pulaski St. 'No Parking' sign Main St. to Manchester St. North side 2001-17 Jodoin St. 'No Parking' sign North side from Archambault Ave. to 2nd telephone pole (approx. 100 ft.) 8 a.m.-4 p.m., Mon.-Fri. 2001-20 Longbow Dr. 'Slow Children' sign Two signs along St. 2001-20 Medieval Way 'Stop' sign At intersection of Longbow Dr. Both sides 2001-20 Crestwood Dr. 'Yield' sign Entering Wightman St. 2001-20 Roberts St. 'Do Not Enter' sign West bound from Ottawa/Roosevelt 2001-21 Remington St.-south side 'No Parking Zone' sign From Main St. to Manchester St. 2001-22 Kathleen Ct 'Stop' sign Intersection of Shannon La. Both sides 2001-22 Carrie Ann Dr. 'Stop' sign Intersection of Shannon La. Southbound 2001-22 Carrie Ann Dr.-north bound 'Priority Traffic' Intersection of Shannon La. 2001-6 Manchester St.-westerly side 'Stop' sign From NE corner of house #89 Manchester St. Towards intersection of Main St. and Cowesett Ave. 2001-6 Archambault Ave.-north side 'No Parking' sign Space 50 ft. NE corner of Archambault Ave. At intersection of Gardner St. 2002-18 Market St. 'Stop' sign Intersection of Greenhill St. 2002-19 West St. 'No Parking' sign West side 2002-198 Lasell St. 'Not A Public Highway' Westerly side of Tampa St. 2002-5 New London 'No Parking Zone' 30' from Legris Ave. intersection Westerly side and south leg of New London Ave. extending 60 ft. 2002-8 Shannon La. 'Stop' sign Intersection of Kathleen Court Both sides 2004-67 River Farms Condominium Devt Street name change From Metropolitan Circle to Sparrow Circle 2005-12 Carriage Road 'No Parking' sign Northside 2005-2 2 Quaker La. 'Yield' sign 2006-21 220 Greenbush Road 'No Parking' sign 2007-14 Valley St. 'No Parking' sign Intersection of Freemont St. 2007-17 Revere Ave. 'No Parking' sign Intersection of Payan St. 2007-17 East Greenwich Ave. 3 way 'Stop' sign Intersection of Greenbush 2007-33 Quaker La. 'No Parking' sign From Legris Ave. to Bald Hill Road Westside 2007-7 Crossen St. 'No Parking' sign 2007-7 Harris St. 'Stop' sign Intersection of South St. 2008-3 Revere Ave. 4 way 'Stop' sign Intersection of Boucher St. 2010-10 Intervale Rd.-east side 'No Parking' sign Wakefield St. to Glendale Dr. 7:30 a.m.-8:30 a.m., 2:30 p.m.-3:30 p.m. 2010-10 Glendale Rd.-north side 'No Parking' sign Crossland Dr. to Intervale Rd. 7:30 a.m.-8:30 a.m., 2:30 p.m.-3:30 p.m. 2011-21 Shady Dr. 'Stop' sign Intersection of Quaker La Westbound 2011-22 Archambault Ave. 'Stop' sign Intersection of Ottawa 2011-26 Brookdale Dr. 'Stop' sign Intersection of Alden Dr. Northbound 2012-12 Knight St. 'No Parking From Here To Corner' sign 20 ft. from Westly St. intersection Eastside 2012-13 Gough Ave. 'No Parking From Here To Corner' sign From Elison St. to Main St. Removal of 'No Parking' area immediately across from said location on north side of Gough Ave. 2012-7 Gareau St. 'Stop' sign Prior to proceeding into Wildberry Apartment Complex Eastbound 2013-04 Pawtuxet Terrace 'Stop' sign Intersection of Harbor Ave. North and southbound 2013-07 Knight St. 'No Parking From Here To Corner' sign Intersection of Westly St. East side, pole 7 2013-42 4 Prospect St. 'No Parking' sign 2013-47 Manchester St. 'No Parking' sign From southern end of playground fence North for a distance of 65 feet East side 2013-47 Manchester St. 'No Parking' sign From Remington St. South to NET&T pole #326-1 West side 2013-50 Granite St. 'No Parking Zone' East side 2014-14 Colonial Way 'Stop' sign Intersection of Pulaski St. 2014-15 Mello St. 'Stop' sign Intersection of Centracchio St. 2014-18 Nowicki St. Traffic Control Device Intersection of West St. 2015-16 Atlantic Ave. Traffic Control Device Intersection of Glen Dr. 2016-14 10-18-16 Cochran St. 'No Parking' sign East side Cochran St., 120 feet north North from Cowesett Ave. 2016-14 10-18-16 Providence St. Removal of: 
'2 Hour Parking' sign Northside of Providence St. Between Penta St. and Water St. 2016-14 10-18-16 Winthrop St. 'No Parking' sign East side Winthrop Ave. Between utility poles #4 and #5. 2016-14 10-18-16 Lacroix Dr. 'Stop' sign Lacroix Dr. at intersection with Crudale Dr. 2016-14 10-18-16 East Greenwich Ave. 'Blind Driveway' sign East Greenwich Ave. On westbound approach to Deerfield Dr. 2017-1 2-7-17 Providence St. '2 Hour Parking between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.' sign Providence St. Between Penta St. and Water St. 2017-1 2-7-17 Stevens Dr. and Brookdale Dr. 'Sharp Curve Ahead' sign 
to replace Yield sign 
Single yellow line on curve Stevens Dr. onto Brookdale Dr. 2017-1 2-7-17 Horta Dr. at Vincezo Dr. 'Stop' sign Horta Dr. at intersection with Vincezo Dr. 2017-1 2-7-17 East Ave. Bridge Removal of: 
'2 Axle Limitation' sign Construction limitation 2017-1 2-7-17 East Ave. Bridge Removal of: 
'3 Ton weight limit' sign Construction limitation 2017-6 2-28-17 29 Epworth Ave. 'No Parking to Corner' sign Westside of Epworth Ave. at #29 2017-7 3-21-17 Douglas St. 'No Parking Between Signs' sign Douglas St. directly across from Sisson St. 2017-19 7-11-17 Pulaski St. 'Stop' sign Westbound at intersection with Pawtuxet Terrace 2017-19 7-11-17 Pulaski St. 'Stop' sign Eastbound at intersection with Harley St. 2017-21 8-1-17 Vincenzo Dr. 'Stop' sign At intersection with Harding St. 2017-21 8-1-17 Bettez St. 'Stop' sign At intersection with Phenix Ave. 2017-21 8-1-17 Old Carriage Road 'Stop' sign At intersection with Pepin St. 2017-22 9-19-17 Horta Dr. 'Stop' sign At intersection with Vincenzo Dr. 2017-27 11-21-17 Border St. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Church St. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Clyde St. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Coit Ave. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Earl St. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 East Greenwich Ave. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Factory St. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Gough Ave. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Grandview Dr. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Greenbush Rd. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Harris Ave. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Harding St. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Highland Ave. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Maple Ave. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 New London Ave. from Rt. 117 Main St. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Pawtuxet Ter. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Prospect Hill Ave. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Robinson Way Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Sunrise Ave. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Wakefield St. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Wilson St. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Woodside Ave. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2017-27 11-21-17 Youngs Ave. Commercial vehicles prohibited Commercial trucking limitation 2018-1 1-16-18 Vincenzo Dr. at Harding St. 'Stop' sign On at intersection with Harding St. 2018-1 1-16-18 Bettez St. at Phenix Ave 'Stop' sign On Bettez St. at intersection with Phenix Ave. 2018-1 1-16-18 Old Carriage Rd. at Pepin St. 'Stop' sign On Old Carriage Rd. at intersection with Pepin St. 2018-1 1-16-18 Kulas Rd. Speed limitation sign At northern and southern ends of Kulas Rd. 25 mph 2018-1 1-16-18 Knight St. and Packard St. 'Stop' sign Three (3) way stop sign at intersection of Knight St. and Packard St. 2018-1 1-16-18 Elbow St. and Phenix Ave. 'Stop' sign On Elbow St. at intersection with Phenix Ave. 2018-1 1-16-18 Intervale Rd. at Glendale Dr. 'Stop' sign On Intervale Rd. at intersection with Glendale Dr. 2018-10 4-24-18 Winthrop Ave. 'No Parking' sign West side of street  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the table of traffic ordinances for the Town of West Warwick. All future traffic ordinances adopted by the town council will be recorded to this table and indicated by parenthetical history notes following the table. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-10 , adopted Aug. 16, 2016, provided that the traffic ordinances of the town as previously included in the West Warwick Code of Ordinances as appendix C, traffic ordinances, are hereby re-enacted as ordinances of the town in their entirety, shall be included in the West Warwick Code of Ordinances as appendix C and shall remain in full force and effect. Appendix C, as hereby re-enacted shall from time to time be amended by the addition or deletion of traffic ordinances through the exercise of the said power regarding traffic ordinances by the town council. 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11,  11-1. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This is a chronological listing of the laws of the town used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the republication and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Compiled Ordinances Chapter Section  Section
this Code 1 1 12-3 2 2 11-19 3 1, 2 6-1, 6-2 5 1 16-15 9 1 16-9 10 1 12-2 2 12-4 14 1 16-16 16 1 12-5 17 1 12-6 2 16-6 18 1 16-8 19 1 16-17 20 1-6 16-44-16-49 21 1 16-18 23 1 8-11 24 1 12-7 25 1 16-4 29 1, 2 14-1, 14-2 31 4 16-3 37 1 11-3 11-12-11-15 11-18 11-51 16-5 16-7 38 1, 2 10-51, 10-52 40 1 10-3 42 2 11-2 3 11-1 7 11-4, 11-5 8 11-6 10-12 11-7-11-9 13 11-10, 11-11 19, 20 11-16, 11-17 21 16-2 23 19-1, 19-2 24 19-4 24A 19-5 25 11-46 32 11-31 33 11-33 34 11-35 36, 37 11-49, 11-50 42 11-34 50 1, 2 16-10 3-5 16-11-16-13  4-10-10(Res.) 15-2  3- 9-17(Ord.) 9-6  3-29-27(Ord.) 2 1-7  6-25-35(Ord.) 1 2-2  6- 8-37(Ord.) 16-1 31 10-90-10-95  9-28-37(Ord.) 14-3, 14-4  4-12-38(Ord.) 1 10-63 1A 10-64 3 10-66 9, 10 10-72, 10-73 11 10-75 12 10-74 14 10-78 15, 16 10-76, 10-77  4- 8-41(Ord.) 16-29-16-33  4-22-41(Ord.) 1 8-3  7-13-43(Ord.) 1 11-47  4-12-48(Ord.) 2 10-65  5-10-49(Res.) 2-3  6- 6-49(Ord.) 1-5 8-1-8-5 7-9 8-6-8-8 11, 12 8-9, 8-10  3-14-50(Ord.) 1 10-63 1-A 10-64 2 10-65 3 10-79  8-15-51(Ord.) 1-16 11-62-11-77 19 11-78 10-10-58(Res.) 18-1 1 6-3 11-10-64(Res.) 1 14-5 12- 8-64(Ord.) 1 11-34 2-1965  5-11-65 2 7-17  5-18-65(Ord.) 1-3 18-2-18-4  6- 8-65(Res.) 11-72 11-76  8- 1-65(Ord.) 1 3-25-3-37  8-24-65(Ord.) 10-2 12-20-65(Ord.) 1 10-14 12-29-65(Ord.) 2 10-18, 10-19 3, 4 10-16, 10-17 5, 6 10-20, 10-21 7 10-15 8 10-22 12-29-65(Res.) 10-13  5-10-66(Res.) 10-1  1-31-68(Ord.) 1 1-10 
12-1 2-4 12-1  7-30-68(Ord.) 1 11-32  9- 1-68(Res.) 6 13-20  9-18-68(Res.) 1 13-16 2, 3 13-17 4, 5 13-18, 13-19 11- 6-69(Ord.) 1 3-12 2 3-14 4 3-13 11-20-69(Res.) 3-1  3- 9-71(Ord.) 9-1-9-5 9-7-9-20 1 8-22 
11-52 2 
3 8-23 
11-52 
8-24  8-10-71(Ord.) 1-3 7-19  1- 1-72(Ord.) 6 2-21  1-11-72(Ord.) 1-5 2-16-2-20  7-11-72(Ord.) 5-5  8- 8-72(Ord.) 7-20  9-12-72(Ord.) 1-3 5-6  3-13-73(Ord.) 1 8-1 2, 3 8-4 4 8-4 
8-4.1  3-15-73(Ord.) 14-5 10- 9-74(Ord.) 10-4 1 1-10  2-24-75(Ord.) 1, 2 12-8  5-14-75(Ord.) 12.5-16  6- 8-76(Ord.) 7-1-7-3  9-16-76(Ord.) 12-2 12-8  1-11-77(Ord.) 1-6 10-106-10-111  1-10-78(Ord.) 1-11 13-36-13-46  1-10-78(Res.) 5-3 5-5  8- 8-78(Res.) 1-5 10-5  8-28-78(Ord.) 16-19  3- 5-79(Res.) 10-65  4- 2-79(Res.) 10-1 10-34, 10-35 10-38 10-94  4-26-79(Res.) 10-5 14-3 10-22-79(Res.) 18-6 10-29-79(Res.) 5-3 12-10-79(Res.) 1-3 12-8  2- 4-80(Res.) 12-9  4-30-80(Res.) 10-15  5- 5-81(Res.) 11-34  5-18-81(Res.) 12-4.1  6- 2-81(Res.) 10-96  7- 7-81(Ord.) 11-34  7- 7-81(Res.) 5-1 10- 6-81(Res.) 12-4.1 12- 1-81(Res.) 11-20  1-19-82(Res.) 10-5 10-121-10-133  2- 2-82(Res.) 10-1  4-20-82(Res.) 11-34  5- 4-82(Res.) 18-2 18-5 18-7  9- 7-82(Res.) 3-12, 3-13 7-19 10-4 10-140-10-146 12- 7-82(Res.) 10-21  1-25-83(Res.) 11-52-11-56  2-24-83(Res.) 10-74  6-14-83(Res.) 10-1  1- 3-84(Res.) 16-20-16-24 10- 2-84(Res.) 4-11-4-27 4-40-4-47  4- 2-85(Res.) 5-3 11-48.1 11-72  4-29-85(Res.) 11-47  5-14-85(Res.) 11-36  8- 6-85(Res.) 4-50-4-60  8-20-85(Res.) 8-12 10- 1-85(Res.) 8-3  3-25-86(Res.) 13-35-13-46  9- 2-86(Ord.) 2-4 10- 7-86(Res.) 5-3  2-17-87(Res.) 11-101-11-113  3- 3-87(Res.) 1-10 8-2  6- 2-87(Res.) 8-30-8-39 11-101-11-113  8- 4-87(Res.) 12-4.2 11- 3-87(Res.) 8-50-8-67  3- 1-88(Res.) 2-5 14-40-14-45  3-15-88(Res.) 8-70-8-81 14-11-14-31  4- 5-88(Res.) 18-8  6- 7-88(Res.) 1 11.5-1, 11.5-2 11.5-2.5 11.5-3-11.5-14  6-16-88(Res.) 10-4  9-13-88(Res.) 4-28-4-32 11.5-4  9-27-88(Res.) 11-37, 11-38 11-23-88(Res.) 11-76  3-16-89(Ord.) 1-37 2-31-2-67  6- 6-89(Ord.) 5-3 10- 3-89(Ord.) 1-5 15-24 12- 5-89(Ord.) 11.5-8  4-10-90(Ord.) 5-3  4-10-90(Res.) 15-1 15-3-15-23 10- 2-90(Ord.) 15-2, 15-3 15-19 12-11-90(Ord.) 12.5-1 15-16  5- 7-91(Ord.) 10-4 11- 5-91(Ord.) 5-3  1- 7-92(Ord.) 1, 2 2-25  3- 3-92(Ord.) 15.5-1-15.5-7 15.5-21-15.5-23 15.5-31-15.5-34 15.5-41-15.5-44 92-7  6- 2-92 5-7  6- 2-92(Ord.) 1-10 15-25 10- 6-92(Ord.) 18-9  6-15-93(Ord.) 12-21-12-23  7- 6-93(Ord.) 12.5-2 1, 2 2-101, 2-102 10- 5-93(Ord.) 8-13 11.5-12 15-20 1-1 
1-2 1-8 
2-6 
2-7  1-11-94(Ord.) art. I 2.5-21 1-1 12-10 art. II 2.5-22 art. III- 2.5-23-2.5-30 art. X  2- 3-94(Ord.) 2-81-2-85 1-1 2-91 
15-22.5 1-2 2-92 
15-22.5 1-3-1-6 2-93-2-96  5- 3-94(Ord.) 16-60-16-72  6-13-94(Ord.) 18-10-18-16 18-31-18-37 10- 4-94(Ord.) 18-2 18-7 10- 6-94(Ord.) 12-5.1 15-16.5  2- 7-95(Ord.) 2-251, 2-252 1-1-1-4 2-121-2-124  5- 2-95(Ord.) 12.5-31 1 12.5-32 1-1(a)-1-1(f) 18-21-18-26 2 12.5-33 3-8 12.5-34 9 12.5-35 10, 11 12.5-36 12, 13 12.5-37, 12.5-38 14, 15 12.5-39 16 12.5-40 95-06(Ord.)  5- 2-95       Added 17-49  8- 1-95(Ord.) 10-67  8- 9-95(Regs.) 10-33-10-40  9- 5-95(Ord.) 18-5 10- 3-95(Ord.) 12-21-12-23 12-51-12-55 12- 5-95(Ord.) 12.5-3 12.5-16  1- 2-96(Ord.) 2-4  3- 5-96(Ord.) 1 App. A,  4 2-6 App. A,  5 7, 8 App. A,  9, App. A,  10  4- 2-96(Ord.) 7-16, 7-17 7-19 7-19.1 7-20 96-04(Res.)  1- 2-96 2-4(c) 96-05(Res.)  9- 3-96 1-6       Added 2-202 96-06(Ord.)  6- 3-97 11.5-4 11.5-8 96-13(Res.)  1- 7-97 1-1-1-12       Added 5-51-5-62 96-66(Res.)  4- 2-96 7-16-7-20 96-84(Res.)  5- 7-96 10-4 96-122(Res.)  6- 4-96 4-11 4-21       Added 4-34 96-140(Res.)  7- 2-96       Added 12-11 96-217(Res.)  9-17-96 1 App. A,  5.3 2       Added App. A,  5.6.20.8 97-06(Res.)  1- 7-97       Rnbd 15-1-15-25       as 15-1-15-24 15-1-15-24 97-09(Res.)  1- 7-97 App. A,  17.8.1 97-19(Res.)  1-21-97 16-70 97-49(Res.)  2-18-97 11.5-12 97-64(Res.)  3- 4-97 1-1       Added 2-301-2-437 97-65(Res.)  3- 4-97       Added 4-33 97-66(Res.)  3- 4-97 1       Added 5-8 97-67(Res.)  3- 4-97 1-1-1-5       Added 12-13 97-68(Res.)  3- 4-97 15-17(a)(13) 97-86(Res.)  4- 1-97 1       Added 2-201 97-87(Res.)  4- 1-97 4-14 4-21 4-24 97-150(Res.)  6- 3-97       Added 14-42.1 97-151(Res.)  6- 3-97       Added 18-27, 18-28 97-153(Res.)  6- 3-97 8-54 97-211(Res.)  8- 5-97 1-6       Added 12-12 97-232(Res.)  9- 2-97 2-356(e) 97-233(Res.)  9- 2-97 10-14, 10-15 97-265(Res.) 10- 7-97       Rpld 18-31-18-37       Added 18-31-18-38 97-338(Res.) 12- 2-97 1-1 15-21 97-339(Res.) 11- 4-97 1, 2 2-302, 2-303 3 2-356(a) 4 2-357(b)(2) 5 2-358(b) 98-11(Res.)  1-21-98       Added 16-34 98-79A(Res.)  4-17-98 2-358(b) 99-03(Ord.)  1- 5-99 10-4 99-18(Res.)  1-19-99 1 App. A,  5.9.4 99-19(Res.)  1-19-99 1 App. A,  6.1 99-112(Res.)  4-20-99       Added 7-3.1 99-124(Res.)  4-20-99 15-21(a) 99-125(Res.)  5-11-99 5-3 99-126(Res.)  5-11-99       Added 14-50-14-64 99-127(Res.)  5-11-99       Added 13-1 99-128(Res.)  5-11-99 1-4       Added 12-14 99-149(Res.)  6- 1-99 2.5-23 99-175(Res.)  7- 6-99 1-14       Added 13-60-13-74 99-176(Res.)  7- 6-99 18-32(a)-(e)       Added 18-32(g), (h) 99-207(Res.)  8- 3-99 1       Added App. A,  5.9.17 99-210(Res.)  8- 3-99 2.5-27(c)(6) 99-236(Res.)  9- 7-99 4-28 99-266(Res.) 10- 5-99 1 4-24(b) 2 4-26 3, 4 4-29, 4-30 5 4-32 6-9       Added 4-31.1-4-31.4 10       Added 4-25.1 11 4-11 99-289(Res.) 11- 2-99 1 8-54 8-57(a) 8-58       Added 8-68 99-305(Res.) 12- 7-99 1 8-3(a)       Added 8-3(c)-(e) 99-317(Res.) 12-21-99 11-52(tit.)       Rpld 11-52(c)       Rnbd 11-52(d), (e)       as 11-52(c), (d) 11-54 2000-11(Ord.)  3- 6-01       Added 8-14 2000-15(Ord.) 11-14-00 2-394 2-358(b) 2-359(a) 2-418(a) 2000-16(Ord.) 11-14-00       Added 2-231 2000-17(Ord.) 11-14-00 1-1 15-21 2000-21(Ord.) 12- 5-00       Added 20-1-20-9       Rpld App. A,  5.10 2000-24(Res.)  2- 1-00       Added 12.5-41 2000-24(Ord.)  2- 2-01 App. A,  3.82 App. A,  5 2000-66(Res.)  4- 4-00 1-3 App. A,  5.10 4 App. A,  7.4 2000-90(Ord.)  5- 2-00       Added 2-345 2000-91(Res.)  5- 2-00 17-18(B)(6)(c) 17-19(B)(16) 2000-92(Res.)  4-18-00 1-1 15-21 2000-153(Res.)  7-11-00 16-61 16-64, 16-65 16-68 16-70       Rpld 16-71       Rnbd 16-72 as 16-73       Added 16-72 2000-154(Res.)  7-11-00       Added App. A,  4.13 2000-220(Res.)  9- 5-00 App. A,  5 2001-1(Ord.)  2- 6-01 1 8-3 2001-2(Ord.)  4- 3-01       Added 18-51, 18-52 2001-3(Ord.)  3- 6-01 2-301-2-303 2-321-2-234 2-341-2-345 2-351-2-372 2-391-2-395 2-411-2-418       Added 2-419 2-431-2-437 2001-4(Ord.)  3- 6-01 17-12 17-15 2001-5(Ord.)  3- 6-01 17-12 17-15 2001-8(Ord.)  6- 5-01 2-252(a) 2001-9(Ord.)  6- 5-01 1       Added 7-21 2001-11(Ord.)  8-21-01 15-2 15-4 15-6 15-8 15-15-15-17       Added 15-18(f) 15-21 15-24(title) 15-25(b)       Added 15-26 2001-14  9-18-01 8-71-8-74 8-76, 8-77 2001-15 11- 6-01 18-31-18-38 2001-18  9-18-01 1 App. A,  5.6 2001-19 10- 2-01 App. A,  6.2, 6.3 2002-2  5- 7-02       Added 5-9 2002-12  6- 4-02 2-231(a) 2002-23 11-19-02       Added 14-6 2003-1  2- 4-03       Rnbd 15-22-15-26 as 15-23-15-27       Added 15-22 2003-4  2-18-03       Added 18-53 2003-5  3- 4-03 16-1 2003-6  3- 4-03 11-103 2003-8  6-17-03 2-394 2003-10  8- 5-03 2-4 2003-11  9-16-03 18-5 2004-2  3-10-04       Added App. A,  17.9 2004-5  4-29-04 18-7 2004-6  4-29-04 18-2 2004-7  5-12-04       Added 5-70 2004-8  6-17-04       Added 11-39 2004-9  7- 8-04 ch. 17 2004-11  8-11-04       Added App. A,  5.13.1-5.13.11 2004-12  8-11-04       Added App. A,  5.14.1-5.14.10 2004-15  8-25-04       Added 16-25 2005-6  4-19-05 9-16 2005-11  5-24-05       Added 10-147-10-154 2005-17  9- 6-05       Added 8-90-8-103 2005-19 12- 6-05 16-14 2005-20 12- 6-05 15-21 2005-21  1- 3-06       Added 11-45 11-46 2006-2  3-21-06 App. A,  5.4 2006-3  3-21-06 App. A,  5.12.1 2006-05  3-21-06       Rpld 20-1-20-9       Added App. A,  5.10-1.10.10 2006-10  5- 2-06 15-16, 15-21 2006-12  6- 6-06 8-98, 8-99, 8-103       Added 8-98A 2006-13  7-11-06 2006-14  7-11-06       Added App. A, 5.15-5.15.11 2006-15  8- 1-06 12-51-12-55       Added 12-56-12-68 2006-19  9- 5-06 App. A,  7.5 2006-22 11- 1-06       Rpld 2-301-2-303 2-321-2-324 2-341-2-345 2-351-2-372 2-391-2-395 2-411-2-419 2-431-2-437       Added 2-301-2-303 2-311-2-314 2-321-2-324 2-331-2-352 2-361-2-365 2-381-2-389 2-401-2-407 2006-23 10-17-06       Added 16-80-16-90 2006-26 11- 1-06       Added 20-1-20-39 2006-28 12- 5-06       Rnbd App. A,  5.14-5.14.10       as App. A,  5.15-5.15.10 2007-1  1-16-07 8-6, 9-4(f) 2007-2  6- 5-07 App. A,  3.2, 5.6.16 2007-3  6- 5-07 App. A,  5.6.17 2007-4  6- 5-07 App. A,  5.4 2007-5  6- 5-07 App. A,  9.7.2, 10.9.2 2007-6  6- 5-07 14-6 2007-10  6- 5-07       Added 6-4 2007-11  6- 5-07 12.5-41 2007-13  8- 7-07 8-13 2007-15  9-18-07       Added App. A,  5.3.1 5.17 2007-16  8-21-07 12-15 2007-18 10-16-07 5-55(3) 2007-21  1- 8-08 App. A, 5.13, 5.15 2007-22  2-19-08       Added App. A,  5.3.2 5.18 2007-23  1- 8-08       Rpld App. A,  5.3.1 5.17 2008-1  2- 5-08       Added App. A,  5.3.1 5.17 2008-2  2- 5-08 15-2-15-5 15-8, 15-9 15-16-15-18 15-21, 15-26 2008-4  3-18-08 App. A,  5.3I 2008-5  4- 1-08 App. A,  5.3G 2008-6  4-15-08 ch. 3, art. II(tit.) 3-13 2008-7  5- 6-08       Added 6-5 2008-14  9-16-08 App. A,  3.88 5.4, 5.6.2 5.6.10       Added App. A,  3.76.1 2008-15  9-16-08 16-90 2008-17 10- 7-08 App. A,  9.3, 9.5.1.2, 9.6, 9.7.3, 10.5, 10.7.1, 10.7.2, 10.7.3.3, 10.8.1 2008-18 10-21-08 7-19, 7-19.1 2008-19 11-18-08 App. A,  3.53, 5.7 2008-20 11-18-08 App. A,  5.3L 2009-1  2-17-09 7-3.1 2009-3  4- 7-09       Added 13-75-13-82 2009-4  4- 7-09       Added 13-83-13-88 2009-5  7- 7-09       Rpld 8-6, 8-7 8-13, 8-14       Added 8-104-8-106 2009-7  6-16-09 15-2, 15-21       Added 15-4(c)(4) 2009-9 11- 3-09 App. A,  5.3.B.3 2009-11 10- 6-09 2.5-24(b)(1) 2009-12 10- 6-09 2.5-27(c)(34) 2009-13 11- 3-09 App. A,  5.14, 27 2009-14 11-17-09 16-14 2010-1  5-25-10       Added 2-26 2010-5  9-21-10 App. A,  5.16.5, 6 2010-6  9-21-10       Rpld 13-35-13-46 App. A,  4.12-4.12.4       Added App. A,  5.19 2010-7 10- 5-10       Added App. A,  5.20 2010-11 12-21-10 4-29 2010-14  2-15-11       Added App. A,  1.3 2011-2  5-24-11 12.5-31, 12.5-32       Added 12.5-42 2011-13  6-27-11       Added App. A,  5.13.12       Added App. A,  5.14.10       Added App. A,  5.15.12 2011-20  8- 2-11 App. A,  5.13.11 App. A,  5.14.8 App. A,  5.15.11 2011-23 10-18-11 App. A,  5.17-5.17.5       Rpld App. A,  5.17.6       Rnbd App. A,  5.17.7 
-5.17.10, as  5.17.6-5.17.9 5.17.6-5.17.10 2011-25  1- 3-12 App. A,  4.5 2012-3  4-17-12 App. A,  3.38, 5.6.17 2012-4  6-19-12 App. A,  9.7.3, 10.9.3 2012-5  6-19-12       Rpld 13-75-13-82       Added 13-75-13-92       Rnbd 13-83-13-88       as 13-101-13-106 2012-6  7-17-12 4-24(b)       Added 4-24.1 4-34(a), (b) 2012-11  9- 4-12 16-68, 16-70 2013-1  2-26-13 App. A,  3.51(i) 2013-2  2-26-13 App. A,  5.21 2013-3  2-26-13       Added App. A,  3.30a. App. A,  5.3 C.1., D.5.       Added App. A,  5.3 E.5a. 2013-43  8-20-13 App. A,  9.3       Added App. A,  10.6 2013-44  9-17-13       Added Ch. 10, Art. XI,  10-155-10-162 2013-45  9-17-13       Added 1-12 2013-46 10- 1-13 2.5-23, 3-13, 4-25.1, 4-28(a), 4-29, 4-30       Added 4-34(d), (e) 5-3, 5-53, 6-4(a)(1), 7-19, 7-21(b), 8-4(d)       Added 8-25 8-65, 8-71, 10-1, 10-4(b), 10-5(b), 10-14, 10-16, 10-33-10-35, 10-52, 10-65, 10-94, 10-107, 10-123(a), 10-124, 10-142(b), 10-148, 11-102, 12-10(f), 12-63, 12.5-32, 14-19(a), 14-57, 15.5-5(b)       Added 16-35 16-61 2013-48 11-19-13 8-1, 8-96, 8-98 A., 11-108(a) 2013-49 11-19-13 App. A,  5.3 E.41., 42. 2013-51 12-19-13       Added Ch. 9A,  9A-1-9A-6 2013-52 12-17-13       Added App. A,  3.8a., 3.16a., 3.38a., 3.57a. App. A,  3.70       Added App. A,  5.3 A.8., 9. 2013-53 12-17-13       Rpld 4-28(a) 2013-180  9-17-13       Added App. B 2013-192 10- 1-13 App. B 2014-1  2-25-14 App. A,  5.3 I.5. 2014-4  3-25-14       Added Ch. 21,  21-1-21-15 2014-8  5-27-14 10-158 2014-9  5-27-14 8-104-8-106 2014-10  5-27-14 9-17(b) 2014-12  6-17-14 App. A,  4.3 2014-16  9-16-14       Added Ch. 9B,  9B-1-9B-4 2014-17  9- 2-14       Rpld Ch. 9,  9-1-9-20       Added Ch. 9,  9-1-9-35 2014-20 12-16-14 App. A,  17 2014-158 (Res.)  9-16-14 App. B 2015-4  6-23-15 App. A,  5.3 2015-5  8-11-15       Added Ch. 9C,  9C-1-9C-6 2015-6  7-21-15 10-158(c) 2015-7  8-11-15 App. A,  5.6.10 2015-8  8-11-15       Added Ch. 10, Art. XII,  10-163-10-178 2015-41 (Res.)  4-14-15 App. B 2015-183 (Res.) 12- 1-15 App. B 2015-194 (Res.) 12-15-15 App. B 2015-13 10- 6-15 App. A, 5.6.16 2015-14 10- 1-15 App. A, 5.19 2015-17  3-15-16 8-104, 8-104.1, 8-105, 8-106 2015-18  1-19-16 11.5-7 2016-1  3-15-16 11.5-2.2 2016-3  5- 3-16 App. A,  3.15-3.15.4 2016-7  7-19-16       Rpld 5-53, 5-54, 5-61 2016-8  9- 6-16       Rpld 11-34       Added 11-34 2016-9  8-16-16       Added Ch. 8, Art. VIII, 8-116-8-118 2016-10  8-16-16 11-1, App. C(note) 2016-11(Res.)  8-16-16 18-2 2016-12 10- 4-16       Rpld Ch. 8, Art. IV,  8-50-8-68 8-98 A 8-106 2016-13 10- 4-16 2-101, 2-102 2016-14 10-18-16 App. C 2016-15  2- 7-17       Added Ch. 10, Art. XIII,  10-179-10-187 2016-34(Res.)  3- 1-16 App. B 2016-107(Res.)  6-21-16 App. B 2016-137(Res.)  8-16-16 App. B 2017-1  2- 7-17 App. C 2017-2  2-28-17 8-12 2017-3  2-28-17       Added App. A,  3.21a App. A,  5.6.10       Added App. A,  5.6.16.21 2017-4  2-28-17       Added App. A,  3.12a, 3.16b, 3.65a App. A,  5.3 App. A,  5.20-5.20.6 App. A,  17.5.2 2017-5  2-28-17 9C-3(a), (b), 9C-4 2017-6  2-28-17 App. C 2017-7  3-21-17 App. C 2017-8  3-21-17 4-11, 4-19, 4-20, 4-24.1(a)(3), 4-29       Added 4-35 2017-10  3-21-17 7-16 2017-12(Res.)  2- 7-17 App. B 2017-12  4-25-17       Rpld Ch. 18, Art. I,  18-1-18-9       Added Ch. 18, Art. I,  18-1-18-5 Ch. 18, Art. V,  18-54 2017-13  6- 6-17 4-11       Added 4-21.1 4-22(b), 4-24, 4-26, 4-29, 4-31, 4-31.2, 4-31.3, 4-32, 4-34, 12.5-2(a) 2017-14  5-30-17 12-14(b)(1) 2017-16  6- 6-17       Added 18-5(e) 2017-18  7-11-17 10-183(g) 2017-19  7-11-17 App. C 2017-20  8- 1-17       Added 4-21.1(d) 12.5-2 2017-21  8- 1-17 App. C 2017-22  9-19-17 App. C 2017-23 10- 3-17 App. A,  9.5 App. A,  10.73 2017-25 10- 3-17 App. A,  5.3.1, 5.17, 5.21.3.1 2017-27 11-21-17 11-34 App. C 2017-68(Res.)  5-30-17 App. B 2017-96(Res.)  6-20-17 App. B 2017-105(Res.)  7-11-17 App. B 2017-106(Res.)  7-11-17 App. B 2018-1  1-16-18 App. C 2018-2  2-27-18 14-3, 14-4 2018-3  2-27-18 8-93 2018-4  2-27-18       Added Ch. 4, Art. V, 4-61-4-65 2018-6  6- 5-18 14-51, 14-55, 14-57, 14-58(d) 2018-7  3-20-18 12.5-34(a) 2018-8  3-20-18 5-3, 5-5 8-1, 8-70, 8-105       Added 15-28 2018-9  4-24-18 4-29 2018-10  4-24-18 App. C 2018-11  4-24-18 5-55(3) 15.5-2, 15.5-3 2018-12  4-24-18 2-302, 2-303 2-314(b), 2-337(b) 2-338, 2-339       Added 2-2-339.1 2018-14  5-22-18 10-179 2018-15  6- 5-18       Added 1-13 2018-16(Res.)  2- 6-18 App. B 2018-17  6-19-18 10-181, 10-183(a) 2018-18  6- 5-18 13-75(b), 13-82 15.5-3, 15.5-21, 15.5-22 16-33, 16-61, 16-63 2018-19  6-19-18 2-231 2018-27(Res.)  2- 6-18 App. B 2018-41(Res.)  3- 6-18 App. B 2018-57(Res.)  4-13-18 App. B 2018-78(Res.)  5-22-18 App. B 2018-83(Res.)  5-22-18 App. B 2018-99(Res.)  6- 5-18 App. B 2018-114(Res.)  6-19-18 App. B  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the General Laws of 1956. 
G.L. 1956 
Section Section  
this Code 2-1-1 et seq. App. A,  3 2-1-15 et seq. 15.5-5 2-1-18 App. A,  5.19.4 2-1-20 App. A,  3 2-14-2 13-64(a) 3-5-10 2.5-24 3-5-19 2.5-26 3-5-21 2.5-29 3-7-6 2.5-25 3-7-7 2.5-27 - 3-1 3-7-14 2.5-27 3-7-14.1 2.5-27 3-7-19 2.5-24 3-8-10 2.5-28 3-8-11.2 2.5-28 tit. 4, ch. 13.1 4-28 tit. 4, ch. 19 4-51 - 4-57 4-1-3.2 4-35 4-13-1 4-24 - 4-28(c) 4-13-1 et seq. 4-13 4-13-1(b)(20) 12.5-2 4-13-4 App. B 4-13-10 4-29 - 4-34 4-13-15 4-25.1 - 4-30 - 4-31.4 4-13-19 4-24 4-13-31 4-31.1 4-13.1-1 et seq. 4-50 4-13.1-5 4-55 4-19-2 4-21.1 4-19-6 4-34 4-19-16 4-21.1 4-24-3 4-21.1 4-24-4 4-24 4-24-13 4-21.1 tit. 5, ch. 21 10-13 5-11-1.1 et seq. 10-64 5-11-7 10-78 5-11-18 Ch. 10, Art. 5-16-5 S A 5-18-1 et seq. 12-15 5-21-1 10-14 - 10-22 5-22-3 3-1 5-23-1 et seq. 10-33 5-23-2 10-34 5-24-1 10-1 5-56 App. A,  5.19.4 5-56.1 App. A,  5.19.4 tit. 6, ch. 14 10-2 8-8-3(a)(4) S A Art. 38,  1 8-8-3.2 S A Art. 38,  1 8-8-13 S A Art. 1,  4 8-9-4, 8-9-5 S A Art. 1,  9 9-9-16 S A Art. 1,  5 9-9-20 S A Art. 1,  5 10-1-1 10-178 tit. 11, ch. 11-1 et seq. 10-176 11-9-13 12-12(c) 11-9-13.8(1) 10-183 11-9-14 12-12(c) 11-19-30 3-25 11-44-1 12-5 11-44-12 et seq. 12-5 11-45-1 et seq. 12-2 12-14-1 S A 15-3-5 S A Art. 39,  1 17-1-2 S A Art. 45,  20 17-5-5 S A Art. 45,  20 17-5-6 S A Art. 45,  20 17-10.1 et seq. S A Art. 1,  13 17-11-7 S A ch. 17-15 S A 17-15-6 S A Art. 1,  12 20-1-2 App. A,  5.19.4 tit. 21, ch. 28.6 App. A,  3.12a 21-28.6 9C-5 21-28.6-1 et seq. App. A,  5.20.1 - App. A,  5.20.2 21-28.6-3 App. A,  5.20.1 21-28.6-12 et seq. App. A,  5.20.1 21-28.6-16 App. A,  5.20.1 - App. A,  5.20.2 22-1-2 S A Art. 1,  3 22-2-2 S A Art. 1,  3 23-18-7 12-15 23-18-10 Ch. 6 23-18-10.1 12-15 23-19.1-1 et seq. 8-50 23-19.1-4 8-50 - 20-1 23-19.14-2 21-2 23-19.15 App. A,  5.19.4 23-20.6-2(c) 12-12(b)(2) 23-20.8 10-167 23-20.9-5 12-12(b)(1) 23-20.10-2(15) 10-183 23-23 7-19 23-23-15 7-19 23-23-18 7-17 - 7-19 23-23-18(b), (c) 7-19.1 23-24.3 App. A,  5.19.4 23-24.6-1-23-24.6-26 9.8 23-27.3 App. A,  5.19 23-27.3-100.0 et seq. Ch. 5 23-27.3-100.1, et seq. 9C-3 23-27.3-106.1 App. A,  5.19 23-27.3-106.3-23-27.3-106.5 9-27 23-27.3-114.2 9-28 23-27.3-122.0 9-29 23-28.1-1 et seq. 7-16 - 9C-3 23-28.22-1 10-96 23-28.22-3 10-96 23-28.25-3 14-55(a)(3) ch. 24-1 S A 24-2-8 S A Art. 4,  5 24-5-9 16-1 24-5-14 16-10, 16-11 24-7-1 16-10, 16-11 - 20-1 24-7-1 et seq. S A Art. 45,  6 24-7-1 App. A,  5.10.1 28-21-1 et seq. 15-2 31-1-3 11-108 31-3.1-4 App. B 31-12-3 11-3 31-12-6-31-12-9 11-12-11-15 31-12-13 11-5 31-13-1 11-4 31-13-4 11-6 - 11-34 31-13-11 11-8 31-18-1 11-89 31-18-3 11-90 31-18-5 11-91 31-18-12 11-92 31-19-7 11-18 31-19-10 11-19 31-25-25 11-1 31-25-26 11-1 31-28-1 et seq. Ch. 11, Art. IV - S A Art. 11 31-37-1 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VI 34-39-1 et seq. 17-8 34-44-1 et seq. 11.5-7 38-2-1 et seq. 15-18 38-2-4 15-21 - App. B 39-15-1 et seq. S A Art. 22,  4 39-26-5 18-54 tit. 40.1, ch. 24 App. A,  3.15.2 40.1-24-1 et seq. App. A,  3.15.1 tit. 41, ch. 46 12-13(c) 42-12-19 15-18 42-17.1 App. A,  5.19.4 42-17.6 App. A,  5.19.4 42-35-1 et seq. 14-17 - 14-28 42-35-14 2.5-25 42-45-5 App. A,  3 42-46-1 et seq. 2-7 - 20-16 42-72.1-1 et seq. App. A,  3.15.3 42-82-2 2-85 42-87-1(7) App. A,  3.21a 43-2-1 1-7 43-3-3-43-3-6 1-2 43-3-6 App. A,  5.20.1 44-3-3(a)(5) 18-5 44-3-3(a)(6) 18-5 44-3-3(a)(17) 18-5 44-3-3(a)(45) 18-5 44-3-3(a)(55) 18-5 44-3-3(a)(59) 18-5 44-3-3 18-1 44-3-4 18-4 - 18-7 44-3-4(a) 18-4 44-3-4(a)(1) 18-3 44-3-4(a)(1)(iii) 18-4 44-3-4(a)(1)(xvf) 18-3 44-3-4(b) 18-4 44-3-4(c) 18-4 44-3-4(e) 18-4 44-3-4(i) 18-4 - S A Art. 44,  1 44-3-4(e) 18-9 44-3-5(a) 18-4 43-3-10-43-3-13 1-2 44-3-12 18-8 - S A Art. 35,  1 44-3-12(a) 18-3 44-3-12(a) S A Art. 35,  1 44-3-13.1 18-1 - 18-2 43-3-16 1-2 44-3-16(b) S A Art. 22,  4 44-3-21 18-54 43-3-22-43-3-24 1-4 44-3-25 S A Art. 35,  1 44-5-3(c) 18-54 44-5-6 S A Art. 2,  15 44-5-11 S A Art. 41,  1 44-5-13.2.1 S A - S A Art. 42,  1 44-5-13.3 S A - S A Art. 42,  2 44-5-26 15-25 44-5.1-3 5-9 44-5.1-3(i)(2) 5-9 44-7-14(4) 18-27 44-7-15 18-28(c) 44-13.1 S A Art. 44,  1 44-21-1 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. 45-2-26 S A Art. 38,  1 45-3-1 et seq. S A Art. 14 45-3-5 S A Art. 1,  13 45-3-15 et seq. S A Art. 17 45-3-17 S A Art. 17,  2 45-4-1 S A Art. 23 45-4-1 et seq. S A Art. 17,  4 45-5-29 S A Art. 2,  5 45-6-1 12-3 - Ch. 16, Art. III 45-6-2 1-10 45-6-2.3 15-23 45-6-3 12-4 45-12-2 S A Art. 2,  15 - S A Art. 2,  37 - S A Art. 12,  8 45-15-16 2-4 45-19-1 et seq. S A Art. 15 45-21-1 et seq. S A Art. 15 45-22-1 Ch. 13 45-22-1 et seq. S A Art. 10 45-22.2-1 et seq. 17-46 - App. A,  3 45-22.2-3 17-7 45-22.2-4 17-7 45-22.2-4 App. A,  3 45-23-1-45-23-24 17-4 45-23-25-45-23-74 17-3 - 17-6 45-23-32 17-3 45-23-53(B), (C) 17-16 45-23-58 17-32 45-23-64 17-3 tit. 45, ch. 24 App. A,  3.15 45-24-14 S A Art. 6,  8 45-24-26-45-24-72 App. A,  1 45-24-27 et seq. 17-46 - S A Art. 6 45-24-31 17-7 45-24-41 App. A,  3 45-24-42 App. A,  3 45-24-47 17-3 45-24-49 17-3 45-24-53(E) 17-27 45-24-56 S A Art. 6,  8 45-24-57 S A Art. 6,  8 45-24.3-1 et seq. 11.5-7 45-24.3-2(g) 9-8 45-31-45-33 21-2 45-31-12-45-33-15 21-3 45-32-13 21-12 tit. 45, ch. 82-26 11.5-1 ch. 46 S A Art. 1,  15 46-12 App. A,  5.19 46-12-1 S A Art. 45,  1 46-12-1 et seq. 13-85 - 13-103 - 15-2 46-12-1(b) App. A,  3 46-12-19 et seq. 15-17 46-13.1-3 App. A, 3 46-13.2 App. A,  5.19.4 46-23 App. A,  5.19 46-23-6 App. A,  5.19 ch. 47 2-202(f) 47-1-1.1 2-202(b) 47-2-47-15 2-202(c) 47-2-1-47-2-6 2-202(d) 47-2-6-47-2-9 2-202(e) 47-3-1 et seq. 2-202(f) 47-3-4 2-202(f) ch. 3629 S A ch. 3650 S A tits. 29, 45 S A Art. 1,  14  
