AIKEN CITY CODE 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: June 11, 2001 
Effective: June 11, 2001 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
AIKEN, SOUTH CAROLINA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Fred Cavanaugh 
Mayor 
____________ 
Lessie Price 
Michael Anaclerio 
Eric Radford 
Beverly Clyburn 
Don Sprawls 
Pat Cunning 
City Council 
____________ 
Roger P. LeDuc 
City Manager 
____________ 
Gary H. Smith, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Richard L. Pearce 
City Solicitor/Staff Attorney 
____________ 
Sara Ridout 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Aiken, South Carolina. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code, as supplemented through April, 1999, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jan Shekitka, Code Attorney, and Bill Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Sara Ridout, City Clerk, Richard Pearce, City Solicitor/Staff Attorney and Gary Smith, III, City Attorney for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Aiken, South Carolina. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Aiken, South Carolina. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Aiken, South Carolina. 2001. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 06112001 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of Aiken, South Carolina; Establishing this New Code; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Within the New Code, Except as Expressly Provided in this Ordinance; Providing for the Manner of Amending this Code; and Providing When this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
WHEREAS, the City of Aiken has a Code of Ordinances; and 
WHEREAS, this City Code was adopted by Ordinance 22580 on February 25, 1980; and 
WHEREAS, the City Clerk, City Attorney, and City Solicitor and Staff Attorney have undertaken an effort to review the 1980 Code book and the revisions to it made since its adoption, and determined that a change of format to make the Code more research friendly and incorporate changes made to the original 1980 Code; and 
WHEREAS, the City Council, on first reading, agreed to amend Section 2-64(a)(5)(b)(3) of the proposed Code of Ordinances to read as follows: 
"3.  The presiding officer may alternate between proponents and opponents when recognizing individuals to address council." 
WHEREAS, the Council of the City of Aiken has concluded that the adoption of the 2001 Code of Ordinance for the City of Aiken is essential to the general health, safety, welfare, and economic stability of the City, and is in the best interest of its citizens; 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF AIKEN HEREBY ORDAINS THAT: 
Section 1: That the Code of Ordinances, as amended hereinabove, consisting of Chapters 1 to 46, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of the City of Aiken, South Carolina," which Code shall supercede all general and permanent ordinances passed by the City Council on or before April 1, 1999, to the extent provided in Section 2 below. 
Section 2: That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force in effect from and after May 29, 2001, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Aiken enacted on final passage on or before April 1, 1999, and not included in such Code, or recognized in continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code; PROVIDED HOWEVER, that nothing in this repealer shall repeal the City of Aiken Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Aiken, the Historic Preservation Ordinance, or other such ordinances not previously incorporated within the City of Aiken Code. 
Section 3: Any and all additions or amendments to the City Code, which passed in such form as to indicate the intention of City Council to make the same a part of this Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the City of Aiken Code so that a reference to the "Code of the City of Aiken, South Carolina," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 4: A copy of the City of Aiken Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, preserved in loose leaf form, or in such other form or data compilation as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or the City Clerk's designee, to insert in designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of City Council to make these amendments or ordinances a part of the City Code when these amendments or ordinances have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the City of Aiken Code, all provisions, which may, from time to time, be repealed by the City Council. The City Clerk's copy of the City of Aiken Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it. 
Section 5: In case of the amendment of any section to the City of Aiken Code, for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty provided in Section 1-13 of the Aiken City Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section of the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended unless such penalty is specifically repealed in it. 
Section 6 : It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the City of Aiken, to be misrepresented. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-13 of the Aiken City Code. 
Section 7 : All ordinance or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 8 : This ordinance shall become effective on June 11, 2001. 
ADOPTED by the Council of the City of Aiken at its regular meeting held this 11 th day of June, 2001, at which a quorum was present and voting. 
INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING:   May 28, 2001 
SECOND READING AND ADOPTION:      June 11, 2001 
	/s/  Fred B. Cavanaugh 
      MAYOR 
 	 
 ATTEST: 
	/s/ Sara B. Ridout 
      CITY CLERK 
 	 
APPROVED: 
/s/ Gary H. Smith, III 
      CITY ATTORNEY 	
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Aiken City Code," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1980, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Duty to provide for codification and indexing of ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-290.  
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Aiken, South Carolina. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used without further qualification, it shall mean the Code of the City of Aiken, South Carolina, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; provided however, that if the last day of the period so computed is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, such day shall be excluded and the time period shall run until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday. 
Council. Whenever the term "council" or "city council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Aiken. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Aiken, South Carolina. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, department, board, commission or other agency by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Aiken, South Carolina." 
Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are referred to, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the city. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Shall, may, must. The words "shall" or "must" are mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means a strip of land in front or on the sides of a house or lot of land lying between the property line and the street. 
Signature or subscription. Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of South Carolina. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-10, it shall be construed to refer to the Code of Laws of South Carolina 1976, section 5-7-10, as amended, or whatever section is cited. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present. 
Written; in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(Code 1980, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended merely as catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1980, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions of Code considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances previously adopted and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1980, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  An ordinance granting any franchise or right; 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget; 
(4)  Any ordinance relating to salaries of city officers and employees or to compensation or pay plans or classification plans for such officers or employees; 
(5)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement; 
(7)  Any zoning ordinance including amendments to the zoning map and ordinances zoning or rezoning specific property; 
(8)  Any ordinance prescribing regulations for land development and the subdivision of land; 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city or establishing and prescribing street grades; 
(10)  Ordinance No. 041387, as amended, adopted April 13, 1987, and entitled "An Ordinance to Minimize Damage from Floods; to Regulate Land Uses in the Floodplains; and for Other Purposes;" 
(11)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; or 
(12)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1980, §§ 1-5, 20-1)  
Sec. 1-6. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of the City of Aiken, South Carolina (or the Aiken City Code), is hereby amended to read as follows …" The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(b)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of the City of Aiken, South Carolina (or the Aiken City Code), is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows: …" The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1980, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1980, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Duty to provide for maintenance of ordinances in current form, reflecting amendments and repeals, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-290.  
Sec. 1-9. - Copies of Code and supplements to be available for public inspection. 
At least three copies of this Code and every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall there be available for public inspection, during normal business hours. 
(Code 1980, § 1-9) 
State Law reference— Codified ordinances to be available for public inspection at reasonable times, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-290.  
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, except by ordinance of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 1-10)  
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 1-11)  
Sec. 1-12. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1980, § 1-12)  
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any other ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the person violating any such provision of this Code or other ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise provided. 
(b)  In addition any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Code may be ordered to pay restitution in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00. In determining the amount of restitution the judge shall determine and itemize the actual amount of damage or loss in the order. In addition the judge may set an appropriate payment schedule. A municipal judge may hold a party in contempt for failure to pay the restitution ordered if the judge finds the party has the ability to pay. 
(c)  Where there is any conflict between the maximum penalty provided by the statutory law of the state and this Code or any other ordinance of the city, for the same or similar offenses, the maximum punishment provided by the state statute shall govern. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1980, §§ 1-13, 1-14) 
State Law reference— Authority of council to fix fines and penalties for violation of ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; trial of persons charged with ordinance violations, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-90; maximum penalty that municipal courts may impose, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-65.  
Sec. 1-14. - Police jurisdiction over parking lots. 
(a)  The procedure for bringing parking lots not owned or leased by the city under public safety department jurisdiction of the city shall be as follows: The owner of a parking lot in the city which is open to use by the public for motor vehicle traffic shall petition the director of public safety requesting that the city exercise police jurisdiction over such parking lot. The director of public safety should determine that such petition is signed by, or on behalf of, the owners or owner, of a majority of the area of such parking lot, and should ascertain the number of signs to be posted to inform the public that the area is subject to the police jurisdiction of the city. The petitioner[s] shall pay the city for the number of signs determined by the director of public safety to be necessary, at a rate specified by the director. 
(b)  Upon the requirements of subsection (a) of this section being met, the director of public safety should request that the parking lot in question be posted with appropriate signs informing the public that the area is subject to the police jurisdiction of the city, with regard to the unlawful operation of motor vehicles and violations of applicable city ordinances. 
(c)  Upon an owner, or owners, filing a request or petition to put a parking lot under public safety jurisdiction referred to in subsection (a), jurisdiction of the city and the city, acting through its department of public safety, shall thereupon have the authority to enforce, in such parking lot, all laws and ordinances relating to the unlawful operation of motor vehicles applicable to the public streets and highways immediately adjoining or connecting to the parking area, as well as all other applicable ordinances of the city and laws and statutes of the state. 
(Code 1980, § 1-15; Ord. No. 02232004, § 1, Exh. A, 2-23-2004)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration of business license regulations, § 12-39; administrative record for adult entertainment, § 12-87; elections, ch. 14; human relations, ch. 18; municipal court, ch. 20; taxation, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 44. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations, S.C. Code 1976, title 5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Adoption of council-manager form of government. 
The council-manager form of municipal government, with a mayor and six council members elected as provided in chapter 14 for four-year terms of office, as provided in S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-13-10—5-13-100, is hereby adopted for the city, to be effective on July 1, 1976, or as soon thereafter as prescribed by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1) 
State Law reference— Selection of form of government, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-5-10 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2. - Payment of unemployment taxes by city. 
The mayor, by and with the attest of the city clerk, is hereby authorized and directed to execute any and all documents necessary to enter into an agreement with the state employment security commission pertaining to the payment of unemployment taxes by the city. The city hereby adopts the reimbursement method of paying such unemployment taxes. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4)  
Sec. 2-3. - Unauthorized taking of city records. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take any record from any municipal office of the city, without the consent of the officer having control of such records. 
(Code 1980, § 2-5)  
Sec. 2-4. - Language for transaction of city business and affairs. 
All city business, transactions, and affairs will be conducted and communicated orally and in written form in the English language. Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to judicial proceedings in the municipal court or matters required to be transacted in another language by federal or state law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-10)  
Secs. 2-5—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Composition. 
The mayor and six council members shall be termed "the council" and shall be the governing body of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-16) 
State Law reference— Composition of council in cities with council-manager form of government, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-20.  
Sec. 2-32. - Oath of office. 
Before entering upon the duties of their offices, the mayor and members of the council shall take the oath of office prescribed by S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-150. Other officers of the city and such members of commissions and committees as may be designated by the council shall take the following oath to be administered by the city clerk: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified according to the Constitution of this state, to exercise the duties of the office to which I have been elected (or appointed); that as  (Name of Office)  of the City of Aiken, I will equally, fairly and impartially, to the best of my ability and skill, exercise the trust reposed in me, and I will use my best endeavors to preserve the peace and to carry into effect according to law the purposes for which I have been elected (or appointed) and will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of this state and the United States. So help me God." 
(Code 1980, § 2-2)  
Sec. 2-33. - Qualifications of council members. 
The mayor and council members shall be qualified electors of the city and shall hold no other public office or public employment with the city, county or state, except that of notary public, appointed school board member or a member of the national guard or other federal military reserve. If a council member or the mayor shall cease to possess any of these qualifications or shall be convicted of malfeasance in office or a crime involving moral turpitude, his office shall immediately become vacant. 
(Code 1980, § 2-17) 
State Law reference— Mayor and council member to be qualified electors of city, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-20.  
Sec. 2-34. - Filling of vacancies. 
Vacancies in the office of mayor or council member shall be filled by special election, if the vacancy occurs more than 180 days prior to the next city general election, for the unexpired portion of the term. If the vacancy occurs less than 180 days before a city general election, the vacancy shall be filled at the general election for the unexpired term as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-200.  
Sec. 2-35. - Election schedule. 
(a)  The following dates and times are hereby established for nomination and election of candidates for regularly scheduled municipal general elections to council, including the mayor, that are conducted in odd-numbered years: 
(1)  The opening of filing for nomination petitions and other filing of candidates for nomination in municipal political party primaries or conventions shall be 12:00 noon on the first Monday in July. 
(2)  The closing of the filing of candidates for nomination by political parties shall be 12:00 noon on the second Monday of July. 
(3)  Closing of entries for nomination by petition shall be 12:00 noon on the 75th day prior to the municipal general election. 
(4)  Municipal party primaries or conventions shall be conducted on the second Tuesday in August. 
(5)  Municipal party primary runoffs, if necessary, shall be conducted on the fourth Tuesday in August. 
(6)  Last day for certifying candidates to the municipal election commission shall be 12:00 noon on the 60th day prior to the municipal general election. 
(7)  The municipal general election for council members and mayor shall be conducted on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy on council requiring a special election, council shall follow the election schedule for special elections in S.C. Code § 7-13-190, as amended, or any successor provisions thereto. 
(c)  If a date set by this section falls on a Saturday or Sunday or legal holiday in a given year, the date therefor shall be changed to the next preceding weekday. 
(Code 1980, § 2-18.1; Ord. No. 04272015 , § 1, 4-27-2015) 
State Law reference— Municipalities to establish election schedules, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-70.  
Sec. 2-36. - Compensation of members. 
(a)  The annual salary of the members of city council shall be $9,000.00 per year. The annual salary of the mayor pro tem shall be $12,000.00 per year. The annual salary of the mayor shall be $15,000.00 per year. Pursuant to Section 5-7-170 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, as amended, this salary change shall not go into effect until the commencement date of the terms of two or more members of city council elected at the next general election [the 2007 election] following the adoption of this section. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  The members of city council, the mayor pro tem, and the mayor shall also be entitled to be reimbursed the actual expenses they incur for attending functions for professional development, or where members of council are acting in their official capacity as a representative of the city or they are otherwise performing their official duties. This reimbursement shall be paid upon submission of a signed city reimbursement form as provided by the finance department. 
(d)  The mayor shall be authorized to use an automobile purchased or leased by the city during his term of service as mayor. The guidelines for the use of this automobile shall be the same as those which govern the use of city vehicles by department heads. 
(e)  The members of the city council, the mayor pro tem, and the mayor shall be allowed to participate in the city's retirement plan as set forth in such retirement plan. 
(f)  Members of the city council, including the mayor, are eligible to continue to participate in the city's health insurance program. They must be participants in the city employees' retirement plan who retire on or after attaining age 55 with at least 12 years of service. 
(1)  An eligible council member who retires with at least 12 years of service with the city but is less than age 55 may continue his coverage under the city's health insurance program at his own cost until attaining age 55. At age 60, the city will offset any monthly pension check which may be payable to a former member of the council by the monthly premium for health insurance payable by the former member. The remaining portion of the pension check shall be directly deposited by the city. 
(2)  All eligible council members who retire on or after age 55 may elect to continue their health insurance coverage and the cost of continued coverage shall be divided between the city and the retiree as follows: 
Retirement at or After 
Age 55 With Years of 
Service 	Percentage of Cost Paid 
by City 
Less than 12 	 0 
12 	28 
15 	40 
20 	60 
25 	80 
 
An additional four percent is added for each full year of service after 12 years up to 25 years of service. Example: For 12 years of service, the city will pay 28 percent of the cost of health insurance coverage. In no event will the city pay more than 80 percent of the monthly insurance premium. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to change or modify its health insurance program from time to time, and continue coverage as is available under the health insurance program as modified from time to time. 
(4)  A former council member's election to continue coverage under the city's health insurance program must be made at the time of the member's retirement when the member is first eligible to elect continued health insurance coverage. If the member fails to elect to continue coverage under the city's health insurance program at the time the member is first eligible, the former member may not later elect to participate. Also, if the former member elects to participate in the city's health insurance program after retirement and later stops participating or the coverage ceases due to the member's failure to pay the required premiums, the member shall not be allowed to rejoin or re-elect health insurance coverage under the city's program. 
(5)  The mayor and council members shall be responsible for 100 percent of any dependent coverage for health insurance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-19; Ord. No. 091195C, §§ 1—3, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 06262000, §§ 1—6, 6-26-2000; Ord. No. 07102000F, §§ 1, 2, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 10232000, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. No. 03262007B, § 1, 3-26-2007) 
State Law reference— Determination of salary of mayor and council members, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-170.  
Sec. 2-37. - General powers. 
All legislative powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the council shall have power to: 
(1)  Adopt the budget of the city. 
(2)  Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance subject to such restrictions and limitations as may be prescribed by law. 
(3)  Inquire into and investigate the conduct of any city office, department or agency and make investigations as to municipal affairs. 
(4)  Adopt plats. 
(5)  Adopt the official map of the city and modify the official map from time to time as the need may require. 
(6)  Regulate and restrict the height and number of stories of buildings and other structures, the size of yards and courts, the density of population of land and the location and use of buildings for trade, industry, business, residence or other purposes. 
(7)  Provide for safe and sanitary housing accommodations for families of low income. 
(8)  Create a housing authority. 
(9)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas. 
(10)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the replanning, improvement and development of neighborhoods and for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster. 
(11)  Provide for an annual independent audit by a qualified certified public accountant designated by the council. Such certified public accountant shall, as of the end of each fiscal year, make an independent audit of the accounts and other evidence of financial transactions of the city government for the immediate past year, and shall submit this report to the council and to the city manager. The designated accountant shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or of any of its officers, but within specifications approved by the council, shall post-audit the books and documents kept by any office, department, board, agency or commission of the city government. 
(Code 1980, § 2-20) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-7-240, 5-13-30, 5-23-10.  
Sec. 2-38. - Powers with respect to offices, boards, commission, etc. 
(a)  The council, by ordinance, may create, change and abolish offices, departments, boards, agencies and commissions. 
(b)  The council may appoint and remove all members of the municipal boards, agencies and commissions established by the council, state law or constitution, except as otherwise provided by state law. Such boards and commissions shall serve as advisory bodies to the council and shall not exercise administrative responsibility, except as may be otherwise provided by law. Terms of the board, agency or commission members shall be as provided by ordinance, state law or constitution. 
(Code 1980, § 2-21)  
Sec. 2-39. - General functions of mayor. 
The mayor shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, and shall execute all official documents of the city, but shall have no regular administrative duties. 
(Code 1980, § 2-22)  
Sec. 2-40. - Emergency powers of mayor. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section a state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, civil disturbance, catastrophe or for any other reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety, health, welfare or property. 
(b)  In the event of a state of emergency threatening or endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the city or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and, in order more effectively to protect the lives, safety and property of people within the city, to define and impose a curfew applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit the application of such a curfew to any area specifically designated and described within the jurisdiction of the city and to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from the curfew public safety officers, doctors, nurses and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the city. 
(d)  The city council shall be called into session within 24 hours after a state of emergency has been proclaimed by the mayor. 
(e)  The mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency and curfew as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the city council. 
(f)  During the existence of proclaimed state of emergency, when a curfew has been defined and imposed, it shall be unlawful for anyone subject to such curfew: 
(1)  To be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon public property unless such travel is necessary to obtain medical assistance. 
(2)  To possess off one's own premises, buy, sell, give away or otherwise transfer or dispose of any explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapon of any kind. 
(3)  To sell beer, wines or intoxicating beverages of any kind; or to possess or consume beer, wines or intoxicating beverages of any kind off one's own premises. 
(4)  To sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum products or any combustible or inflammable substances, except as expressly authorized by the provisions of the curfew imposed. 
(Code 1980, § 2-23)  
Sec. 2-41. - Mayor pro tempore. 
The council shall elect one of its members as mayor pro tempore to serve as such for two years, who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, and if a vacancy occurs, shall become mayor until a successor is duly qualified and elected. 
(Code 1980, § 2-24) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-190.  
Sec. 2-42. - Limitations on dealing with administrative service. 
Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office by the city manager or by any of his subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city. Except for the purposes of inquiry and investigation, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. Any council members violating the provisions of this section, or voting for a resolution or ordinance in violation of this section, shall be guilty of malfeasance in office, and shall thereby disqualify himself as a member of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-25)  
Secs. 2-43—2-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Council meetings, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-250. 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Regular and special meetings generally. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the second and fourth Monday in each month, unless changed by a majority vote of members present at any regular or special meeting. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council may be held on the call of the mayor or of a majority of the members. Notice of a special meeting shall be given immediately to all available members and the news media by the city manager. 
(c)  All regular and special meetings of the council shall be open to the public. 
(d)  For annexations, rezonings, and utility requests before Aiken City Council affecting a particular piece of real estate, such matter shall also be given public notice by posting a public notice sign, at least 20 days prior to the first scheduled public hearing before city council, on the subject property and in a location clearly visible from each street adjacent to the particular piece of property. This public notice sign shall be in substantially the same form as the public notice sign utilized by the planning department for matters pending before the historic preservation commission, board of zoning appeals, and planning commission, and conformed for the purposes of this section, as appropriate. This notice shall be posted by the planning department director, or a designee of the director. Where more than one lot is involved in an application, the planning director shall determine the number and location of required public notice signs. 
(Code 1980, § 2-31; Ord. No. 06092003, § 1, 6-9-2003)  
Sec. 2-62. - Conference meetings. 
(a)  The city council may have conference meetings as permitted by the state Freedom of Information Act at such times and in such places as may be deemed necessary and in the public interest by the mayor or any member of the council. No formal vote shall be taken upon any matter under discussion at any such conference, but an informal polling of the council may be made, if desired by any member of the council. 
(b)  The city manager may, if time permits, give notice to the local news media or anyone requesting in writing advance notice that a conference meeting will be held pursuant to law without stating the specific matters to be discussed. When advance notice is not given, the city manager may give notice of such meeting after it has been held. 
(c)  No vote of the council shall be necessary to call a conference meeting. 
(Code 1980, § 2-32)  
Sec. 2-63. - Quorum; presiding officer; rules of order. 
A majority of the members of the council serving shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business at any meeting. The mayor or mayor pro tempore shall preside, except that, in the absence of both, the members shall elect a presiding member. Except as otherwise required by state law or this Code, all proceedings of the council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1980, § 2-33)  
Sec. 2-64. - Rules of order. 
(a)  Rules of procedure. 
(1)  Authority. S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-250 provides that: "The council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings which shall be a public record." 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of city council in adopting rules of order is to enable the council to transact business with speed and efficiency while protecting the rights of all persons whether in the majority or the minority. Arbitrary technical rules must not prevent the council from accomplishing the public's business. Therefore, it is the intent of the council that common sense and courtesy be applied when enforcing the rules of procedure so that the will of the majority of the council may be achieved while insuring that all positions are heard and considered. 
(3)  Presiding officer. Normally the mayor or, in the mayor's absence, the mayor pro tempore, shall preside at any meeting. Notwithstanding that however, city council may, upon motion passed by a two-thirds majority of all council members serving, elect a council chairperson and vice-chairperson who shall then serve as presiding officer at all future meetings until the next general or special election at which any member of the council, including the mayor, is elected and takes office. In the event that the mayor or mayor pro tempore (or chairperson or vice-chairperson) is not in attendance or is ineligible to preside at any meeting, the members present shall elect a member to preside. 
(4)  Order of business. The standard order of business, which shall be reflected in the meeting agenda, shall be as follows: 
a.  Call to order. 
b.  Invocation. 
c.  Pledge of allegiance. 
d.  Approval or correction of agenda. [3] 
e.  Approval or correction of minutes. 
f.  Public requests, presentation of petitions, awards, memorials. 
g.  Nonagenda items from the public (total time limited to 30 minutes and each speaker limited to three minutes). 
h.  Second reading and adoption of ordinances. 
i.  First reading and advertisement of ordinances. 
j.  Resolutions. 
k.  Motions. 
l.  Nonagenda items from the public (each speaker limited to three minutes). 
m.  Communications from the city council and the city manager. 
n.  Reports and information presentations from city staff. 
o.  Executive session. [4] 
p.  Adjournment. 
(5)  Procedure pursuant to the agenda. 
a.  Information and presentation items. Many items on a meeting agenda do not involve a decision making or legislative action on the part of the council. These include the invocation, presentations, awards, and nonagenda items from the public. When these items are reached on the agenda, the presiding officer should simply announce them and introduce the individual or group who will be making the presentation or providing the information. If a discussion involving the presenters and council members is appropriate, the presiding officer should control the discussion to maintain proper decorum and to insure that the discussion remains relevant to the agenda topic. When it becomes apparent that the subject has been thoroughly covered or the discussion has become redundant or strayed from the topic, the presiding officer should, with the consensus of the council, end the discussion and announce the next agenda item. 
b.  Legislative items. The council takes action by resolution or ordinance. Ordinances must be in writing and in the form required for final adoption when introduced. Resolutions are most commonly introduced in writing but may be introduced and approved in oral form. Upon reaching an ordinance or resolution on the agenda, the presiding officer will read the ordinance or resolution by title (or the presiding officer may ask the city clerk to read it) and ask the city manager to present a brief explanation of the ordinance to include its expected effect and who has proposed it. The manager may ask a staff member or a retained expert to give this briefing. 
After the manager's briefing, the presiding officer will call for a motion from the council. If no motion is made, or if the motion is not seconded, the presiding officer will move on to the next agenda item. If a motion is made and seconded, the presiding officer will call for discussion in the following order: 
1.  The applicant or its representative. Council members may ask questions of the applicant or its representative during the applicant's presentation. 
2.  Individuals to address council. [5] Any citizen, resident, or other interested individual may address council during the first or second reading of an ordinance or resolution. The presiding officer may alternate between proponents and opponents when recognizing individuals to address council. Council members may ask questions of the individual during the individual's presentation. 
3.  The mayor and members of council. During the presentation of each member of council and the mayor, they may also ask questions of any speaker who will be asked to return to the podium to respond to the questions. 
After the discussion is completed, the presiding officer shall, if the motion has not been disposed of or postponed by subsidiary motion, immediately restate the motion before council and call for the vote of council. Following the vote, the presiding officer should immediately announce the results. 
c.  Nonagenda items. Nonagenda items from the public or staff will be accepted only for the information of the council. 
(6)  Motions. A motion is the means by which the city council takes any legislative action. Motions are ranked in order of precedence: a motion may be made only if no motion of equal or higher precedence is on the floor. The precedence of each motion is indicated in brackets after its title. All motions must be seconded, and are adopted by majority vote unless otherwise noted. All motions may be debated unless otherwise noted. These motions (indicated by an asterisk) may be made at any time that they are relevant to the issue presently on the floor or the decision which has just been made: 
a.  Motion to adjourn [1]. Not debatable; goes to immediate majority vote. 
b.  Call for the orders of the day [1]. Directs the presiding officer to return to the approved agenda. Not debatable. 
c.  Call the question [1]. Not debatable. Closes debate on the motion on the floor and forces a vote on that motion. Requires a two-thirds-majority vote. 
d.  Motion to limit or extend limits of debate [2]. Not debatable, can be amended, requires a two-thirds-majority vote. 
e.  Motion to refer [2]. Should specify which committee, board, or commission the matter is to be referred to, what council expects the group to do, and when it should be reported back to council. Approval of this motion ends discussion of the matter and the presiding officer should proceed to the next agenda item. 
f.  Motion to continue [3]. May be made instead of a main motion when an agenda item comes before the council or at any time before the main motion is disposed of. Should specify when the matter is to be brought back before the council and what action or information is desired before it is brought back. If approved it ends consideration of the agenda item for the current meeting and the presiding officer should move to the next item. 
g.  Motion to amend [3]. 
h.  Main motion [4]. 
i.  Motion to appeal decision of the presiding officer. [6] Not debatable. Requires immediate vote. Always stated by presiding officer so that a yes vote sustains his or her decision. Presiding officer retains the chair, but must proceed as voted by the majority. 
j.  Object to the consideration of a question.* Once agenda is approved, requires two-thirds-majority vote. Not debatable. 
k.  Point of order.* This is a request from a member for action by the presiding officer and may be made even when someone else has been recognized to speak. No second is required; no amendment is permitted; and no vote is required unless the presiding officer asks the council to decide the issue or the decision of the presiding officer is appealed. The point of order is frequently used to question a procedure undertaken by the presiding officer or to suggest an alternate procedure to the presiding officer. 
l.  Motion to reconsider.* May only be made before adjournment of the meeting at which the original action was taken. Must be made by a council member who voted on the winning side on the original action. Nothing in this subsection should be construed to prevent the original matter from being placed on the agenda for a subsequent meeting if requested by at least three council members. After 90 days, the original matter may be added to a meeting agenda using the same procedure as with any other matter not previously decided by council. 
m.  Motion to suspend the rules.* Can be made at any time that no question is pending. If a matter is before the council and the motion to suspend is applicable to that matter, the motion to suspend takes precedence over all other motions. It is not debatable or amendable and requires a two-thirds-majority to pass. This motion permits the council to do something it wishes to do but cannot without violating one or more of the rules contained in its rules of procedure. This motion cannot be used to modify or suspend any requirement of state law. 
(7)  Public hearings. A public hearing is a special type of meeting. It is intended to provide the council the opportunity to gather information from public input and provide information to the public. State law requires that a public hearing be conducted under certain circumstances. The presiding officer should call the hearing to order and announce the purpose of the hearing. The presiding officer should recognize individuals who wish to address council and should ensure that representatives of all competing views have a fair opportunity to express those views. The council can take no action during the public hearing. 
A public hearing may be a separate meeting or may be held during a regular council meeting. If it is during a regular council meeting it generally occurs at the point on the agenda where the subject of the public hearing is listed for action. In that case the presiding officer must clearly announce the start of the hearing and the adjournment of the hearing so that it is clear when the special rules applicable to the hearing apply and when the rules of procedure for regular council business are restored. A record of each public hearing must be kept and should include: 
a.  A hearing agenda. 
b.  A record of all the members of the public who participate. 
c.  Proof of any required notice or publication. 
d.  Minutes or a tape of the proceedings. 
e.  Copies of any materials received from the public or distributed to the public. 
(8)  Disruptive conduct. These rules of procedure are adopted based on the expectation that all persons attending a meeting of the city council will be honorable and will conduct themselves with courtesy for all other individuals present. In most situations where an individual's conduct becomes disruptive, it will be inadvertent and a warning from the presiding officer will be sufficient to correct the offensive behavior. If that is not the case, or if the presiding officer is determined by council to be disrupting or obstructing the proceedings of a council meeting, the following shall apply. 
a.  It is unlawful for any person to disrupt a meeting of city council. If a person who is determined by the presiding officer, or by a majority vote of council, to be disruptive, refuses to discontinue the disruptive behavior, the matter will be immediately reported to the police department who will, upon responding, take necessary action to end the disruption. Action by the police may include, if necessary, removing the offending individual from the meeting room. 
b.  In a case where the disruptive person is a member of council, a determination that the disruptive behavior is in violation of these rules shall be made by a majority vote of council. 
c.  If the presiding officer refuses to call for action on a matter on an approved agenda, ignores a motion apparently made and seconded in good faith, refuses to allow council to vote on an appeal from a decision or ruling of the presiding officer, or in any other way refuses to conduct the meeting in accordance with these rules, council may by majority vote declare the chair vacated. Any council member may move to vacate the chair based on the refusal of the presiding officer and, upon receiving a second, the member who made the motion may call for the immediate vote of council. If the motion receives a majority vote the position of presiding officer shall be filled for the remainder of the meeting as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, as if the presiding officer were absent. Unless the original presiding officer is removed from the meeting as provided in subsection (b)(8)a of this section, he shall be permitted to remain in the meeting and participate as any other council member. 
(9)  Items not covered. Any matter or order of procedure not covered by these rules shall be referred to the presiding officer who shall decide the matter in conformity with the purpose of these rules. The decision of the presiding officer may be reversed on appeal by a majority vote of council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-43; Ord. No. 06112001, 6-11-2001; Ord. No. 02112008C, § 1, 2-11-2008) 
State Law reference— Council to determine its own rules and order of business, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-250(b). 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The South Carolina Freedom of Information Act requires that an agenda be advertised 24 hours before the scheduled meeting time. It has been argued by some parties that this prevents the amendment of the agenda after the advertisement. The better argument seems to be that when it is necessary in the public interest to add a matter to the agenda after it is published, the council may do so. 

--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— When related to the item being considered, an executive session may be held at the time a matter is being discussed if a majority of the council votes to do so. 

--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— There is no state law requirement that public input be accepted during the consideration of a resolution or ordinance. With limited exceptions, there is no state law requirement for a public hearing on a resolution or ordinance. 

--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— These motions may be made at any time that they are relevant to the issue presently on the floor or the decision which has just been made. 
 
Sec. 2-65. - Agenda. 
Matters to be considered by the council at a regular meeting shall be placed on a written agenda prepared by the city manager and publicly posted by the city manager by noon of the day preceding the meeting. Matters not on the agenda may be considered upon request of a member, unless two members object. 
(Code 1980, § 2-34)  
Sec. 2-66. - Voting requirements; permission required for member to leave chamber. 
(a)  All actions of the council shall be by majority vote of the members present at a public meeting. 
(b)  The vote on every question shall be recorded in the council minutes. 
(c)  No member of the council may leave the council chamber, while the council is in public session, without permission of the presiding officer. 
(Code 1980, § 2-35)  
Sec. 2-67. - Minutes. 
The city clerk shall keep the minutes of all public meetings of the council, which shall be a matter of permanent public record. At each council meeting, the minutes of the previous meeting shall be presented for approval. Minutes shall not be considered the official record of a meeting until approved by the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-36)  
Sec. 2-68. - City attorney to attend, act as parliamentarian, etc. 
The city attorney shall attend all meetings of the council, unless excused by the council. The city attorney shall act as parliamentarian, propose ordinances and resolutions, review all ordinances, resolutions and documents presented to the council and give opinions upon questions of procedure, form and law to any member of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-37)  
Sec. 2-69. - Hearings by special committees. 
The city council may appoint a special committee to assist in or hold a public hearing for the council at any time upon any matter pending before it. Minutes or reports of hearings held by special committees shall be filed with the city clerk as public records. 
(Code 1980, § 2-39)  
Secs. 2-70—2-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— City to establish rules and procedures for adoption of ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-270. 
 
Sec. 2-86. - Notice required prior to introduction of certain ordinances. 
Prior to the introduction of an ordinance granting a franchise, license or right for the use of any street or public property, or for the permanent closing of any abandoned street, the city clerk shall publish a notice in three issues of a newspaper having general circulation in the city stating the nature of the franchise, license or right sought or a description of the street sought to be closed, and the date on which the application is to be presented to the city council, which shall be at least one week after the last notice. This requirement shall not apply to the temporary closing of a public street initiated by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-45)  
Sec. 2-87. - Form generally. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption, which shall include: 
(1)  A title briefly describing the content; 
(2)  Findings, reasons or basis for the ordinance, if desired and appropriate; 
(3)  An enacting clause; 
(4)  Citation of any ordinance repealed; 
(5)  The provisions of the ordinance, including section numbers, if the ordinance is to be codified or amends an existing codified ordinance; 
(6)  The effective date of the ordinance; 
(7)  The approval of the city attorney as to form and the assignment of an ordinance number; and 
(8)  Space for the signatures of the mayor or presiding member of the council and the city clerk attesting notice, if required, and adoption. 
(b)  Written resolutions shall be in such similar form as deemed appropriate by the city attorney. 
(Code 1980, § 2-46) 
State Law reference— Ordinances to be introduced in writing and in form required for final adoption, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-270.  
Sec. 2-88. - Introduction, notice, etc., of ordinances. 
(a)  A proposed ordinance shall be referred to the city attorney for approval as to form. The city attorney shall render assistance in the preparation of notices and ordinances. After an ordinance is in proper form and required notices have been given, the city attorney shall send the ordinance to the city manager to be held for public inspection. An ordinance shall be deemed to be introduced when its title is read. 
(b)  Every ordinance shall be introduced in writing in the form in which it is to be finally passed and, after passage on first reading, the title and a summary of the content of the ordinance shall be published stating the time and place, it will be given a public hearing and be considered for final passage. Any individual desiring to speak to council during either first or second reading of each ordinance shall be allowed to speak to council as set forth in section 2-64(5)b. 
(Code 1980, § 2-47; Ord. No. 02112008C, § 1, 2-11-2008)  
Sec. 2-89. - Introduction of resolutions. 
A voice motion of a member of the council shall be considered to be the introduction of an oral resolution, which shall require no written record other than a notation of the city clerk in the council minutes. A resolution proposed in writing shall be introduced in the same manner as an ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-48)  
Sec. 2-90. - Enactment of ordinances. 
(a)  An ordinance to levy a tax, adopt a budget, appropriate funds, grant a franchise, license or right to use or occupy a public street or public property for commercial purposes shall be complete in the form in which it is to be finally passed and in such form remain on file with the city clerk for public inspection at least one week before final adoption. 
(b)  No ordinance shall be adopted until it shall have been read two times and on two separate days with at least six days between each reading. 
(c)  Emergency ordinances may be adopted on one reading without notice or hearing by affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members present. An emergency ordinance may not levy taxes, relate to a franchise or a service rate and shall expire automatically on the 61st day following enactment. [8] 
(d)  The, first reading of an ordinance shall be by title only, unless a member of the council requests full reading. However, reading of an ordinance by title only shall be a sufficient reading upon both first and second readings, as to any ordinance more than 500 words in length, as to any ordinance adopting a technical code such as building, zoning, housing, gas, electric, plumbing or other similar codes, and as to adoption of sections of the Code of Laws of South Carolina by reference, provided that, in regard to such ordinances, reading in full may be required upon either first or second reading, or both, by majority vote of the council members present. [9] 
(e)  After the introduction of an ordinance, whether on first reading or on second reading, any member of the council or any citizen of the city, or any other individual, interested therein may request a public hearing, which may be held at any time designated by the council prior to final adoption. 
(f)  Upon final adoption by vote of the council, an ordinance shall be signed by the mayor or presiding member and attested by the city clerk, who shall file the original in the council minutes. 
(Code 1980, § 2-49; Ord. No. 02112008C, § 1, 2-11-2008) 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-270. 

--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-250(d). 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Adoption of resolutions. 
Written or oral resolutions may be adopted on one reading, unless a public hearing is set by a majority of the members of the council present. 
(Code 1980, § 2-50)  
Secs. 2-92—2-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance relating to salaries of city officers and employees or to compensation or pay plans or classification plans for such officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-5(4). 
 
Sec. 2-111. - Personnel regulations. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the validity of the city employee handbook. 
(Code 1980, § 2-3)  
Sec. 2-112. - Grievance procedure for complaints by disabled persons concerning services, programs, or activities. 
(a)  The following grievance procedure is adopted to meet the requirements of the regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Justice to enforce the provisions of Subtitle A of Title II of the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 concerning the alleged exclusion from participation in or denial of benefits of city services, programs, or activities. This grievance procedure should be used by any qualified individual with a disability who wishes to file a complaint alleging discrimination on the basis of that disability concerning his or her exclusion from participation in or denial of the benefits of city services, programs, or activities. 
(b)  The grievance complaint shall be in written form and contain as much information as possible about the alleged discrimination. Other arrangements for submission of a grievance, such as a personal interview or tape recording, may be made available for those individuals with a disability that make it impractical to submit a written grievance complaint. The grievance complaint should be submitted within 30 calendar days of the alleged violation, unless good cause is shown for submitting the complaint at a later date, to the Assistant City Manager, Municipal Building, 214 Park Avenue South West, Aiken, South Carolina 29801, (803-642-7654). The office hours for this location are from 8:10 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(c)  Within 15 working days of receipt of the grievance complaint, the assistant city manager will respond in writing to the complainant concerning the grievance or may respond in such other manner as is reasonably calculated to communicate the response to the complainant. The response will offer a resolution or explanation of the position of the city on the complaint. 
(d)  If the response by the assistant city manager is not sufficient or does not satisfactorily resolve the issue for the complainant, the complainant may, within 15 calendar days of the date of the response, request an informal hearing before the city council. This request should be in writing, or in such other form as is practical for the complainant based upon his or her disability, and submitted to the Assistant City Manager, Municipal Building, 214 Park Avenue South West, Aiken, South Carolina, 29801, (803-642-7654). The office hours of this location are the same as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. Within 30 calendar days of the hearing conducted by council, the complainant, will receive the written resolution of the complaint as determined by city council. 
(e)  All complaints received by the assistant city manager and all responses by that official or by city council shall be kept by the city for such period as is required by law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-8)  
Sec. 2-113. - City employees employed at-will. 
It is hereby declared to be city policy that, notwithstanding any policies, memoranda, or handbooks promulgated by the city or any employment practices by the city: 
(1)  All employees of the city are employed at-will and may resign or be discharged from employment at any time. 
(2)  Only the city council shall have the right to enter into employment contracts for other than at-will employment on the city's behalf. Any contract for employment other than at-will employment must: 
a.  Be in writing; 
b.  Be executed by the city mayor; 
c.  Specify the duration of the employment; and 
d.  Specifically state that the contract is being created pursuant to the city's authority under this section. 
(Ord. No. 08112003C, § 1, 8-11-2003)  
Secs. 2-114—2-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Election commission, § 14-3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Attendance of members of boards and commissions. 
Any appointed member of a board or commission created by an ordinance of the city council who during a calendar year is absent from 40 percent or more of the regular meetings or three or more successive regular meetings of the board or commission shall automatically be removed therefrom shall not be reinstated to the remainder of his term except by a resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-9)  
Sec. 2-142. - Composition and terms of specific boards and commissions. 
(a)  This section shall apply to the following boards and commissions whose makeup is as follows: 
	Number of 
Members 	Terms 
Accommodations tax committee 	7 	2 years 
Arts commission 	7 	2 years 
Board of zoning appeals 	7 	3 years 
Building code appeals commission 	7 	2 years 
Community development committee 	7 	2 years 
Design review board 	7 	2 years 
Energy and environmental committee 	7 	2 years 
Equine committee 	14 	2 years 
General aviation commission 	7 	2 years 
Housing authority board 	7 	5 years 
Park commission 	7 	2 years 
Planning commission 	7 	2 years 
Recreation commission 	7 	2 years 
Senior commission 	7 	2 years 
 
(b)  These boards and commissions shall be comprised of seven members (14 members for the equine committee) with the terms set forth above. Each member of city council shall have appointment power for one member of each commission or board (two members for the equine committee). Upon the expiration of a member's term, the applicable council member shall nominate a replacement. Each nomination shall be voted upon by city council in a public session. If a nomination fails to be approved by a majority of council, the council member making the nomination shall nominate a replacement member. This process shall be repeated until city council approves a council member's nominee by a majority vote. 
(c)  Members of boards, commissions, and committees who are appointed by city council shall serve for a period of time to coincide with the current term of the council member who recommended that appointment, unless a shorter term is provided. In the event that members of boards, commissions, and committees have time remaining to serve on a board, commission, or committee following the election or appointment of a new council member, their terms shall expire once the newly elected or appointed council member has appointed that member's replacement in accordance with section 2-142(b). 
(d)  City staff shall maintain a list of citizens who volunteer to serve on boards and commissions. A short application or resume may be used to show a citizen's interest in serving on boards and commissions. Council members may review current volunteer applications before selecting candidates for appointment to a board or commission. Council members should make sure that proposed candidates have no apparent conflict of interest. Council members should exert every effort to propose individuals who broadly represent the Aiken community. Nominations to the boards and commissions shall be accompanied by an application, or resume, of the proposed appointee. 
(e)  These appointments shall be made under all applicable federal laws, state statutes and city ordinances, including, but not limited to, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-29-350, 6-29-360, 6-29-780, 6-29-790 and 6-29-870. 
(Code 1980, § 2-9.1; Ord. No. 02252002, § 1, Exh. A, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 04142003B, § 1, 4-14-2003; Ord. No. 02282005A, § 1, 2-28-2005; Ord. No. 10092017D , § 1, 10-9-2017; Ord. No. 03122018 , § 1, 3-12-2018; Ord. No. 05132019 , § 1, 2, 5-13-2019)  
Sec. 2-143. - Authority to appoint sub-committees. 
From time to time, the city's boards, commissions, and committees, hereinafter referred to as "boards," and more specifically set forth in section 2-142 above, have the need to appoint advisory committees to perform a study about a particular matter before the boards; provide the boards with research and insight about a particular matter before the boards; and to advise the boards about the effect of proposed changes to various codes, ordinances and/or regulations of the city. In order to allow the swift appointment of members to these various advisory committees, the chair of each board may appoint a committee chair or ad hoc or task force members of these advisory committees unless otherwise appointed by city council in accordance with their rules and regulations. However, if more than one individual expresses an interest in a position being filled by the chair, then the position(s) shall be filled by a vote of the entire board. The bylaws of the city boards shall be amended to comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 03272006A, § 1, 3-27-2006)  
Secs. 2-144—2-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Membership. 
The community development committee shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the city council. The terms of office of the members of the community development committee shall be for two years, except that the terms of the initial members shall be staggered. Any vacancy in membership of the community development committee shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause on written charges after a public hearing. All members of the community development committee shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1980, § 2-170)  
Sec. 2-162. - Organization; meetings; rules; staff and finances. 
The community development committee shall elect a chair and vice-chair from among its members. The term of the chair and other offices shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. It shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or an employee of the city. The community development committee shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its recommendations, transactions, findings and determinations and shall meet at the call of the chair and at such times as the chair or committee may determine. All meetings of the community development committee at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the committee shall be a public record. 
(Code 1980, § 2-171)  
Sec. 2-163. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the community development committee shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then such committee shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities as set forth as follows: 
(1)  To establish criteria, guidelines and procedures for the administration and disbursement of housing assistance funds previously approved by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, through the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974. 
(2)  To approve or disapprove any application for housing assistance based on fair and equitable evaluation of the application in relation to adopted criteria, guidelines and procedures. 
(3)  To let construction bids and negotiate contracts for housing work with "approved" contractors. 
(4)  To approve all contractors and establish a register of contractors to work in the CD (community development) program. 
(5)  To inspect or have inspected all completed work and certify to the satisfactory performance of such work before authorizing payment. 
(6)  To negotiate with local lending institutions their role in the implementation of CD (community development) housing activities, if desired. 
(7)  To encourage home improvements through conventional financing and to assist applicants where possible. 
(8)  To establish a revolving fund for making low-interest housing improvement loans to low and moderate income persons. 
(9)  To perform and assist in all other related housing activities as deemed necessary to encourage the rehabilitation of substandard housing and the preservation of standard housing. 
(Code 1980, § 2-172)  
Secs. 2-164—2-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FARMERS MARKET COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-181. - Definition. 
As used in this division, the term "commission" shall mean the farmers market commission created by this division. 
(Code 1980, § 2-151) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-182. - Created. 
There is hereby created a commission to operate and regulate a farmers market in the city, to be known and designated as the farmers market commission. 
(Code 1980, § 2-152)  
Sec. 2-183. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
The farmers market commission shall consist of seven members who shall be residents of the county, to be appointed by the city council for terms of two years each. 
(Code 1980, § 2-153)  
Sec. 2-184. - Election and terms of officers. 
The members of the farmers market commission shall annually elect one of their number as chair and another as secretary and treasurer to serve in such respective offices for a term of one year or until their successors have been appointed. 
(Code 1980, § 2-154)  
Sec. 2-185. - Rules and regulations. 
The farmers market commission shall have the authority and is hereby directed to make and promulgate such necessary rules and regulations for its operation and for the licensing and fees to be granted and charged for the use of the farmers market facilities. When adopted by the commission, filed with the city clerk and approved by the city council, such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-155)  
Sec. 2-186. - Authority to purchase equipment, hire employees and enter into contracts; limitation on city's liability. 
The farmers market commission is authorized and empowered to purchase such equipment, hire such employees and enter into such contracts as may be necessary to carry out its functions; provided, however, that the city shall not be bound or obligated on any debts, contracts or other obligations or liabilities of the commission, but all debts and obligations of the farmers market commission shall be payable solely out of revenues and funds of the commission. 
(Code 1980, § 2-156)  
Sec. 2-187. - Employment and duties of market manager. 
The farmers market commission shall employ a market manager who shall be responsible to the commission for the business-like operation of the farmers market, for collecting all rental fees, for keeping all necessary records, and for enforcing all duly approved rules and regulations of the commission. 
(Code 1980, § 2-157)  
Secs. 2-188—2-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PLANNING COMMISSION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Local planning commission, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-310 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-206. - Definition. 
As used in this division, the term "commission" shall mean the city planning commission. 
(Code 1980, § 2-136) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-207. - Created; composition; appointment of members. 
There shall be a city planning commission, which shall consist of seven members, who shall be appointed by the council. No commission member may hold any other public office or position in the city. The city manager and mayor shall serve as ex officio members of the commission. 
(Code 1980, § 2-137)  
Sec. 2-208. - Terms of office for members; filling of vacancies. 
The term of office for the seven appointive members of the planning commission shall be two years. Each such term shall commence on December 1 on the first year of the appointment and expire on November 30 of the last year of term. The terms of office shall be staggered so that two expire simultaneously each year except for the year in which only one shall expire. Any vacancy during an unexpired term of an appointive member of the planning commission shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the term. 
(Code 1980, § 2-138)  
Sec. 2-209. - Election of chair. 
The planning commission shall elect from among its appointed members a chair. 
(Code 1980, § 2-139)  
Sec. 2-210. - Duties. 
The planning commission shall be required to: 
(1)  Recommend to the council a master plan and subsequent modifications and additions thereto. 
(2)  Recommend platting and subdivision regulations. 
(3)  Cause to be prepared and recommend to the council the adoption of an official map of the city and any modifications or additions thereto. 
(4)  Recommend to the council a zoning plan, including all necessary regulations, modifications and additions thereto. 
(5)  Recommend to the council plans for the clearance and redevelopment of slum districts and blighted areas within the city. 
(6)  Submit annually to the city manager, not less than 90 days prior to the beginning of the budget year, a list of recommended capital improvements which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary or desirable to be constructed during the forthcoming five-year period. Such list shall be arranged in order of preference with recommendations as to which projects shall be constructed in which year. 
(7)  Promote public interest in and understanding of the master plan and planning, zoning and slum clearance. 
(8)  Keep a public record of its resolutions, findings and determinations. 
(Code 1980, § 2-140)  
Secs. 2-211—2-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-231—2-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATIVE BRANCH OF GOVERNMENT[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to establish administrative departments and assign and distribute work thereof, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-30(2). 
 
Sec. 2-246. - Composition of administrative branch. 
The administrative branch of the city shall be composed of the office of the city manager and the department, divisions and offices listed in this division. 
(Code 1980, § 2-61)  
Sec. 2-247. - Appointment, term and removal of city manager. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint, by a majority vote of all its members, a city manager. No council member shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within two years after the expiration of his term. 
(b)  The council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term and may remove him only by a majority vote of all of its members. At least 30 days before such removal shall become effective, the council shall, by a majority vote of all its members, adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for his removal. The manager may reply in writing and may request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than 20 days nor later than 30 days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one be requested, and after full consideration, the council, by majority vote of all its members, may adopt a final resolution of removal. By the preliminary resolution, the council may suspend the manager from duty, but shall, in any event, cause to be paid him forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary for the next calendar month following adoption of the preliminary resolution. 
(Code 1980, § 2-62) 
State Law reference— Employment, qualifications, term and removal of city manager, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-13-50, 5-13-70.  
Sec. 2-248. - City manager as chief administrative officer; general powers and duties of manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer and the head of the administrative branch of the city government. The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that end, the city manager shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the public, remove all officers and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided by this chapter or other provisions of this Code and except as he may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office. 
(2)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the council, as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(4)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Code or state law or required of the city manager by the council, not inconsistent with this chapter or state law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-63) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-90.  
Sec. 2-249. - City manager shall establish fees for review of annexation, zoning, subdivision, utilities, and similar applications and for planning commission special meetings. 
The city manager shall establish fees to be charged applicants who file requests with the planning commission or department of planning and community development for annexations, zoning approvals, signs, site plans, landscape plans, subdivisions, utilities, telecommunications towers site plans and similar actions and for special meetings of the planning commission. Such fees shall be based upon the manager's estimate of the actual costs and staff time incurred by the city in reviewing each type of application or request or conducting the special meeting. The city manager annually shall review such fees for the purpose of making adjustments based upon his estimates of such costs. The city manager shall promptly report all such adjustments to the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-63.1)  
Sec. 2-250. - Administrative regulations. 
The city manager shall be authorized to prepare and issue regulations concerning the administration of the city's affairs and the enforcement of this Code and all city ordinances in accordance with policies prescribed by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-64)  
Sec. 2-251. - Inquiries and investigations by city manager. 
The city manager, or any person or committee authorized by him, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency or officer of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. 
(Code 1980, § 2-65)  
Sec. 2-252. - Distribution of administrative functions. 
The administrative functions of the city shall be distributed among the office of the city manager and the various departments, divisions and offices referred to in this division. 
(Code 1980, § 2-66)  
Sec. 2-253. - Department directors generally. 
(a)  At the head of each department, there shall be a director, who shall be an officer of the city and shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual. The city manager may head one or more departments and directors of departments may also serve as heads of divisions. 
(b)  Each department head shall be responsible to the city manager and shall exercise administrative authority within his department. Each department head shall be responsible for preserving public records relative to the function of his department and, subject to the city manager's directives, he shall furnish other departments such service, labor and materials as may be necessary in accordance with such procedures and budgetary controls as may be established. Each department head shall submit annual and monthly reports in writing to the city manager, following the format prescribed by the city manager. Each department head shall submit to the city manager, at such date and in such detail as the city manager may require, estimates of operating and capital expenditures. Each department head shall also submit work programs when required by the city manager. 
(c)  Each department head shall perform such additional duties relating to the conduct of city affairs as may be assigned to him by the city manager or by law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-67) 
State Law reference— Department heads designated as directors, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-100.  
Sec. 2-254. - Department divisions. 
(a)  The departments of the city government shall be composed of such divisions, with such duties and functions, as are prescribed by the city manager. 
(b)  At the head of each departmental division, there shall be an officer who shall have the authority to direct and supervise the division under the general supervision of the director of the department. Two or more divisions may be headed by the same individual. 
(Code 1980, § 2-68)  
Sec. 2-255. - City clerk. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be appointed by and shall be subject to removal by the city manager. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be the custodian of the official seal of the city and all official documents of the city, serve as clerk to the city council, record and file council actions, administer oaths and perform such other duties as may be assigned him by law or by the city manager. 
(c)  The city clerk shall make available for inspection by any citizen, any representative of a citizen's organization or any representative of the press, at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by the city manager, all official documents in his custody, except records and documents, the disclosure of which, in the discretion of the city manager, would tend to defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish. 
(Code 1980, § 2-69) 
State Law reference— Appointment and general duties of clerk, S. C. Code 1976, § 5-7-220.  
Sec. 2-256. - Administration department. 
There shall be an administration department headed by the city manager who shall be responsible for the preparation and execution of the budget, the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment required by the city, the administration of the personnel program in accordance with regulations of the merit system and the development of a city insurance program. 
(Code 1980, § 2-70)  
Sec. 2-257. - Finance department. 
There shall be a finance department, headed by a finance director. The director shall be responsible to the city manager for financial planning, accounting, licensing, property and fiscal records, collections, internal auditing and other fiscal activities. 
(Code 1980, § 2-71)  
Sec. 2-258. - Department of public safety. 
(a)  There shall be a department of public safety, headed by a director of public safety. The director of public safety shall be responsible to the city manager for the enforcement of state laws and city ordinances, protection of life and property, preservation of law and order, traffic control, investigation of crimes, apprehension and custody of criminals, the suppression of vice and the prevention and control of juvenile delinquency. The director of public safety shall likewise be responsible to the city manager for the direction of all firefighting, fire prevention and fire service activities of the city. 
(b)  The director of public safety shall direct the assignment of public safety officers, establish training programs, establish departmental procedures pursuant to this Code or other city ordinances and administrative regulations issued by the city manager and shall cooperate with other law enforcement and firefighting agencies. 
(c)  The director of public safety, with the approval of the city manager, may appoint volunteer part-time law enforcement officers with limited duties for the purpose of enforcing specific laws or ordinances within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. The director of public safety shall establish written policies regulating the appointment, training, supervision, and duties of such officers. Such officers shall receive no compensation or benefits, shall serve at no cost or liability to the city, shall not have the power of arrest, and are subject to dismissal by the director of public safety for any reason at any time. 
(d)  When any public safety officer impounds or takes possession of any vehicle in the discharge of his duties, an inventory of the contents of such vehicle shall be made immediately and filed with the department of public safety. 
(Code 1980, §§ 2-72, 2-73) 
Cross reference— Removal of illegally stopped vehicles, § 42-73.  
Sec. 2-259. - Department of public works; director. 
There shall be a department of public works headed by a director. The director of the department of public works shall be responsible to the city manager for all activities relating to the planning, construction, maintenance and operation of municipal utilities, public ways, garbage collection and waste disposal facilities, city buildings, parks and other physical properties of the city which have not been otherwise assigned by the city manager. The director of the department of public works shall also be responsible for the animal shelter. The director of the department of public works shall render such assistance to the planning commission and other departments as shall be authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 2-74)  
Sec. 2-260. - Department of parks and recreation—Powers and duties of director. 
(a)  There shall be a parks and recreation department headed by a director. The director of parks and recreation shall be responsible to the city manager for the operation and supervision of all existing public playgrounds, athletic fields, swimming pools, tennis courts, baseball and other ball fields, municipal camps, and all other recreational facilities on or in any public grounds or buildings, either within or without the city, owned by the city; or on or in any public grounds or buildings now or hereafter acquired which the city may from time to time authorize, designate or set apart for recreational purposes. 
(b)  The director of parks and recreation shall be required to: 
(1)  Promote public interest and participation in all of the recreational activities of his department. 
(2)  Keep himself advised and informed of the recreational activities in the greatest demand and those which would yield maximum public participation, and whenever possible, organize and conduct such recreational activities. 
(3)  Cooperate with other public and private organizations in the utilization of available private and public facilities and personnel, which serve the recreational needs of the community. 
(c)  The director of parks and recreation shall be responsible for permitting the use of public playgrounds, parks, baseball and other ball fields under his control, but shall not have the authority for the granting of leases or concessions on, in or at such recreational facilities. The city manager shall have the authority to grant leases or concessions to be operated in or at the recreational facilities of the city, subject to approval by the city council. 
(d)  The director of parks and recreation shall be responsible for the care of property, personal and real, under his control. 
(e)  With the consent of public school authorities, the director of parks and recreation may organize and conduct play and recreational activities on grounds and in buildings under the control of such school authorities. 
(f)  The director of parks and recreation shall have authority to operate and maintain privately owned lands or buildings where use for public recreational purposes may be temporarily granted by the owners and accepted by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-75) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 26.  
Sec. 2-261. - Same—Charges for use parks and recreational facilities. 
All fees, rentals, admissions and other charges made to the public for the use of city recreational facilities shall be recommended by the director of parks and recreation, reviewed by the city manager and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-76)  
Sec. 2-262. - Disposition of money collected. 
All moneys collected, derived or received by or from any operation of the parks and recreation department shall be paid daily to the city manager or any other officer of the city designated by him. 
(Code 1980, § 2-77)  
Secs. 2-263—2-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL SERVICES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03262012A, § 1(Exh. A), adopted March 26, 2012, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 2-281—2-286, pertained to the same subject matter, and derived from Code 1980, §§ 2-88—2-93. 
 
Sec. 2-281. - Appointment of city attorney, city solicitor; terms; removal. 
(a)  The city attorney shall be appointed by, serve at the pleasure of, and be subject to removal by the city council. The city council, with the advice and consent of the city manager, may appoint one person to serve as the city attorney/city solicitor, and in the event of such appointment, it shall be considered one position or office. 
(b)  The city solicitor shall be appointed by, serve at the pleasure of, and be subject to removal by the city manager. 
(c)  All appointments for city attorney and city solicitor shall require the execution of a contract which shall be prepared by the city manager's office and must set forth the terms of the appointment to include compensation details, malpractice insurance coverage requirements, worker's compensation insurance requirements, and other details which may be deemed important by the city manager and city council. 
(Ord. No. 03262012A, § 1(Exh. A), 3-26-2012) 
State Law reference— Authority of council to appoint city attorney, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-230.  
Sec. 2-282. - Qualifications. 
The city attorney shall be an attorney at law who has been admitted to practice before the supreme court of the state. The city attorney shall be a member in good standing of the bar of the state at the time of his appointment and throughout his term of office. If for any reason he shall cease to be a member in good standing of the state bar at any time while serving as city attorney, he shall thereupon become immediately disqualified and shall be dismissed as city attorney by the city council. The qualifications for city solicitor shall be the same as those for city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 03262012A, § 1(Exh. A), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 2-283. - Compensation. 
The salary of the city attorney shall be established by the city council. The salary of the city solicitor shall be established by the city manager and subject to approval by city council as part of the city's annual budget process. 
(Ord. No. 03262012A, § 1(Exh. A), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 2-284. - Department of legal services. 
There shall be a department of legal services headed by the city solicitor who shall also serve as the director of the department. The city solicitor shall be responsible to the city manager for operations of the department as provided by section 2-253. The department shall consist of such other personnel as are assigned to it by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 03262012A, § 1(Exh. A), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 2-285. - Duties of city attorney. 
The duties of the city attorney shall be as follows: 
(1)  The city attorney shall be the chief legal advisor to the city council and all offices, departments, boards, commissions and agencies of the city and all officers and employees of the city in matters relating to their official powers and duties, and in that capacity may communicate directly with the council and those offices, departments, boards, commissions, agencies, officers and employees. 
(2)  The city attorney shall advise the city council, its committees, the city manager or any other city officer upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of city business. 
(3)  The city attorney shall prepare and revise ordinances when so requested by any member of the city council, any committee thereof or the city manager. 
(4)  The city attorney shall prepare, for execution, contracts and other written instruments to which the city is a party and shall approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the city. 
(5)  The city attorney shall enter appearances for the city in all actions, cases and special proceedings. The city attorney shall conduct all suits and other proceedings before all courts in which the city is, or shall be, a party. This subsection shall not apply to prosecutions handled by the city solicitor. The city attorney may elect not to enter appearances in suits and proceedings in which the city is represented by outside counsel employed or retained by an insurer of the city or by the city, or in which he determines there is a conflict of interest. 
(6)  The city attorney shall make recommendations to the city manager and city council on retaining outside legal counsel on specified matters. The retaining of counsel where the estimated cost does not exceed $1,000.00 may be approved by the city manager. 
(7)  A city officer or employee who is being sued civilly for action taken in good faith in the course of his official duties may be represented by the city attorney if there is no conflict of interest as determined by the city attorney. 
(8)  With the approval of the city manager, he may settle claims against the city for an amount of $1,000.00 or less. 
(9)  The city attorney may assign any of the duties provided in this division to another attorney retained or employed by the city. 
(10)  The city attorney shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by ordinance or state law or directed by the city council or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 03262012A, § 1(Exh. A), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 2-286. - Duties of city solicitor. 
The city solicitor shall prosecute and represent the city in all criminal and related proceedings in municipal court and all appeals therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 03262012A, § 1(Exh. A), 3-26-2012)  
Secs. 2-287—2-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-5(1); taxation, ch. 38. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-311. - Service charge for returned checks and bank drafts. 
(a)  A service charge is hereby imposed upon all persons issuing checks, drafts or other orders to the city or any of the agencies or departments thereof that are returned to the city from the bank on which they were drawn for whatever reason, including but not limited to insufficient funds, closed account, or no such account, in the maximum amount allowed by S.C. Code 1976, § 34-11-70 or any successor state laws or provisions thereof. 
(b)  In the event the charge, license, fee, penalty or other obligation for which such check, draft, or other order is given is or may be secured by lien in favor of the city, the service charge applicable thereto also shall be secured by such lien. 
(Code 1980, § 2-7)  
Sec. 2-312. - Forgiveness of late fees for payments due on weekends, city holidays, federal holidays, and other emergency situations. 
In the event a payment for city services, city taxes, or city fees is due to the city on a date that falls on a Saturday or Sunday, a date that is a city holiday, or a date that is a federal holiday, then that payment shall not incur a penalty provided the full payment is made before 5:00 p.m. on the next business day following the weekend or holiday. In the event that the city manager, in his discretion, determines that circumstances such as a weather emergency or other state of emergency makes it difficult for citizens and businesses to make timely payment of their bills for city services, city taxes, or city fees, then that payment shall not incur a penalty provided the full payment is made before 5:00 p.m. on the next business day following the weather emergency of other state of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 04252011A, § 1, 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 03272017 , § 1, 3-27-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03272017 , § 1, adopted March 27, 2017, amended § 2-312 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Payments due on weekends or city holidays" to "Forgiveness of late fees for payments due on weekends, city holidays, federal holidays, and other emergency situations," as set out herein.  
Secs. 2-313—2-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING AND SALES 
 
Sec. 2-331. - Purchasing agents generally. 
The city manager, or such officers of the city as designated by the city manager, shall be the purchasing agents for the city. They shall be responsible for: 
(1)  The purchase of supplies, materials, and equipment and contractual services required by any office, department, or agency of the city government. 
(2)  The storage and distribution of all supplies, materials, and equipment required by any office, department or agency of the city government. 
(3)  Establishing written specifications, whenever practicable, for supplies, materials, and equipment required by any office, department, or agency of the city government. Such specifications shall be definite and certain and shall permit competition. 
(4)  Maintaining, wherever practicable, a perpetual inventory record of all materials, supplies, or equipment stored in storerooms or warehouses. 
(5)  Soliciting and maintaining an up-to-date list of qualified suppliers who meet the criteria set forth in section 2-338 for lowest responsible bidders and have requested their names to be added to a bidders' list. The city manager or designated purchasing agents shall have authority to remove temporarily the names of vendors who have defaulted on their quotations, failed to respond to three consecutive requests for bid, attempted to defraud the city, or who have failed to meet established specifications or delivery dates. 
(6)  Obtaining as full and open competition as possible on all purchases, contracts, and sales. 
(7)  Obtaining the approval and signature of the assistant city manager or other person designated by the city manager on an appropriate form for those purchases in excess of $5,000.00 prior to the award of the bid to the lowest responsible bidder and ordering the supplies or services bid upon. 
(Code 1980, § 2-112; Ord. No. 03272000A, § 1(2-112), 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 02102014 , § 1, 2-10-2014)  
Sec. 2-332. - When formal contract required. 
All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided in this article, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $25,000.00, shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder after due notice inviting proposals. All sales of personal property which has become obsolete or unusable, when the estimated value shall exceed $25,000.00, shall be sold by formal, written contract to the highest responsible bidder after due notice inviting proposals. 
(Code 1980, § 2-113; Ord. No. 03272000A, § 1(2-113), 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 02102014 , § 1, 2-10-2014)  
Sec. 2-333. - General bid requirements. 
Before any purchases of or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment, or services exceeding $2,500.00 but less than $5,000.00 are made, oral bids from at least three suppliers on the bidders list, whenever possible, should be obtained. For purchases or contracts exceeding $5,000.00, but not exceeding $25,000.00 that are made, bids from at least three suppliers on the bidders list, whenever possible, must be obtained in writing. All purchases or contracts exceeding $25,000.00 are subject to the requirements set forth in sections 2-332, 2-334, 2-336 and 2-338, as well as other applicable requirements set forth in these sections. 
(Code 1980, § 2-114; Ord. No. 03272000A, § 1(2-114), 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 10102005C, § 1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 02102014 , § 1, 2-10-2014)  
Sec. 2-334. - Advertising for bids. 
All contracts for city improvements, materials, equipment, or services costing more than $25,000.00 shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days before the last day set for receipt of proposals. The newspaper notice required in this section shall include a general description of the articles or services to be purchased and shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. 
(Code 1980, § 2-115; Ord. No. 03272000A, § 1(2-115), 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 02102014 , § 1, 2-10-2014)  
Sec. 2-335. - Bid deposits. 
When deemed necessary by purchasing agents, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Upon entering into a contract, bidders shall be entitled to return of the bid deposit where the purchasing agent has required one. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit required by the purchasing agent upon failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten days after the award; provided, however, that the city manager in his discretion may waive this forfeiture. 
(Code 1980, § 2-116; Ord. No. 03272000A, § 1(2-116), 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 01232006A, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 2-336. - General procedures for sealed bids. 
The procedure for sealed bids shall be as follows: 
(1)  Bids shall be submitted to the assistant city manager, or another designated purchasing agent, securely sealed in an envelope, and shall be identified on the envelope in accordance with all bid instructions. 
(2)  Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
(3)  A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection. 
(4)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served by doing so. 
(5)  The assistant city manager, or another designated purchasing agent, shall not accept the bid of vendors or contractors who are delinquent in the payment of taxes, licenses, or any other money due by them to the city. 
(6)  For those bids on unbudgeted items over $25,000.00, the city council must approve the bid of the lowest qualified bidder prior to its award. 
(Code 1980, § 2-117; Ord. No. 03272000A, § 1(2-117), 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 01232006A, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 2-337. - Performance and payment bonds. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond and, where appropriate, a payment bond before entering into a contract, in such form and amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-118; Ord. No. 03272000A, § 1(2-118), 3-27-2000)  
Sec. 2-338. - Award of contract generally; determination of lowest responsible bidder. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this division; provided, however, that city council approval is required in the following instances: 
(1)  For contracts in excess of $25,000.00 for purchases not included specifically as budgeted items in the current budget; or 
(2)  Purchases which are not replacement items funded under the city depreciation accounts. 
(b)  Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the purchasing agent or city council shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract, provide the service promptly, or do so within the time specified without delay or interference. 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder. 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services. 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or services. 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service. 
(7)  The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(10)  Whether the bidder has failed to fully perform prior contracts to the city's satisfaction, or is past due, delinquent, or owes the city any money of any type. 
(Code 1980, § 2-119; Ord. No. 03272000A, § 1(2-119), 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 01232006A, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 2-339. - Local vendor preference in awarding bids. 
(a)  Local vendor means a vendor who is considered to be a resident of the city or county if the vendor: 
(1)  Is an individual, partnership, association, or corporation that is authorized to transact business of the city or county; 
(2)  Maintains an office in either the city or county; 
(3)  Maintains an inventory for expendable items which are representative of the general type of commodities on which the bid is submitted and located in the city or county at the time of the bid having a total value of $10,000.00 or more based on the bid price, but not to exceed the amount of the contract; and 
(4)  Has paid all assessed taxes, fees, costs, or other revenue due to the city. 
(b)  No requirement contained in section 2-338 shall preclude the award of bids to local vendors on the following basis: 
(1)  A bid from any vendor located within the city which is no more than five percent higher than the lowest bid received may be given preference under the terms of the city purchasing process, provided that the difference between the two bids is not greater than $3,000.00. 
(2)  A bid from any vendor located outside the municipal limits of the city but within the county which is not more than three percent higher than the lowest bid received from a vendor located outside the county may be given preference under the terms of the city purchasing process, provided that the difference between the two bids is not greater than $3,000.00. 
(c)  Competitive procurements made by the city shall be made from vendors resident in the city or county, provided that the bidder has certified in writing in the bid that he or she is a resident of the city or county. In order to receive the award the vendor must be a responsible and responsive bidder and the bid must otherwise comply with the Code of the city. In the case of a request for local vendor status, this requirement shall apply to the entire solicitation. 
(d)  Protest of any awarded bid is subject to these procedural requirements: 
(1)  Right to protest; exclusive remedy. Any actual bidder, offeror, contractor, or subcontractor who claims to be aggrieved in connection with the bid award shall protest to the purchasing agent in the manner stated in subsection (2) below within three business days of the date of award notification is given in accordance with this Code. 
The rights and remedies granted in this article to a disappointed bidder, offeror, contractor, or subcontractor are to the exclusion of all other rights and remedies of disappointed bidders, offerors, contractors, or subcontractors against the city at common law, or otherwise, for the loss or potential loss of an award of a contract under the city procurement code. 
(2)  Protest procedure. A protest under subsection (1) above shall be in writing, submitted to the purchasing agent, and shall set forth the grounds for the bid protest and the relief requested by them with enough particularity to give notice of the issues to be resolved. 
(3)  Duty and authority to attempt to settle protests. Prior to commencement of an administrative review as provided in subsection (4) below, the purchasing agent, the head of the department, or designees thereof shall attempt to settle by mutual agreement a protest by aggrieved bidders, offerors, contractors, or subcontractors, actual or prospective, concerning the solicitation or award of the bid. City department directors, or their designees, shall have the authority to approve any settlement reached by mutual agreement. 
(4)  Administrative review and decision. If, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, after reasonable attempt, a protest cannot be settled by mutual agreement, the purchasing agent shall promptly conduct an administrative review and shall issue a decision in writing within ten days of completion of this review. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken. 
(5)  Notice of decision. A copy of the decision under subsection (4) above shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the protestant and any other party intervening. The purchasing agent shall also post a copy of the decision at a date and place communicated to all parties participating in the administrative review, and such posted decision shall indicate the date of posting on its face. 
(6)  Finality of decision. A decision under subsection (4) above shall be final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or unless any person adversely affected by the decision requests a further administrative review by the city manager within ten days of posting of the decision. The request for review shall be directed to the purchasing agent, who shall forward the request to the city manager and shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons why the person disagrees with the decision of the purchasing agent. 
(e)  A bidder shall be suspended or debarred from doing business with the city if the city manager or designee determines that the certification made by the bidder as to the local vendor request was filed under false pretenses and is not valid. In addition, if the bidder with the invalid certification of origin was awarded the contract, he shall also pay the city the amount by which the bid based on the invalid certification exceeded the lowest responsible and responsive bid that would have been selected but for the invalid certification, plus reasonable attorney fees and costs. If a bidder has not requested the reference, he will neither be entitled to claim any preference against another bidder nor will he be protected from application of another bidder's claim to a preference against his bid in determining contract award. 
(Code 1980, § 2-120; Ord. No. 01232006A, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-23-2006; Ord. No. 03272006B, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-2006)  
Sec. 2-340. - Award of contract in case of tie bids. 
If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to the local bidder. If two or more of such bids are submitted by local bidders, the purchasing agent shall award the contract to one of the local tie bidders by drawing lots in public. If local bidders are not involved in tie bids, the purchasing agent shall award the contract to one of the outside tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
(Code 1980, § 2-121)  
Sec. 2-341. - Cooperative purchasing plans; purchases through state without publication and bidding. 
The purchasing agent shall have authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby. The purchasing agent is hereby given the authority to make purchases of supplies and equipment through the property division of the state budget and control board, without the formality of publication and receiving competitive bids. 
(Code 1980, § 2-122)  
Sec. 2-342. - Financial interest of city officials and employees prohibited; exception. 
No member of the city council or any officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest in any contract or in the sale to the city or to a contractor supplying the city of any land or rights or interests in any land, material, supplies or services, except when a majority of the city council determines an exception to this provision is in the best interest of the city; provided that no council member whose interest is involved shall vote on the question. Any wilful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee of the city found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person contracting with the city shall render the contract voidable by the city manager or the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-123) 
State Law reference— Prohibition against municipal officers contracting with municipality, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-30.  
Sec. 2-343. - Tests. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the city government or any outside laboratory. 
(Code 1980, § 2-124)  
Sec. 2-344. - Records of open-market orders and bids. 
The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all open-market orders and the bids submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall also be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1980, § 2-125)  
Sec. 2-345. - Obsolete or surplus supplies. 
(a)  All offices, departments or agencies of the city government shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall have authority to transfer surplus supplies to other offices, departments or agencies of the city government. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the supplies for, or trade in the supplies on, new supplies. Such sales shall be made to the highest bidder and in conformance with section 2-332. All moneys received from such sales shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-126)  
Sec. 2-346. - Sole source purchases or contracts. 
A purchase of or contract for supplies, materials, equipment or services may be made, regardless of the amount involved, without competitive bidding when the purchasing agent affirms in writing that there is only one source for the required supplies, materials, equipment or services. Written documentation must also include the determination and basis for the proposed sole source procurement. In cases of reasonable doubt that there is only one such source, competitive bidding must be solicited. Any decision by the purchasing agent that a procurement be restricted to one vendor must be accompanied by an explanation as to why no other will be suitable or acceptable to meet the city's need. 
(Code 1980, § 2-127)  
Sec. 2-347. - Emergency purchases and testing. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the purchasing agent may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements only when there exists an immediate threat to public health, welfare or safety under emergency conditions; provided that such emergency procurement shall be made with as much competitive bidding, if any, as practical under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular vendor shall be included in the contract file and reported to the city council. The purchasing agent also may authorize limited testing or sampling of supplies, materials, equipment or services without solicitation of competitive bids and shall prepare written documentation of the need for the testing or sampling and time required for the evaluation thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 2-128)  
Sec. 2-348. - Professional services/selection. 
Professional services are those services rendered by licensed professionals including consulting engineers, planning consultants, architects, auditing firms, banking institutions, and law firms. Professional services shall be obtained through the process of requesting interested firms to submit their qualifications; reviewing the qualifications submitted and determining which firms are qualified; requesting the qualified firms to submit proposals; selecting the qualified firm with the best proposal; and negotiating the necessary contract. Except for agreements for less than $25,000.00 and that are provided for in the annual operating budget of a department, agreements for professional services shall state the terms and conditions and shall be approved by city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-129; Ord. No. 02102014 , § 1, 2-10-2014; Ord. No. 05092016A , § 1, 5-9-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02102014 , § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 2014 changed the title of § 2-348 from professional and artistic services and supplies to professional services/selection, as set out herein.  
Sec. 2-349. - Construction. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Construction manager agent means a business that has been awarded a separate contract with the city to provide construction management services but not construction. 
Construction manager at-risk means a business that has been awarded a separate contract with the city to provide both construction management services and construction using the construction management at-risk project delivery method. A contract with a construction manager at-risk may be executed before completion of design. 
Construction management services are those professional services associated with contract administration, project management, and other specified services provided in connection with the administration of a project delivery method defined in this section 2-349. 
Construction management at-risk means a project delivery method in which the city awards separate contracts, one for architectural and engineering services to design an infrastructure facility and the second to a construction manager at-risk for both construction of the infrastructure facility according to the design and construction management services. 
Design-bid-build means a project delivery method in which the city sequentially awards separate contracts, the first for architectural and engineering services to design an infrastructure facility and the second for construction of the infrastructure facility according to the design. 
Design-build means a project delivery method in which the city enters into a single contract for design and construction of an infrastructure facility. 
Design-build-operate-maintain means a project delivery method in which the city enters into a single contract for design, construction, maintenance, and operation of an infrastructure facility over a contractually defined period. All or a portion of the money required to pay for the services provided by the contractor during the contract period are (1) appropriated by the city, (2) secured by the city through fare, toll, or user charges, (3) provided in the form of a concession agreement with the contractor or an assignee, or (4) any combination of the foregoing. 
Infrastructure facility means a building; structure; or networks of buildings, structures, pipes, controls, and equipment, or portion thereof. 
Operations and maintenance means a project delivery method in which the City enters into a single contract for the routine operation, routine repair, and routine maintenance of an infrastructure facility. 
(b)  Construction services authorization. 
(1)  Project delivery methods authorized. 
a.  The following project delivery methods are authorized for procurements relating to infrastructure facilities: (a) design-bid-build; (b) construction management at-risk; (c) operations and maintenance; (d) design-build; (e) design-build-operate-maintain. 
b.  In addition to those methods identified in item (1), the Council may approve as an alternate project delivery method any combination of design, construction, finance, and services for operations and maintenance of an infrastructure facility. 
c.  Participation in a report or study that is later used in the preparation of design requirements for a project does not disqualify a firm from participating as a member of a proposing team in a construction management at-risk, design-build, or design-build-operate-maintain delivery procurement, unless the participation provides the business with a substantial competitive advantage. 
(2)  Choice of project delivery method. The project delivery method used for a city construction project must be that method which is most advantageous to the city and results in the most timely, economical, and successful completion of the construction project. The city shall select the appropriate project delivery method for a particular project and shall state in writing the facts and considerations leading to the selection of that particular method. 
(3)  Source selection methods assigned to project delivery methods. 
a.  Competitive sealed bidding, as provided in this Code, must be used to procure construction in design-bid-build procurements. 
b.  Construction management at-risk. Contracts for construction management at-risk must be procured by either competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed proposals. 
c.  Operations and maintenance. Contracts for operations and maintenance must be procured by either competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed proposals. 
d.  Design-build. Contracts for design-build must be procured by competitive sealed proposals. 
e.  Design-build-operate-maintain. Contracts for design-build-operate-maintain must be procured by competitive sealed proposals. 
f.  Other. Contracts for an alternate project delivery method approved by the council must be procured by a source selection method specified by the council when approving the alternative project delivery method. 
g.  The procedures for receipt and evaluation of competitive sealed proposals applicable to a solicitation will be outlined in that solicitation. 
(4)  Prequalification on construction. The city may limit participation in a solicitation for construction to only those businesses, including potential subcontractors, that are prequalified. If businesses are prequalified, the city must issue a request for qualifications. The request must contain, at a minimum, a description of the general scope of work to be acquired, the deadline for submission of information, and how businesses may apply for consideration. The evaluation criteria must include, but not be limited to, prior performance, recent past references on all aspects of performance, financial stability, and experience on similar construction projects. Using only the criteria stated in the request for qualifications, businesses must be ranked from most qualified to least qualified. The basis for the ranking must be determined in writing. If fewer than two businesses are prequalified, the prequalification process must be canceled. The determination regarding how many offers to solicit is not subject to protest. 
(5)  Additional procedures applicable to procurement of certain project delivery methods. 
a.  Evaluation factors. A request for proposals for design-build or design-build-operate-maintain must: (a) state the relative importance of (i) demonstrated compliance with the design requirements, (ii) offer or qualifications, (iii) financial capacity, (iv) project schedule, (v) price, or life-cycle price for design-build-operate-maintain (including the effects of proposed or alternative short- and long-term financing options), and (vi) other factors, if any. 
(c)  Integration with remainder of city procurement code. This section 2-349 supplements the tools available to the city under Aiken City Code, Division 2, Purchasing and Sales, but the specific provisions of this section 2-349 in a procurement activity will supersede incompatible provisions of any other section of Aiken City Code, Division 2, Purchasing and Sales. For example, but not by way of exhaustive listing: the use of competitive sealed proposals is incompatible with provisions requiring award to "lowest bid" and the like (e.g., sections 2-232, -233, -234, -238(b)), but compatible general requirements such as advertising (section 2-324), security (section 2-337), and responsibility (section 2-338(b)(1) et seq.) will apply to procurements under this section 2-349. 
(Ord. No. 10242016A , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2016)  
Secs. 2-350—2-365. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SETOFF DEBT COLLECTION PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 2-366. - Participation in setoff collection. 
The city manager shall set the minimal amount for delinquent debts owed the city which it may submit to the state tax commission, or any successor agency, for collection pursuant to the Setoff Debt Collection Act, or any successor provisions thereto. In determining this amount, the city manager shall consider the administrative and related costs of utilizing this collection procedure, the amount of the potential recovery to the city, and any other relevant factors. 
(Code 1980, § 2-180) 
State Law reference— Levy on and seizure of intangibles, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-53-20.  
Sec. 2-367. - Procedures. 
(a)  The city shall notify a delinquent debtor of its intention to cause the debtor's state tax refund to be setoff by notice given in person, left at the dwelling or usual place of business of the debtor, or sent by certified or registered mail to the debtor's last known address no less than 30 days before the city submits its setoff request to the state tax commission, or any successor agency. The notice shall include a statement which sets forth the administrative appeal procedures available to the debtor provided by this section and any alternatives available to the debtor which may avoid the setoff. The city shall promptly notify the debtor when the liability out of which the setoff arises has been satisfied. 
(b)  If a debtor disputes that he owes a delinquent debt or the amount of a delinquent debt, the debtor may submit a written request for review of the debt to the city manager. The city manager shall review all of the relevant facts to determine whether the debt is owed and whether the amount claimed by the city is correct. If the city manager determines the amount setoff exceeds the amount properly due, the city shall refund the appropriate amount to the debtor. If the city manager determines that the city is entitled to no part of the amount setoff, the city shall refund the entire amount plus any administrative fee retained by the state tax commission, or any successor agency, to the debtor. If a tax refund has been setoff based upon an error committed by the city, the city shall pay the debtor interest as required by the Setoff Debt Collection Act. If the debtor's request is received and resolved prior to a setoff request being submitted to the state tax commission, or any successor agency, the amount of the delinquent debt owned shall be adjusted accordingly. The city manager may decline to consider a debtor's request received more than 30 days after the city sends the debtor the notice required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Upon receipt by the city of proceeds collected on its behalf by the state tax commission, or any successor agency, together with an accounting therefor, the city shall credit the debtor's obligation and notify the debtor in writing of the amount of the setoff and the balance due, if any. 
(Code 1980, § 2-181)  
Sec. 2-368. - Collection agreement. 
Upon a resolution being adopted by city council, the city manager may enter into an agreement with the Municipal Association of South Carolina or any other authorized agency or entity for services related to collection of delinquent debt pursuant to the Setoff Debt Collection Act. 
(Code 1980, § 2-182)  
Sec. 2-369. - Collection costs charge. 
To the extent allowed by law, the city manager may set and assess against delinquent debtors a charge for the estimated actual costs to the city of collecting debts pursuant to this division, and the charge shall be added to and become part of such delinquent debt. If the city contracts with another agency or entity for services related to this collection procedure, the collection charges of that agency or entity shall be added to and become part of the delinquent debt, to the extent allowed by law, in the same manner as the city charge. The city manager shall notify the city council of the schedule of collection charges and any changes therein. 
(Code 1980, § 2-183)  
Secs. 2-370—2-385. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ANNEXATION INCENTIVE PROGRAM FOR LARGE TRACTS OF REAL ESTATE LOCATED OUTSIDE THE CITY 
 
Sec. 2-386. - Owners to apply. 
An owner of more than 500 acres of land located outside, but contiguous to, the city who plans to develop this property for residential and/or commercial purposes may apply to the city manager for the annexation incentive program. 
(Ord. No. 03262001A, § 1, 3-26-2001)  
Sec. 2-387. - Requirements to qualify for incentive. 
(a)  The property to be annexed by the owner shall comprise more than 500 acres of real estate presently located outside the city limits of the City of Aiken. The property must be contiguous to the city limits. 
(b)  The owner must file an annexation petition with the city planning department. This petition shall include a copy of the deed showing that the applicant is the actual owner of the real estate. The owner shall also file a recent plat showing that all of the property owned by the owner is to be annexed. The petition shall also describe any areas on the property that will become common areas for the proposed development and/or what portions of the real estate will not be developed. 
(c)  The property must be accepted for annexation by the city council following a review by the planning commission. Nothing in the ordinance from which this article derives shall obligate city council to accept the annexation of a proposed development that is not in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03262001A, § 1, 3-26-2001)  
Sec. 2-388. - Incentive payment. 
(a)  If approved by city council, the owner shall be entitled to an incentive payment for up to three years to be determined by applying the following formula: 
No. of acres owned by owner at the end of the applicable year × per acre/per lot appraised value [per the county assessor] × .06 × The applicable millage rate = incentive payment 
(b)  The number of acres entitled to this incentive shall initially be determined in a written agreement between the owner and the city council. This incentive may be set forth in a development agreement if one is entered into by the owner and the city. Thereafter, the number of acres entitled to the reimbursement shall be reduced by the number of acres/lots sold by the owner in each calendar year. The owner shall provide a copy of each deed to the city to show all real estate sold by the owner during each calendar year. Failure of the owner to provide a copy of all deeds for property sold during the applicable year may result in the termination of this incentive payment for the particular development and will enable the city to seek reimbursement of all previous incentives paid. This property and its acreage shall be clearly delineated on the plat presented to the city. The owner must be current on all real estate tax payments for the property in order to apply for the incentive program. 
(c)  In no event shall the owner be entitled to this incentive for more than three years except that property being developed as a golf course may be entitled to this incentive for up to five years. This shall be more particularly described in the agreement to be executed by the city and the owner. 
(d)  The owner shall apply for this incentive on or before January 10 of the year following the calendar year for which the incentive is sought. No incentive shall be paid for the initial year that the property is annexed. The city shall have up to 60 days to confirm the owner's entitlement to the incentive being requested. 
(Ord. No. 03262001A, § 1, 3-26-2001)  
Sec. 2-389. - Expiration of annexation incentive program. 
This incentive program shall expire at midnight on December 31, 2006, unless otherwise renewed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 03262001A, § 1, 3-26-2001)  
Secs. 2-390—2-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ECONOMIC PROJECT INCENTIVE PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 2-401. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be titled the "City of Aiken Economic Project Incentive Program," and is referred to herein as the "program." 
(Ord. No. 08132018 , § 1, 8-13-2018)  
Sec. 2-402. - Findings. 
The city council hereby affirms the findings made in this ordinance and incorporates such findings as if set forth fully herein. 
(Ord. No. 08132018 , § 1, 8-13-2018)  
Sec. 2-403. - Definitions. 
In addition to those capitalized terms defined elsewhere in this article, unless the context shall otherwise require, the following terms shall have the following respective meanings: 
Benefits means those tangible benefits, such as increased revenues for the city from property taxes and other sources, and those intangible benefits to the city and its citizens of providing the incentives, which generally include: (a) increased property values within the area in which the incentives are offered and the city as a whole; (b) increased revenues from property taxes, business license fees, permit fees, utility revenues, and other fees imposed by the city from other properties within the area in which incentives are offered; (c) greater amenities for the benefit of the city's citizens; and (d) increased tourism and commercial activity within the area in which the incentives are offered and the city as a whole. 
Goals means the objectives of the city in offering the incentives, which generally are: (a) to promote the construction of new buildings or the rehabilitation of existing buildings within specific areas of the city; (b) to support the establishment of the categories of new businesses within these areas that the council determines will significantly increase the overall commercial activity within specific areas of the city; and (c) to increase employment opportunities within the city. 
Incentive shall mean a grant of any inducement having monetary value by the city that is offered to a person, firm, or corporation to pursue a project that encourages private investment and/or the creation/retention of jobs. The incentive may also include grants from other entities that the city may be able to obtain. 
Job shall mean each new (a) full-time position or (b) each full-time equivalent position that is created as a direct result of the ongoing operation of a project. For the purposes of calculating the number of jobs created by a project, only those employed at businesses located within the project and those who are to permanently be employed within the applicable incentive zone shall be considered. 
Project shall mean the development of real property to the extent of adding value to the tax base through the improvement of real property and the creation of employment opportunities. 
Project sponsor means the private party or parties responsible for the development of a project. 
Recipient means the private party or parties to whom an incentive shall be paid, which, unless otherwise expressly agreed to by the city, shall be the party or parties who paid the fee that is to be refunded or reimbursed. 
(Ord. No. 08132018 , § 1, 8-13-2018)  
Sec. 2-404. - Authorization to enter into incentive agreements. 
(a)  Agreement provisions. The council, at its discretion and on a case-by-case basis, but subject to the eligibility criteria provided for in section 2-406(a) hereof, may enter into an agreement with a project sponsor that intends to develop a project within the city (an "incentive agreement"). Incentives shall only be provided to a recipient after an incentive agreement has been entered into between the city and the project sponsor, which shall set forth the following: (i) the particulars of the project; (ii) the incentives to be provided; and (iii) sufficient assurances that the benefits will accrue to the city and the goals will be advanced by the project. 
(b)  Negotiation and approval. Pending the approval by the council of any incentive agreement and subject to the provisions of section 2-408 hereof, the city manager of the city is authorized to discuss the provisions of this program, aid in the completion of any proposal (as defined herein) and, subject to the final approval by the council, negotiate with the potential project sponsor on behalf of the city. Each incentive agreement shall be approved by the council by ordinance which shall include those findings of the council set forth in section 2-406(a) of this chapter. Council may provide incentives in any amounts and for any period of time within the thresholds provided for herein or within the time periods and thresholds provided for in any applicable statutory authorization. 
(Ord. No. 08132018 , § 1, 8-13-2018)  
Sec. 2-405. - Authorized incentives. 
(a)  Multiple incentives. The council may offer any combination of incentives provided for herein; provided, however, that the total amount of incentives given in connection with an individual project must be in keeping with the goals and the value of the benefits must be greater than the financial value of the incentives. 
(b)  Incentive recipient. Where the project sponsor is the developer of a project, but does not own and/or operate the business or businesses located therein that are responsible for the payment of any fee that is to be refunded or reimbursed as an incentive, the recipient of the incentive shall be the payor of such fee unless otherwise expressly agreed to by the city; provided, however, that with respect to connection fees and permit fees (as each are defined herein) payment of such fees to the city by the contractor of the project shall be considered payment by the project sponsor and any refund or reimbursement of any such fee shall be made to the project sponsor. 
(c)  Incentives of the city. All direct incentives of the city shall be grants which shall be in the form of reimbursements and refunds of fees that have been duly paid to the city. No upfront abatements of fees shall be permitted. Where incentives continue for a period of more than one year, such incentives may be graduated to increase or decrease year-to-year as the council sees fit, but subject to monitoring by the city to ensure compliance with the terms of any incentive agreement. The council may offer incentives in connection with the following fees up to the percentages indicated with respect to each: 
(1)  Up to 50 percent of utility connection fees collected by the city ("connection fees"), to be reimbursed to the recipient 12 months following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project; 
(2)  Up to 50 percent of building permit fees collected by the city ("permit fees"), to be reimbursed to the recipient 12 months following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project; 
(3)  Up to 50 percent of business license fees collected by the city ("business license fees") for as many as five years, to be reimbursed to the payor of the business license fees at the annual anniversary of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project for which a business license has been issued, provided the recipient has continued to operate the business for which the business license fees were paid for the entirety of such year; 
(4)  Such other incentives that the council, at its discretion on a case-by-case basis, determines are appropriate given the amount or type of investment made by the project sponsor. 
(d)  State incentive programs. The council may include within any package of incentives or as a stand-alone incentive for in-city project any incentive authorized by statute ("state incentive programs"). 
(Ord. No. 08132018 , § 1, 8-13-2018)  
Sec. 2-406. - Eligibility criteria. 
(a)  General eligibility criteria. Except for those incentives authorized under a state incentive program, in order for a project to be eligible to receive incentives, the council shall determine and make specific findings in the ordinance approving any incentive agreement that the project meets, or upon completion will meet, each of the following criteria: 
(1)  The project is consistent with the city of Aiken Comprehensive Plan (as it may be amended and updated from time to time, the "comprehensive plan"); 
(2)  The manner in which the project will advance the goals of the city; 
(3)  The project, upon completion and continued operation for the term of the incentives authorized, will result in the realization of benefits to the city and its citizens that exceed the value of the incentives provided, including a description of the tangible and intangible benefits that are expected to accrue to the city and its citizens as a result of a project; 
(4)  Absent the provision of incentives, the project would be unlikely to occur or unlikely to occur at the level or scale contemplated by the proposed project sponsor; and 
(5)  The project consists of a business or businesses that are substantially devoted to one or more of the following uses: (1) retail uses; (2) tourism-related business or activities; (3) corporate headquarters; (4) research and development; (5) high technology growth businesses; and (6) other uses, as may be determined by the council, that are consistent with the goals and the comprehensive plan. Where the project includes multiple businesses or uses, at least 50 percent of the commercial space comprising the project must be occupied by one or more of the above listed uses. 
(b)  Additional criteria. The council may, in its discretion and on a case-by-case basis, include within an incentive agreement any other eligibility criteria, including, without limitation, capital investment and job creation benchmarks, that must be met upon completion of a project in order to ensure that the goals are met and that the project provides benefits to the city and its citizens that exceed the value of the incentives provided. 
(Ord. No. 08132018 , § 1, 8-13-2018)  
Sec. 2-407. - Administration and terms of delivery. 
(a)  Incentive proposal. A proposed project sponsor must submit to the city manager a proposal (a "proposal"). A form of the proposal is attached hereto as exhibit A. The proposal must include a sufficient description of the project, to include, without limitation, the following information: 
(1)  Identification of the property or properties on which the project is to be located (the "subject property"), any acquisition costs of the subject property, and the then-current value of the subject property; 
(2)  A general description of the improvements that are to be made to the subject property as part of the project, including a good-faith estimate of the costs of such improvements, the estimated start date and completion date for any improvements to the subject property, and a good-faith estimate of the value of the subject property upon completion of such improvements; 
(3)  A good-faith estimate of the number of jobs that are to be created in connection with the project, including a projected date or dates upon which the estimated number of jobs will have been created; 
(4)  A good-faith estimate of the property taxes and new revenue from other sources that will be generated for the city as a direct result of the project; and 
(5)  Any other additional information that the project sponsor or the city manager deems may be necessary and helpful for the council to evaluate and give due consideration to the proposal. 
(b)  Determination of incentive amounts. The amount of incentives granted to a project shall be based upon the amount of the capital investment in the project, the amount of new revenue for the city directly created by the project, and the number of new jobs that will be directly created by the project. The amount of incentives granted to a project shall in no case exceed the value of the tangible and intangible benefits of the project to the city and its citizens. 
(c)  Certification, commencement and continuation of incentives. 
(1)  No incentive shall commence or be given until 12 months after the project has been issued a certificate of occupancy and/or a business license and the project sponsor has provided sufficient proof that all terms and benchmarks included within the applicable incentive agreement, including without limitation benchmarks for capital investment, property valuation, and job creation, have been fully achieved or otherwise completed. 
(2)  Where benchmarks, such as the number of jobs created or the continuous operation of a business, are to be met continuously over a period of time, the project sponsor shall provide to the city, on an annual basis, sufficient proof that the project has continuously achieved or otherwise complied with such requirements upon the anniversary of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  If, at any time after completion of a project or at any time within the period of time during which a project is granted incentives, a project fails to achieve or otherwise comply with any benchmark or other requirement, the council may, at its discretion and on a case-by-case basis: 
a.  Declare the incentive agreement null and void and refuse to grant any future incentives; or 
b.  Decrease the amount of incentives based upon the actual direct and indirect benefits of the project to the city and its citizens. 
(d)  Administration of program. The administration of the application process, specifically including the drafting of any proposal, and continuous monitoring of projects pursuant to applicable incentive agreements shall be the responsibility of the city manager and any person designated to oversee such process by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 08132018 , § 1, 8-13-2018)  
Chapter 4 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 12; signs for garage sales, § 34-34. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Posting advertising matter to utility poles, trees or public buildings. 
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other advertising matter calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamp post, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Code 1980, § 3-1) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; utilities, ch. 44. 
State Law reference— Injury to property, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 16-11-510, 16-11-520.  
Sec. 4-2. - Banners extending across streets or parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to extend any banner or canvas sign across any public street or park of the city, without first having obtained a permit from the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-2) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 4-3. - Use of vehicle for advertising purposes. 
No person shall operate or park, on any street, any vehicle for the primary purpose of advertising, except under a permit issued by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1980, § 3-3) 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 42.  
Secs. 4-4—4-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS 
 
Sec. 4-31. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing. 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales. 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state or by any ordinance of this city. 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Postal Service of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer, as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published, with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper in this section. 
Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place means any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way or any public park, square, space, ground or building. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1980, § 3-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 4-32. - Deposit or distribution on or in public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. It shall not be unlawful, on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city, for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(Code 1980, § 3-15) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Dumping litter on public or private property, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-700.  
Sec. 4-33. - Deposit in or on vehicles. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle. This section shall not prevent a person from handing out or distributing, without charge to the receiver thereof, noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle in a public place who is willing to accept it. 
(Code 1980, § 3-16)  
Sec. 4-34. - Distribution or deposit on private premises generally. 
(a)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. In case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in section 4-35, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1980, § 3-17)  
Sec. 4-35. - Deposit or distribution on posted private premises or contrary to occupant's request. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Code 1980, § 3-18)  
Sec. 4-36. - Deposit on vacant premises. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1980, § 3-19)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 12; alcoholic beverages prohibited at garage sales, § 34-39. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, S.C. Code 1976, title 61. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the words "alcoholic liquors" shall be construed to mean any spirituous, malt, vinous, fermented, brewed (whether lager or rice beer) or other liquors, or any compound or mixture thereof, by whatever name known, which contains alcohol and is used as a beverage. This definition shall not extend to and include wine, when made for home consumption and which is not sold by the maker thereof or any other person, nor shall it apply to any beverage heretofore or hereafter declared by the statutory law of the state to be nonalcoholic or nonintoxicating. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-20.  
Sec. 6-2. - Compliance with state law required for manufacture, possession, transportation, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person either to manufacture, store, receive, have in possession, transport, buy, sell, barter, exchange or deliver any alcoholic liquors in the corporate limits of the city, except as permitted by state law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, or to purchase or otherwise procure, within the corporate limits of the city, any alcoholic liquors, other than such as shall have been purchased from a dealer duly licensed by the state, or which does not have affixed thereto revenue stamps required under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1980, § 4-2)  
Sec. 6-3. - Drinking alcoholic liquors in specified places prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to: 
(1)  Publicly engage in the drinking of alcoholic liquors. 
(2)  Publicly engage in the drinking of alcoholic liquors in the presence of a passenger in either a privately or publicly owned vehicle. 
(3)  Engage in the drinking of alcoholic liquors upon any premises upon which any public athletic contest is being conducted. 
(4)  Drink alcoholic liquors on the premises of any retail, wholesale or manufacturing alcoholic liquor business or business establishment. 
(Code 1980, § 4-3)  
Sec. 6-4. - Drinking of beer or wine in public places. 
(a)  Except for the area and circumstances specified in subsections (b) and (c) herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess a beer or wine in an open container, either on their person, in a motor vehicle or otherwise on the streets, sidewalks, parks, squares or other public places within the city. 
(b)  Within the area of the city known as The Alley Plaza which shall include the right-of-way of Bee Lane from Park Avenue, SW to Richland Avenue and the right-of-way of The Alley from Laurens Street, SW to Newberry Street, SW and shall also include the City Hall patio which is located at the intersection of The Alley and Bee Lane; the following regulations apply: 
(1)  Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., any business establishment that is licensed to sell beer or wine that borders The Alley Plaza described above may sell one beer or wine beverage in a paper or plastic cup for removal from the premises to The Alley Plaza; provided, however, that the alcoholic beverage is not placed in a can, bottle or other glass container and, further provided, that the licensee may dispense no more than one alcoholic beverage per person, and no person shall remove more than one beer or wine beverage from the premises; 
(2)  Any beer or wine beverage dispensed pursuant to this section shall not exceed 16 fluid ounces in size and no person shall possess an open container containing a beer or wine beverage in excess of 16 fluid ounces within The Alley Plaza area described in this section; 
(3)  Unless specifically provided otherwise by ordinance, the regulations provided by this section shall be in full force and effect during any festival that may be held in The Alley Plaza. 
(c)  Persons age 21 and over may possess alcoholic beverages as provided by subsection (b)(2) during events of a limited duration conducted within the city and sponsored either by the city or those organizations for which a special event permit has been obtained from the city. 
(Code 1980, § 4-4; Ord. No. 09112017 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 6-5. - Hours of operation for on-premises establishments. 
All business establishments selling beer, wine, liquors, or other alcoholic spirits for on-premises consumption shall observe the hours of operation as set forth in paragraph (a) below. Any operators or owners of such establishments, as may be determined from the business license issued to such establishments, found in violation of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in the city business license ordinance and this Code and shall be subject to having their business license revoked, other penalties imposed, and/or their establishment declared a nuisance. 
(1)  Hours of operation. 
Day 	Open 	Close 
Monday 	10:00 a.m. 	2:00 a.m. (the following Tuesday) 
Tuesday 	10:00 a.m. 	2:00 a.m. (the following Wednesday) 
Wednesday 	10:00 a.m. 	2:00 a.m. (the following Thursday) 
Thursday 	10:00 a.m. 	2:00 a.m. (the following Friday) 
Friday 	10:00 a.m. 	2:00 a.m. (the following Saturday) 
Saturday 	10:00 a.m. 	2:00 a.m. (the following Sunday)* 
Sunday 	10:00 a.m. 	2:00 a.m. (the following Monday)* 
 
*Establishments serving alcoholic beverages after midnight Saturday, during any Sunday hours, and after midnight Sunday, but before 10:00 a.m. Monday, must have first obtained the necessary permits or licenses from the state department of revenue, or that department's designee. 
(2)  Violations and penalties. Nothing in these provisions shall supersede federal or state laws regulating the hours of sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. It shall be unlawful for any on-premises establishment to remain open outside of permitted hours of operation. Penalties shall be as set forth above as well as under sections 1-13, 1-14, et seq., of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 4-5; Ord. No. 08132001B, § 1, 8-13-2001; Ord. No. 12092002B, § 1, Exh. A, 12-9-2002; Ord. No. 03242003A, § 1, Exh. A, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 02092004B, § 1, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2005, amended Ch. 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8, §§ 8-1—8-19, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1980, §§ 5-1—5-12 and §§ 5-14—5-23. 
Cross reference— Riding, driving or parking vehicles or animals in parks, § 26-3. 
State Law reference— Animals, livestock and poultry, S.C. Code 1976, title 47; dogs and other domestic pets, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Designation. 
This chapter may be cited as the animal control ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different intention clearly appears from the context, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Animal means all mammals, fowl, and reptiles, but shall not include homo sapiens. 
Animal at-large means an animal not under the restraint and control of its owner as required by the provisions of this chapter and off of the owner's premises. 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the city manager to enforce the city animal control program and the provisions of this chapter. 
Animal control shelter means any premises designated by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals pursuant to this chapter. 
Animal control superintendent means the person designated by the city manager to administer the animal control program and the provisions of this chapter. 
City tag means the license tag issued by the city for a pet. 
Dog means all members of the canine family. 
Exotic animals means those members of class mammalian and class reptilian, including, but not limited to: 
Class Mammalia 
(1)  Order Artiodactyla (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, deer, but not cattle, swine, sheep, or goats). 
(2)  Order Carnivora. 
a.  Family Felidae (lions, tigers, cougars, leopards, ocelots, servals, but not domestic cats). 
b.  Family Canidae (wolves, coyotes, foxes, jackals, but not domestic dogs). 
c.  Family Ursidae (all bears). 
d.  Family Mustelidae (weasels, skunks, martins, minks, but not ferrets). 
e.  Family Procyonidae (raccoons, coatis). 
f.  Family Hyaenidae (hyenas). 
g.  Family Viverridae (civets, genets, mongooses, binturongs). 
(3)  Order Edentatia (anteaters, armadillos, sloths). 
(4)  Order Marsupialia (opossums, kangaroos, wallabies, sugar gliders). 
(5)  Order Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, but not horses, donkeys, or mules). 
(6)  Order Primates (lemurs, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas). 
(7)  Order Proboscidae (elephants). 
(8)  Order Rodentia (squirrels, beavers, porcupines, prairie dogs, but not guinea pigs, or rats, or mice, or gerbils, or hamsters). 
Class Reptilia 
(1)  Order Squamata. 
a.  Family Varandae (only water monitors and crocodile monitors). 
b.  Family Iguanaidae (only green iguanas and rock iguanas). 
c.  Family Boidae (all species whose adult length has the potential to exceed eight feet in length). 
d.  Family Colubridae (only boomslangs and African twig snakes). 
e.  Family Elapidae (such as coral snakes, cobras, mambas, etc.)—All species. 
f.  Family Nactricidae (only keelback snakes). 
g.  Family Viperidae (including, but not limited to, copperheads, cottonmouths, and rattlesnakes)—All species. 
(2)  Order Crocodilia (including, but not limited to, crocodiles, alligators, caimans, and gavials)—All species. 
Fowl means any of various birds of the order galliformes, including but not limited to, chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys, and guineas. 
Identified hybrid means any wild animal crossbred to domestic dogs or cats. 
Kennel means the premises at which six or more dogs, six or more cats, or six or more carnivorous animals of the same species over one year of age are housed. For purposes of this Code, the following shall not be deemed kennels: zoological parks, veterinary hospitals, public laboratories, publicly owned or operated facilities for research and education, all government entities, and duly qualified 501(c)(3) organizations who operate a facility primarily for the rescue and care of stray and abandoned animals. 
Owner means any person temporarily or permanently owning, keeping, possessing, caring for or harboring an animal or acting as custodian of an animal. 
Owner's premises means lands and buildings owned, leased or regularly occupied by the owner of an animal. 
Pet means dogs, cats and domesticated species of carnivores. 
Rabies certificate means the written certificate in a form prepared and issued by the state department of health and environmental control signed by a licensed veterinarian as proof of inoculation against rabies provided for by the laws of this state. 
Rabies control officer means such officer as defined or provided for by the laws of this state. 
Rabies tag means the license tag issued by a licensed veterinarian as proof of inoculation against rabies provided for by the laws of this state. 
Vicious animal means any animal: 
(1)  With a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
(2)  That attacks a human being or domestic animals without provocation. 
(3)  That is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or that is trained for fighting. 
(4)  Whose behavior, temperament, constitutes a risk of injury to a person or another animal. 
(5)  Evidencing an abnormal inclination to attack persons or other animals. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 8-3. - City tags generally; fees; special provisions. 
(a)  The owner of any pet over six months of age must obtain and provide the pet with a current city tag or provide the city proof the animal has been implanted with a microchip, along with its identifying information. To qualify for a city tag or before filing the pet microchip information with the city, the owner of the pet must give proof of a current rabies tag or certificate showing that pet has been inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian as required by the laws of this state provided, however, that for any exotic animals or identified hybrids for which rabies inoculations are prohibited under South Carolina law, a current rabies tag or certificate shall not be required. Any pet that spends more than 45 calendar days in a given year in the Aiken city limits shall obtain a city pet tag or file proof that the pet has a microchip and its identifying information. No person may use any city tag for any pet other than the pet for which it was issued. 
(b)  The city tag fee for each fertile pet shall be a one-time fee of $100.00. If the pet is microchipped, this one-time fee shall only be $80.00. The city tag fee for each sterilized pet shall be a one-time fee of $15.00. If the pet is microchipped and sterilized, this one-time licensing fee shall be waived in its entirety. Total one-time per pet fees shall be capped as follows: for two to five pets, $200.00 maximum. For six or more pets, $300.00 maximum. It shall be unlawful for an owner of a pet to fail to obtain a city tag in violation of this chapter and any violation shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in section 1-13 and section 8-19; provided, however, that in the event that the owner of a fertile pet, within 30 days of being given notice of a first violation hereunder has such animal sterilized and provides written proof from the veterinarian performing the procedure, then the maximum fine shall be $25.00. A duplicate city tag may be obtained upon payment of a $1.00-replacement fee. 
(c)  Any owner of a pet who can furnish a written certification from a licensed veterinarian that the pet, due to health reasons, could not withstand spay or neuter surgery shall be exempt from paying the higher city tag fee for fertile pets and is not required to have the pet spayed or neutered. Pet owners shall be so notified of this provision in the annual pet license renewal notices given by the city. The city will maintain these written certifications in its pet tag reports. 
(d)  Any handicapped owner of a dog which is used by the owner as an aid for seeing, hearing, or other physical purposes and which is specially trained for such purposes by a recognized service organization shall be required to obtain a city tag, but shall be exempt from paying the tag fee. 
(e)  The city tag issued for a pet that is not microchipped shall be attached to a collar or harness and worn by the dog at all times, except as provided as follows: 
(1)  While within the confines of the walls of a building or a completely and securely fenced-in yard area on the owner's premises, a dog is not required to wear a harness or collar with city tag attached, but the owner shall have the rabies tag and city tag available and immediately produce them upon request of an animal control officer, rabies control officer or public safety officer. 
(2)  A hunting or stock dog and show dog, while being worked, conditioned, groomed and/or shown under the direct control of its owner, is not required to wear the city tag while engaged in such activities, but the owner shall have the city tag and rabies tag available at the site of such activity for inspection and immediately produce them upon request of an animal control officer, rabies control officer or public safety officer. 
(f)  A kennel license must be obtained for every kennel. A kennel license shall also be required to be obtained for any location which houses an exotic animal, vicious animal, or an identified hybrid. The kennel license shall be $25.00 per year and shall be required in addition to the city tag set forth in subsection (a) above. Kennel licenses shall be required annually and shall expire on June 30 of each year. Authorized agents of the city are empowered to enter upon the premises of any kennel subject to this section and to make animal care inspections. It shall be unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to permit these inspections of care received by animals or to interfere with these inspections in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005) 
State Law reference— Pets to be inoculated, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-60.  
Sec. 8-4. - Vicious animal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vicious animal to permit the animal to leave a securely enclosed and confined area located on the owner's premises, unless the animal is securely muzzled and leashed or securely enclosed and confined in a cage or similar container so that it may be controlled by the owner. 
(b)  When a person has an animal that is vicious, it shall be unlawful for that person to fail to report the animal to an animal control officer, or city public safety officer. 
(c)  Any person convicted of an offense under this section shall have the animal spayed or neutered by a date specified by the presiding judge and, in the discretion of the court, forfeit all right, title, and interest in the animal, and an animal control officer, upon order of the court specifying a date for compliance, shall euthanize the animal or have the animal euthanized. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to guard dogs owned and used exclusively by licensed security services or dogs used by law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005) 
State Law reference— Regulation of dangerous animals, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-710 et seq.  
Sec. 8-5. - Restraint of dogs and at-large dogs. 
(a)  All dogs shall be kept under restraints at all times by their owners while within the city and off the owner's premises. The owner of a dog, when taking it off the owner's premises, must restrain the dog by placing it in a secure enclosure or by securely restraining it on a leash under the physical control of the owner. It shall be unlawful for the owner to fail to so restrain a dog while off the owner's premises. A dog off the owner's premises and not restrained as required by this section shall be deemed to be an animal at-large. 
(b)  Dogs that are participating in or training for hunting events, obedience trials, conformation shows, tracking tests, herding trials, terrier trials, or lure courses under the direct control of their owner shall not be considered animals at-large and are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any owner whose dog is found at-large within the city shall forfeit all right, title, interest and ownership in the dog subject to the procedures in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prohibit running at large, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-50.  
Sec. 8-6. - Sanitation. 
The owner of every pet shall be responsible for the immediate removal of all excretions deposited by the pet at any place off the owner's premises. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-7. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Animals whose owners are in violation of this chapter shall be taken into custody by an animal control officer or public safety officer and impounded in the animal control shelter. 
(b)  Animals whose owners are known shall be held at the animal control shelter for ten business days, unless released earlier to the owner. The animal control officer shall notify the owner that unless the animal is claimed within such time, it may be euthanized or released for adoption through an approved agency. If the animal control officer cannot contact the owner in person or by telephone within 24 hours of the animal's impoundment, a notification letter shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address, if any, of the owner. 
(c)  Animals whose owners are not known shall be held at the animal control shelter for five calendar days and, if unclaimed, the animal control officer may euthanize such animals or release them for adoption through an approved agency. 
(d)  An animal may be released from impoundment after payment by the owner of all fees; verification of a current rabies inoculation; and presentation of a valid city tag. Before an animal is released from impoundment, the owner of the animal must pay the city the currently required fee for each impoundment. In addition to impoundment fees, the owner shall pay the per diem board fee established or approved by the city. There will be an additional impoundment fee for female pets in heat. The owner shall be responsible for all fees whether the animal is reclaimed or not; and it shall be unlawful for the owner to fail to pay such fees. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-8. - Nuisance animals. 
The action of an animal constitutes a public nuisance under this section when it disturbs the rights, threatens the safety, or damages a member of the general public, or interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of his property or public property or areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or maintain an animal in such a manner as to constitute or allow it to become a public nuisance. In addition, the following acts or actions by an owner of any animal are hereby declared to be a public nuisance under this section and to be unlawful: 
(1)  Failure to exercise sufficient restraint necessary to control an animal as required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property of anyone other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over garbage containers or damaging vegetation. 
(3)  Maintaining a vicious animal. 
(4)  Maintaining animals in unsanitary conditions which result in offensive odors or are dangerous to the animal or the public health, welfare, or safety. 
(5)  Maintaining his premises or other property in a manner that is offensive, annoying or dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the public because of the number, density, or location of the animals on the owner's premises or other property. 
(6)  Allowing or permitting an animal to bark, whine, howl, yowl, crow, or cackle continuously for ten minutes or longer, or make other noise in such a manner so as to result in a serious annoyance or interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjoining or nearby properties. 
(7)  Keeping an animal that is diseased and dangerous to public health. 
(8)  Keeping an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, attacks or barks at pedestrians, bicycles, or vehicles. 
(9)  Failing to confine or control a female pet in heat in such a manner as not to create a nuisance by attracting other animals. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-9. - Injured or diseased animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person accidentally or otherwise to strike an animal with a vehicle or other instrument, injure the animal, and leave the scene of the incident without immediately notifying an animal control officer, public safety officer, or other official of the city. Any animal received by the animal control shelter in critical condition from wounds, injuries or disease may be destroyed if the owner cannot be located within two hours of receipt of the animal at the shelter. If the animal is in severe pain, it may be euthanized immediately, at the discretion of the animal control superintendent or an animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-10. - Animal bites and quarantine of animals. 
(a)  The breaking of skin of a human being by an animal shall be considered an animal bite case. All animal bite cases shall be reported to an animal control officer, public safety officer or other official of the city, by anyone having knowledge thereof. During nonbusiness hours, the report shall be made to the 911 emergency center. The animal bite report shall be made as soon as possible, and in no case more than 24 hours after bite. Animal control officers shall assist in making animal bite reports, but the initial responsibility is that of the owner of the animal involved or believed to be involved and the person bitten to report the incident to the city. It shall be unlawful for an animal owner or the person bitten to fail to make the report required by this section. 
(b)  The owner of any animal that has physical contact with a suspected rabid wild animal shall promptly notify the city of the incident. 
(c)  Any animal which has bitten a human being or is suspected of being rabid shall be quarantined by the city for at least ten days, and no such animal shall be released from quarantine or euthanized until the animal has been examined by a licensed veterinarian or rabies control officer and determined not to have symptoms of rabies. The rabies control officer is authorized to require that the animal be quarantined at the animal control shelter, or may, at the request of the animal owner, allow the animal to be quarantined in a facility operated by a licensed veterinarian. The owner is responsible for all board and veterinary medical costs incurred during the quarantine. The animal may be quarantined at the owner's residence at the discretion of the rabies control officer. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005) 
State Law reference— Reports of animal bites required, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-90.  
Sec. 8-11. - Emergency rabies proclamations and orders. 
(a)  City council is hereby granted within the city limits all the powers conferred on county boards of health by S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-120. 
(b)  From and after the publication of the proclamation as provided for in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person owning or having the custody of control of any dog within the city to allow such dog to run at-large within the city limits at any time during the period covered by the proclamation. Each day that any dog shall be allowed to run at-large during the period prohibited in such proclamation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  During any period covered by a proclamation for this section, any dog found running at-large in the city may be euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005) 
State Law reference— Quarantines authorized, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-120.  
Sec. 8-12. - Keeping of fowl. 
Fowl shall be kept in a secure enclosure located at least 40 feet from any residence other than that of the owner thereof, and so constructed as to prevent such fowl from leaving the owner's premises. Owners of fowl must also comply with all applicable federal, state and local health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-13. - Keeping of swine prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep swine within the city. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005) 
State Law reference— Feeding of garbage to swine, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-15-10 et seq.  
Sec. 8-14. - Hitching, grazing or running at-large of livestock in streets or parks. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any cattle, horses, mules, hogs, goats, sheep or other livestock to allow such livestock to be hitched, grazed, or run at-large in any of the streets, highways or parks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-15. - City-designated bird sanctuary. 
The entire area within the city is hereby designated as a permanent bird sanctuary. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-16. - Hunting, killing, etc., birds, fowl or squirrels. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to hunt, kill, shoot or attempt to shoot, wound, injure, abuse or molest any bird, wild fowl or squirrel, or to rob bird nests; provided, however, if squirrels, starlings, English sparrows or any other birds or wild fowl are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality of the city that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the director of public safety, it shall 
be so declared by such director. Such squirrels or birds then may be destroyed or removed in such numbers and in such a manner as is deemed advisable by the director of public safety. Squirrel removal may be performed by humane trapping. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-17. - Interference with animal control officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, oppose, resist, hinder or molest the animal control superintendent or any animal control officer in the performance of his duty or seek to release any animal in his custody without his consent. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-18. - Injured or diseased animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person accidentally, or in any other manner, strike any domesticated animal with a vehicle or other instrument, injure the animal, and then leave the scene of the incident without immediately notifying an animal control officer, public safety officer, or other official of the city. Any animal received by the animal control shelter in critical condition from wounds, injuries or disease may be destroyed if the owner cannot be located within two hours of receipt of the animal at the shelter. If the animal is in severe pain, it may be euthanized immediately, at the discretion of the animal control superintendent or an animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-19. - Cruelty to animals and failure to aid injured animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or any other person to willfully injure or kill any animal by any means causing it unnecessary fright or pain, and it shall further be unlawful for the owner or any other person, by neglect or otherwise, to cause or allow any animal to endure pain, suffering, or injury. Acts constituting violations of this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Failure to provide adequate shelter from inclement weather. 
(2)  Failure to provide food for a period of more than 24 hours and/or water or other necessary care for more than 12 hours. 
(3)  Abandoning any animal on private, or public, property. 
(4)  Leaving or exposing any poisonous substance, food, or drink, for man, animal, or fowl, or aiding or abetting any person in so doing, except insect or rodent poison when used in compliance with the product directions for control of insects or rodents. 
(5)  Baiting, attacking with violence, provoking, or harassing an animal or causing an animal to engage in fights with or among other animals or between animals and humans. Nothing in the foregoing sentence, however, shall prohibit the lawful training of guard or law enforcement dogs or other animals, provided it does not violate other provisions of this chapter, the city code, or the laws of this state. 
(6)  Riding animals beyond their endurance limits, requiring animals to pull or operate any carriage or other animal powered vehicles beyond these animals' endurance limits, overloading animals, making animals carry loads or operate animal powered vehicles when they, or the animals, are overloaded, torturing, tormenting, depriving of necessary sustenance, cruelly beating, mutilating or cruelly killing animals, or causing or procuring these actions to be done. 
(b)  Any owner whose animal has been subjected to a violation of this section by the owner shall forfeit all right, title, interest, and ownership in the animal subject to the procedures in this chapter, and the animal shall be impounded until the animal control superintendent determines that the circumstances of the cruelty or neglect by the owner have been remedied. Upon conviction in municipal court of a violation of this section, the sentence imposed by the municipal judge may include the permanent forfeiture of the animal. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or person to tether a dog to a stationary object or mobile device in violation of this section. Persons using tethering devices to control their dogs must comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  No person shall tether a dog to a stationary object or to a mobile device, including, but not limited to, a trolley or pulley by means of: 
a.  A tether that does not allow such dog to walk at least fifteen feet, excluding the length of such dog as measured from the tip of such dog's nose to the base of such dog's tail, in any one direction. 
b.  A tether that does not have workable swivels on both ends to prevent twisting and tangling, unless a person is in the presence of such dog. 
c.  A coat hanger, choke collar, prong-type collar, head halter or any other collar, halter or device that is not specifically designed or properly fitted for the restraint of such dog. 
d.  A tether that has weights attached or that contains metal chain links more than one-quarter of an inch thick. 
e.  A tether that allows such dog to reach an object or hazard, including, but not limited to, a window sill, edge of a pool, fence, public road or highway, porch or terrace railing that poses a risk of injury or strangulation to such dog if such dog walks into or jumps over such object or hazard, unless a person is in the presence of such dog. 
f.  No chain or tether shall weigh more than one-eighth of the dog's body weight. 
(2)  A person owning or keeping a dog confined shall provide the dog with access to clean water and appropriate dog shelter. The dog shelter shall allow the dog to remain dry and protected from the elements. The shelter shall be an appropriate size for the dog and enable the dog to stand, lie down and turn comfortably. The structure shall be structurally sound and in good repair. Suitable drainage shall be provided so that water, ice or waste is not standing in or around the shelter. 
(3)  The provisions of subdivisions (1) and (2) of this subsection shall not be construed to apply to: 
a.  Any veterinary practice licensed pursuant to state law that tethers a dog in the course of such veterinary practice, 
b.  Any exhibition, show, contest or other temporary event in which the skill, breeding or stamina of such dog is judged or examined, 
c.  Any exhibition, class, training session or other temporary event in which such dog is used in a lawful manner to hunt a species of wildlife during the hunting season for such species of wildlife or in which such dog receives training in a lawful manner to hunt such species of wildlife, 
d.  The temporary tethering of a dog at any camping or recreation area as expressly authorized by the commissioner of energy and environmental protection, or 
e.  The temporary tethering of a dog at a grooming facility in the course of grooming such dog. 
(4)  No person shall tether a dog outdoors to a stationary object or to a mobile device, including, but not limited to, a trolley or a pulley, when a weather advisory or warning is issued by local, state or federal authorities or when outdoor environmental conditions, including, but not limited to, extreme heat, cold, wind, rain, snow or hail, pose an adverse risk to the health or safety of such dog based on such dog's breed, age or physical condition, unless tethering is for a duration of no longer than fifteen minutes. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or person to confine any animal in a motor vehicle that is done in a manner that places the animal in a life threatening or extreme health-threatening situation by exposing it to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or other protection from such heat or cold. In order to protect the health and safety of an animal, an animal control officer, law enforcement officer or fire fighter who has probable cause to believe that this section is being violated shall have the authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means necessary under the circumstances, after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other responsible person. In the event that the owner or other responsible person cannot be located, the animal control officer, law enforcement officer or fire fighter may take the following actions: 
(1)  Take all steps that are reasonably necessary to remove an animal from a motor vehicle if the animal's health, safety, or wellbeing appears to be in immediate danger from heat, cold, or lack of adequate ventilation and the conditions could reasonably be expected to cause extreme suffering or death. 
(2)  Remove an animal from a motor vehicle if the animal's safety appears to be in immediate danger from heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, lack of food or water or other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death to the animal. An animal control officer, law enforcement officer, or fire fighter may enter the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of rescue or release of the animal and may not search the vehicle unless otherwise permitted by law. 
(3)  A law enforcement or animal control officer who removes an animal in accordance with this section shall, in a secure and conspicuous location on or within the motor vehicle, leave written notice bearing the officer's or agent's name and office, and the address of the location where the animal may be retrieved. The owner may retrieve the animal only after payment of all charges that have accrued for the maintenance, care, medical treatment, and impoundment of the animal. 
(4)  A law enforcement or animal control officer who removes an animal from a motor vehicle pursuant to this section is immune from criminal or civil liability that might otherwise result from the removal. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005; Ord. No. 06112018E , § 1(Exh. A), 6-11-2018)  
Sec. 8-20. - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter, and any such violation shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 11142005, § 1, 11-14-2005)  
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Posting advertising matter to utility poles, trees or public buildings, § 4-1; fire prevention and protection, ch. 16; noise from buildings operations during specific hours, § 22-35; solid waste, ch. 32; streets and sidewalks, ch. 36; street numbers for lots and buildings, § 36-61 et seq.; construction for telecommunications, § 40-14; utilities, ch. 44. 
State Law reference— Building codes and fire prevention in cities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Fire districts. 
The city is divided into fire districts as agreed to between the county council and the city council. However, in those areas outside the city limits, fire service shall be provided as agreed between the city and the property owner. Fire districts are as mapped under county Ordinance No. 93-5-41, as amended. 
(Code 1980, § 6-1) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Duty of city to establish fire limits, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-1110.  
Sec. 10-2. - Building codes. 
The following codes, which have been promulgated and published by the International Code Counsel, Inc., and formally adopted by the South Carolina Building Codes Council, (SCBCC), are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference to the same extent as if set out here fully word for word, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city as to matters covered by them: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2018 Edition, including Chapter 1 Administration and South Carolina Modifications. 
(2)  International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, including Chapter 1 Administration and South Carolina Modifications. 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, including Chapter 1 Administration and South Carolina Modifications. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, including Chapter 1 Administration and South Carolina Modifications. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, including Chapter 1 Administration and South Carolina Modifications. 
(6)  International Energy Conservation Code as adopted by the State of South Carolina. 
(7)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition. 
(8)  NFPA National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition. 
(9)  International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, including Chapter 1 Administration and South Carolina Modifications. 
(10)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 Edition. 
(11)  A copy of each of these codes adopted by this section shall be kept on file in the City of Aiken's buildings inspection division and available for public inspection during normal office hours. 
(12)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of any building or construction code adopted by this section and any person convicted of such violation shall be punished as prescribed by section 1-13, Aiken City Code, as amended. 
(13)  In the event of any conflict between the provisions of any code or regulation adopted by, or set forth in, this chapter and any other law, code, ordinance, or regulation of the city, or state, the more restrictive law, code, ordinance, or regulation shall apply and control. 
(Code 1980, § 6-2; Ord. No. 11122001E, § 1, 11-12-2001; Ord. No. 05122003, § 1, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 08092004C, § 1, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 09252006B, § 1, 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 06162008, § 1, 6-16-2008; Ord. No. 06242013 , § 1, 6-24-2013; Ord. No. 06272016A , § 1, 6-27-2016; Ord. No. 12092019D , § 1, 12-9-2019) 
State Law reference— Generally authority to adopt standard codes or technical regulations by reference, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-280. For specific provisions concerning building, electrical, gas, plumbing and housing codes, see S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-10 et seq.  
Sec. 10-3. - Demolition 200 Program. 
As an alternative to any procedure set forth in any applicable section, the building official may meet with, or correspond with, all the owners of the residential property upon which a substandard structure may be located and offer to have the city undertake the demolition of the substandard structure in return for the payment by the owner to the city of the total sum of $200.00. Upon receipt of this payment, and the execution of an agreement approved by the city attorney, by all of the owners of the property on which the substandard structure is located, the building official may direct the demolition and removal of the substandard structure. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define or declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or other procedure. The measures and procedures provided for in this Code and this section do not supercede, and this section does not repeal, any other measures or procedures which are provided by ordinance, state law, applicable building code, or other applicable law for the elimination, repair, or correction of the conditions referred to in this Code, but the measures and procedures provided for in this article shall be in addition to any others applicable. 
Nothing in the passage of this chapter shall adversely affect any enforcement action begun prior to January 1, 2002 under any former code. Any enforcement action commenced prior to January 1, 2002 shall proceed to completion under the code applicable prior to the adoption and the January 1, 2002 effective date of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 06162008, § 1, 6-16-2008) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06162008, § 1, adopted Jun. 16, 2008, repealed the former § 10-3, and enacted a new § 10-3 as set out herein. The former § 10-3 pertained to adoption of electrical code. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 10-4. - Dwellings unfit for human habitation, boarded structures, and property maintenance. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms whenever used or referred to regarding dwellings unfit for human habitation shall have the following respective meanings for the purposes of this section, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
Dwelling shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
Governing body shall mean the Aiken City Council. 
Municipality or city shall mean the city of Aiken. 
Owner shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest shall mean all individuals, associations, corporations and others who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession thereof. 
Public authority shall mean any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or state of South Carolina relating to health, fire or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings in the city. 
Public officer shall mean the officer or officers who are authorized by this section to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinance and by this section, specifically including the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Repairing, closing or demolishing unfit dwellings. Whenever it is found that there exists in the city dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to (a) dilapidation, (b) deterioration increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, (c) lack of proper ventilation, light or sanitary facilities or (d) other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to health and safety or harboring illegal activities or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, the city may exercise its police powers with due process to repair, close or demolish any such dwelling in the manner herein provided. 
(c)  Provisions included in this article relating to unfit dwellings. Pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 31-15-30, the following provisions are incorporated into this article; 
(1)  That the public officer is hereby designated or appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by this article; 
(2)  That whenever the public officer on his motion believes that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and all parties in interest in such dwelling a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the building code appeals commission at a place therein fixed, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of such complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the building code appeals commission; 
(3)  That if after such notice and hearing the building code appeals commission determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, it shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order (a) if the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling for human habitation; or (b) if the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling; or c) establish an agreed upon schedule to make repairs that are costly; 
(4)  That if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the public officer may cause such dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed; the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful"; 
(5)  That if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling, the public officer may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished; 
(6)  That the amount of the cost, to include all costs necessitated or required by this article, of such repairs, alterations or improvements, vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred and shall be collectible in the same manner as city ad valorem property or real property taxes; and 
(7)  If the city in demolishing unfit dwellings as permitted by this article contracts with a third party not employed by the city to do the work, it must conform with the procurement policy applicable to the city. 
(8)  City may auction the materials as part of the demolition and retain monies from the cost of auction to be applied to the satisfaction of the city's lien. 
(d)  Power of city to declare nuisances not impaired. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of this city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(e)  Standards for determining fitness of dwelling for human habitation. This article provides that a public officer may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that conditions exist in such dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the health and safety of the occupants of such dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings or other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; yard debris posing danger to ground water; structural defects; excessive contents impeding accessibility to interior or exterior; or illegal activities. Additional standards to guide the public officer or his agents may be adopted for determining the fitness of a dwelling for human habitation by amendment to this article. 
(f)  Service of complaints or orders; posting and filing copies. Complaints or orders issued by a designated public officer pursuant to an ordinance adopted under this section shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the designated public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the designated public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing it once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published in the county and circulating in the city in which the dwellings are located. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint shall also be posted on the city website. A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed with the clerk of the county in which the dwelling is located and such filing of the complaint or order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(g)  Rights of persons affected by orders. Any person affected by an order issued by a public officer may within 60 days after the posting and service of the order petition the circuit court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause. Hearings shall be had by the court on such petitions within 20 days or as soon thereafter as possible and shall be given preference over other matters on the court's calendar. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decrees as law and justice may require. In all such proceedings the findings of the public officer as to facts, if supported by evidence, shall be conclusive. Costs shall be in the discretion of the court. The remedies herein provided shall be exclusive remedies and no person affected by an order of the public officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the public officer or because of compliance by such person with any order of the public officer. 
(h)  Provisions with respect to powers of designated public officer. The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this section including the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations, provided such entries be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinances to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(i)  Sale of materials of removed or demolished dwelling. If a dwelling is removed or demolished by a public officer he shall sell the materials which are saleable of such dwelling and shall credit the proceeds of such sale, if any, against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the circuit court by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. 
(j)  Funds for enforcement; estimate of amount needed. The building inspections division of the city manager's office shall, as soon as possible after the enactment of this article, prepare an estimate of the annual expenses or costs to provide the equipment, personnel and supplies necessary for periodic examinations and investigations of the dwellings in the city for the purpose of determining the fitness of such dwellings for human habitation and for the enforcement and administration of this article. The city may make appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary for this purpose and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provision of such ordinances. 
(k)  Provisions cumulative. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of this city to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, or to prevent or punish violations thereof and the powers conferred by this section shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. 
(l)  Vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource. 
(m)  Definitions. The following words and terms shall, regarding vacant structures and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown herein. 
Building means any structure including, but not limited to, any residential commercial industrial or assembly structure approved for occupancy. 
Vacant building means any structure or building that: 
(1)  Is unoccupied or occupied by unauthorized persons; and 
(2)  Is unsecured or boarded. 
(n)  Enforcement and remedies for violation. A building that is boarded or vacant in violation of this section is a public nuisance. In addition to the provisions in this section the city is authorized to use the remedies set forth in state law and the Aiken City Code. The remedies, procedures and penalties provided by this section are cumulative to each other and to any others available under state law or other city ordinances. 
(o)  Owner responsibilities. No person shall allow a building designed for human use or occupancy to stand vacant for more than 60 days unless the owner establishes by substantial evidence to the reasonable satisfaction of the code official one of the following applies: 
(1)  Permits. The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the repair or rehabilitation. 
(2)  Sale or lease. The building meets all applicable codes, does not contribute to blight, is ready for occupancy and is actively being offered for sale, lease or rent. 
(3)  Maintained. The building does not contribute to and is not likely to contribute to blight because the owner is actively maintaining and monitoring the building so that it does not contribute to blight. Active maintenance and monitoring shall include: 
a.  Maintenance of landscaping and plant material in good condition. 
b.  Maintenance of the exterior of the building including but not limited to paint and finishes in good condition. 
c.  Prompt and regular removal of all exterior trash debris and graffiti. 
d.  Maintenance of the building in continuing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations. 
e.  Prevention of criminal activity on the premises including, but not limited to, use and sale of controlled substances, prostitution, criminal street gang activity, loitering, or trespassing. 
(p)  Natural disasters. If the building is vacant due to fire, flood, earthquake, or other form of natural disaster and the owner is actively pursuing assistance for demolition, rehabilitation, or restoration of the building and/or premises from local, state or federal assistance programs or from insurance agencies. 
(q)  Rehabilitation. The owner of any boarded building whether boarded by voluntary action of the owner or as a result of enforcement activity by the city shall cause the boarded building to be rehabilitated for occupancy within six months after the building is boarded. 
(r)  Boarded-up structures. The owner of any boarded building whether boarded by voluntary action of the owner or as a result of enforcement activity by the city shall ensure that the building is boarded to the city's board-up standards. In no case shall a structure remain boarded for a period more than six months. 
(s)  Standards for boarding a vacant building. The boarding of a vacant building shall be according to the specifications approved by the code official. 
(t)  Buildings abated by city. If the city boards the vacant building, the building may be boarded in a manner which is determined to adequately prevent unauthorized entry or vandalism. All costs of boarding shall be recovered pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Aiken City Code. 
(u)  Notice procedures for vacant, unsecured, or boarded buildings. Whenever the code official determines that a vacant, unsecured, or boarded building exists, a notice shall be sent to the owner or responsible party in accordance with the Aiken City Code. 
(v)  Trespass notice. The code official may also require the owner of the property to post "no trespassing" signs on the property and sign a letter with the city of Aiken public safety department authorizing the department to enforce no trespassing on the premises. 
(w)  Continuing nuisance. When the owner of a boarded or vacant building fails to maintain the property in accordance with this section or when repeated violations of this section occur for the same property, the code official may seek other remedies as provided by this code, local ordinances or state law including but not limited to demolition of the structure. 
(x)  Emergency hazard abatement. When any open building or structure constitutes such an imminent threat to life, limb or property such that it must be secured, closed or barricaded and compliance with other provisions of this code becomes infeasible as determined by the code official, the code official may summarily secure, close, or barricade the building without prior notice to the property owner. All costs of boarding shall be recovered pursuant to the procedures in the Aiken City Code. 
(y)  Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the city or contractor hired by the city shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon. And the owner or agent responsible for the property shall pay the costs of such removal. 
(z)  Property to be kept clean. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, occupant or lessee of property within the city to: 
(1)  Deposit garbage in any but fly proof and watertight receptacles, or those receptacles that are issued by the city or other sanitation company excluding active construction sites and equine dumpsters. 
(2)  Place garbage, refuse or trash or cause the discharge of sewage or any other organic filth into or upon any place in such manner that transmission of infective material to human beings may result therefrom. 
(3)  Place outside of any building any discarded furniture, icebox, refrigerator, stove, water heater or other major appliances, machinery, equipment, junked vehicle or vehicle parts, mattresses or building material or any accumulation of trash and refuse which is not completely enclosed within a building, except as allowed for trash collection by city forces, or that is hidden from street view by privacy fencing. 
(4)  Sweep or push litter from buildings, property or sidewalks into streets, sidewalks and storm drains. Sweepings shall be picked up and put into household or commercial receptacles. Exception is made for yard waste that is placed in accordance with city regulations. 
(5)  Allow the accumulation of loose or trapped litter at such locations as fences, wall bases, grassy or planted areas, borders, embankments or other similar collecting points. Owners, agents, occupants or lessees whose properties include a city right-of-way shall be responsible for keeping up to and including the curb and gutter or street line free of litter. 
(6)  Fail to regularly maintain fences and walls to continue their structural integrity, and/or to provide a neat appearance and to preserve the aesthetic character of the city. 
(aa)  It is not the intent of this section to create a hardship on persons or entities whose property is planted with typical lawn type grasses and is normally maintained adequately. At the city's discretion, enforcement of these requirements shall reasonably accommodate extreme weather conditions which temporarily inhibit normal property maintenance. 
(bb)  It shall be the duty of every owner, tenant or person in charge of any real property located within the city to properly maintain the vegetation on said property. Such maintenance will include cutting weeds, grass and undergrowth so they do not exceed 12 inches (305 mm) in height and/or become overgrown as determined by the public officer. Trees, shrubbery, vines and other ornamental plantings will be pruned, trimmed or thinned to prevent an overgrown or unsightly appearance. 
(cc)  Real property that has never been cleared or developed, or has been cleared and then allowed to return to its natural state, will be allowed to stay in its natural state. 
(dd)  The 12 inch limit on weeds, grass and undergrowth shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Flower beds, vegetable gardens, ornamental grasses, trees, controlled shrubbery, flowers or other ornamental plants which are properly tended, vegetation buffers between streets and lots for the purposes of reducing headlight intrusion into homes and businesses and shrubbery, vines, and other vegetation growing to hide refuse collection containers lawfully placed on neighboring lots. 
(2)  Any premises or part thereof on which such growth may be reasonably demonstrated to be for agricultural, horticultural or equestrian use and which is properly tended. Land that is being tilled and farmed must be cleared after the growing season to maintain grass, weeds, and undergrowth to the maximum height requirements of 12 inches (305 mm). 
(3)  Undeveloped woodlands in a natural state. 
(4)  Rough areas including areas of extreme grade, creek banks or gullies that cannot be safely maintained without specialized equipment. 
(5)  Wetlands, woodlands, forested areas, and areas within fifteen feet of a stream or pond. 
(6)  Any resident with an illness or physical limitation, the elderly and disabled, at their legal residence who apply for a temporary waiver of this section until suitable arrangements for compliance have been secured. 
(ee)  Compliance. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or parcel of land within the city to permit the conditions set forth in this section to exist or continue, after notice thereof. 
(ff)  Construction sites. It shall be unlawful for any construction and/or demolition contractor to fail to control loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building material, employee lunch/coffee break discards and other trash produced by those working on a site. All such material shall be contained by the end of each working day and the site shall be kept in a reasonably clean and litter-free condition. The number and type of refuse receptacles, bulk containers, detachable containers or other approved method of containing waste material shall be determined by the size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public property or neighboring private property as a result of the construction or demolition shall be immediately removed by the contractor. Construction sites shall be kept orderly at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 6-4; Ord. No. 062899, §§ 1, 3, 6-28-1999; Ord. No. 03242003B, § 1, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 10252010B, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 03262018 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-26-2018; Ord. No. 10082018 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-8-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10252010B, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 2010, amended § 10-4 title to read as herein set out. Former § 10-4 title pertained to housing code amended as to unsafe dwellings. Later, Ord. No. 03262018 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted March 26, 2018, amended § 10-4 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Dwellings unfit for human habitation" to "Dwellings unfit for human habitation, boarded structures, and property maintenance," as set out herein. 
State Law reference— S.C. Code 1976 § 31-15-20 et seq.  
Sec. 10-5. - Building official designated as relocation officer. 
Under the building regulations of the city, the building official is hereby designated as the relocation officer of the city, whose duties as such are to perform all the necessary relocation services related to families displaced as the result of the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, the acquisition of rights-of-way for highways or other purposes within the city, whether such are acquired by the city or another governmental body, and other city official activity actually requiring removal of dwellings or structures occupied by families, individuals, businesses, institutions or nonprofit organizations. Such officer shall do, perform and carry out, in a proper and satisfactory manner, general relocation services. 
(Code 1980, § 6-5)  
Sec. 10-6. - Housing rehabilitation and slum clearance plan adopted. 
The Housing Rehabilitation and Slum Clearance Plan and Guidelines to Implementation is hereby adopted by the city council and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 6-6)  
Sec. 10-7. - Duties of housing board of adjustments and appeals delegated to building code appeals committee. 
Section 106.1 of the Standard Housing Code adopted by section 10-2 is hereby repealed in its entirety, and all references in the remaining provisions of the Standard Housing Code to "the board" and the "housing board of adjustments and appeals" shall mean the building code appeals committee provided for by Section 105 of the Standard Building Code adopted by section 10-2 and the building code appeals committee is hereby authorized to discharge all the duties, responsibilities, and functions of the housing board of adjustments and appeals provided for in the Standard Housing Code. 
(Code 1980, § 6-7)  
Sec. 10-8. - Commercial property maintenance. 
(a)  Every commercial, business, industrial or mixed occupancy or use of a building or premises, all of which occupancies or uses are referred to in this section as commercial, shall comply with the provisions of this section, whether or not such buildings or premises were constructed, altered, or repaired before or after the enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and regardless of any permits or licenses that have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises, construction or repair of the building or premises, or installation or repair of equipment or facilities on the building or premises. 
(b)  In the event of the conflict of the provisions of this section with the provisions of any other city ordinance, code, or regulation, or the laws of this state, the standards set forth in the provisions that are the most restrictive shall prevail. 
(c)  The exterior of every commercial building or structure, and the premises on which they are located, shall be kept free of all nuisances or hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians, other persons utilizing the premises, and the public and free of unsanitary conditions. The foregoing nuisances, hazards, and unsanitary conditions shall include, but shall not be limited to, refuse; weeds; broken glass; stumps; obnoxious growths; garbage; trash; debris; dead or dying trees, limbs or other natural growth; excavations; holes; recurring accumulations of stormwater; sources of infestation; building materials, or materials that have fallen from, or become displaced from, any structure of any kind; and commercial and industrial material and equipment visible from the sidewalk, street, or any other public area. 
(d)  All landscaping and vegetation on any commercial premises, including lawns, hedges, and bushes, shall be kept trimmed and maintained so as not to become overgrown or unsightly. 
(e)  The exterior of every building, or structure, on any commercial premises shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, peeling paint, or any other condition, or deterioration, or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property must be preserved, safety or fire hazards eliminated, and adjoining properties protected from blighting influences. The outside building walls of all structures on commercial premises shall not have any holes; loose boards; or any broken, cracked, or damaged finish which admits rain, cold, air, dampness, rodents, insects, or vermin to its interior. All boards and wood, including floor boards, subfloors, joists, bridging, and all other boards in any interior or exterior floor, wall, roof, or other part of the building, or structure, shall be maintained free of cracks, termite damage, or rot. Any damaged members must be replaced. 
(f)  The owner, operator, or person in control of each commercial building, structure, or premises shall have joint and several responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this section. The officers of the department of public safety and all city staff authorized by the city manager to issue an ordinance summons shall have the duty of enforcing the provisions of this section, and, in doing so, may enter upon any such premises for the purpose of investigating and examining the premises to enforce this section. It is unlawful for any owner, employee of an owner, agent, contractor, or other person or entity to violate any provisions of their commercial property maintenance code. 
(Code 1980, § 6-8; Ord. No. 02132006C, § 2 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 10-9. - The City of Aiken Facade Improvement Grant Program. 
(a)  Purpose. The city establishes this grant program to encourage the renovation of building facades in the downtown area. The city recognizes that the front facades of older buildings occasionally need restoration to preserve and promote an attractive looking downtown area. These improvement efforts stabilize or even increase property values and can help to attract new business and development into an area. Building facades represent the public face of private structures, and as such, they have much to do with the physical image of a community and how it is perceived by residents, developers and visitors. 
(b)  The grant. The financial incentive has the following elements: 
(1)  The city will pay one half the cost of an improvement project up to a maximum city contribution of $10,000.00. The cost of the facade improvement shall be determined from a review of the improvement project building permit or other appropriate documentation for those improvement projects that do not require a building permit. 
(2)  The owner must initially pay the cost of restoring the facade. Once facade improvements are completed to city Code standards and in keeping with Aiken Downtown Design Guideline, the city will reimburse the owner for the appropriate grant amount. 
(3)  Since these monies are being paid under a grant program, they do not have to be repaid. 
(4)  This program may be terminated by the City of Aiken at any time that there are not sufficient funds available to fund this incentive program. 
(5)  Owner shall determine whether this property qualifies for a grant at the time the building permit is issued. 
(c)  Eligible structures. 
(1)  The building must be in the area zoned Downtown Business (DB) under the city's zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The facade to be improved must be contiguous to, and visible from, a public right-of-way or alleyway, including, but not limited to, Bee Lane, The Alley, Sea Lane, and Hoods Lane. 
(d)  Facade improvements. The facade grant may be used for the following: 
(1)  Demolition, only if it is associated with, and followed by, a facade renovation project. 
(2)  Exterior improvements including, but not limited to, correction of exterior code violations, painting and siding, exterior repairs, door and window replacement, trimwork, enhanced entryways, display windows, or any other work as approved by the planning director. 
(e)  Design issues. The city is interested in promoting good design of downtown buildings that is in character with the area's architectural history. In order to further that goal, grant applicants must meet the design standards for facade renovation that are in keeping with the city's design guidelines for the downtown area. 
(f)  Approval process. 
(1)  Façade is defined as any exterior face or wall of a building from the grade level to the top of the parapet or eaves, the entire building width, any associated structural elements including porches, but specifically excluding roofs, dormers, entrance floors, domes, cupolas, steeples, chimneys [unless part of the façade], and turrets. 
(2)  Certificates of appropriateness from the design review board must be obtained, where necessary, prior to any work being commenced. 
(3)  A final form supplied by the planning department and documenting the costs and nature of the work must be submitted to the planning department within 90 days of final approval by the city building inspector, or, where no such inspection is required, within 90 days of final payment for the work. 
(4)  The planning director shall determine whether the request should be approved and may exclude any ineligible work. Written notice of the planning director's decision shall be mailed to the applicant within 60 days of submission. The decision of the planning director may be appealed to the city manager in writing within five days of the mailing of the decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 09122005B, § 1, 9-12-2005; Ord. No. 06122006, § 1, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 06102019 , § 1, 6-10-2019)  
Sec. 10-10. - Redevelopment incentive—Use of empty buildings. 
(a)  Purpose. The City of Aiken hereby establishes the empty building incentive program to encourage the use and/or redevelopment of empty buildings located throughout the city. The city recognizes that there are any number of reasons that contribute to building vacancies. With this program, the city offers an opportunity to assist new owners in reducing the overhead costs for a startup business. The city also seeks to reduce the number of vacated buildings located throughout the city to preserve and promote an attractive-looking city and to enhance the value of real estate throughout the city. As an additional purpose, the city seeks to reduce development sprawl by encouraging existing buildings to be reused. This will reduce development costs as well as the cost of public services to the business community. In most cases, water, sewer and other infrastructure is already available to old, unoccupied buildings. There is no added cost of running utility lines to more distant locations. Also, by using existing buildings, which usually are located in already developed areas, we may reduce fuel costs and traffic volumes within the city. 
(b)  Incentive. For qualifying buildings, the owner shall be entitled to an incentive payment to be determined by applying the following formula: 
(1)  The total assessed value of the subject property (building and land) as determined by Aiken County prior to construction is subtracted from the total assessed value for the property after construction is complete. This is the difference in the improvements to the subject property (increase in value). 
(2)  The increase in value is then multiplied by .04 for residential uses and .06 for commercial uses. This sum is then multiplied by the city's then current millage rate (presently .071, as of the 2004-05 fiscal year). That sum is then multiplied by the applicable multiplier based on the number of years the building has been vacant. This is the total incentive payment. The city will then issue a check to the owner for the full amount of the incentive payment. 
Example: Redevelopment of a property currently assessed by Aiken County at $6,000.00 results in a new assessed value of $100,000.00. The building has been empty for more than four years. The calculation looks like this: 
$94,000.00 increase in value 
× 4 percent (6 percent if commercial property; 10.5 percent if industrial property) 
________ 
$3,760.00 
× .071 (city millage rate at time of calculation) 
________ 
$267.00 
× 3 
________ 
$800.88 (total incentive payment) 
The owner must be current on all real estate tax payments for the property in order to apply for the incentive program. The city shall have up to 60 days to confirm the owner's entitlement to the incentive being requested. The amount of the incentive is based on the number of years the building has been continuously vacant. 
Example: If your building qualifies and has been vacant for more than four years, your multiplier is three. 
Incentive Scale 
Continuous Vacancy (months) 	Incentive Multiplier 
0—24 	No Incentive 
24—36 	1 year 
36—48 	2 years 
48 + 	3 years 
 
(c)  Requirements to qualify for the incentive payment. 
(1)  The building must have been used last for commercial purposes and it must be redeveloped for a commercial purpose or new residential purpose. The building must be a minimum size of 30,000 heated square feet. 
(2)  The building must be located within the city. 
(3)  The building must be empty and/or vacant continuously for at least 24 months. 
(4)  A building can qualify only one time for the reimbursement incentive. The incentive will only be paid to the person or entity that redeveloped the empty building. 
(5)  The entire empty building must be fully occupied before the owner will qualify for the incentive. For purposes of this section, 75 percent or more of the heated square footage of the building must be utilized by the owner or tenant before qualifying for the incentive. 
(6)  The incentive cannot be taken in conjunction with the Downtown Aiken Facade Incentive Program. 
(7)  The owner shall apply for qualification for this incentive prior to the issuance of a building permit or demolition of the subject structure. 
(8)  The owner/developer must not have received any incentive payments or loans from the Aiken Corporation for use on the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 03282005B, § 1, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 10-11. - Nuisances. 
Declaration of policy. Any act of any person, group or business within the city whereby the health or life of any person may be endangered, injured or impaired or disease may, directly or indirectly, be caused by the act, or because of the act any property may be endangered, injured or damaged, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful. Dwellings and other buildings in the city which are unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or otherwise hazardous to the welfare of the residents of the city are also declared to be a nuisance. 
(1)  Specific nuisances. Acts of nuisance shall include but are not expressly restricted to: 
a.  The owner, occupant or agent of any owner or occupant of one or more lots, parcels or areas within the city permitting the premises to become unsanitary or a fire menace by allowing any offensive or unsafe matter, such as grass, weeds or brush, to become overgrown, accumulate or otherwise occupy and remain upon such premises. 
b.  The owner, occupant or agent of any owner or occupant of one or more lots, parcels or areas within the city permitting pools of water to accumulate and remain upon the premises and become stagnant and foul. 
c.  The owner, occupant or agent of any owner or occupant of one or more lots, parcels or areas within the city and in a residential area allowing junk, disabled cars and trucks, trash, waste, old lumber or used tires to accumulate and remain upon the premises as a possible harborage for rats, snakes and other vermin. 
d.  The owner, occupant or agent of any owner or occupant of one or more lots, parcels or areas within the city allowing the accumulation of abandoned or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers. 
e.  The owner, occupant or agent of any owner or occupant of one or more lots, parcels or areas within the city allowing the accumulation of any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or harbor a disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gas, or attract rodents, vermin or other disease-carrying pests, animals or insects; but the presence of earthworms in a compost pile shall not constitute a nuisance. 
f.  The owner, occupant or agent of any owner or occupant of one or more lots, parcels or areas within the city keeping or permitting another to keep upon any premises deleterious septic material unless such material is contained in containers or vessels which deny access to humans, flies, insects, rodents, vermin and animals. 
g.  The owner, occupant or agent of any owner or occupant of one or more lots, parcels or areas within the city maintaining a premises in a condition or a building in a condition which is detrimental to property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. 
h.  The owner, occupant or agent of any owner or occupant of one or more lots, parcels or areas within the city allowing any partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating motor vehicle or motor vehicle parts to remain on such property longer than ten days; except that this section shall not apply with regard to any vehicle in an enclosed building or so located upon the premises as not to be readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. This section shall further not apply with regard to any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place, other than in a residential area, and operated in a lawful manner, when the keeping or maintenance of such vehicle is necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or with regard to a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city or any other public agency or entity. 
i.  The owner, occupant or agent of any owner or occupant or user of any one or more lots, parcels or areas within the city using such lot or any building or erection thereon for the purposes of lewdness, or prostitution, or for the sale or distribution or consumption of any illegal substance are all declared a nuisance and shall be enjoined and abated as provided for in this article. 
j.  A dwelling or other building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such dwellings, the occupants of neighboring dwellings, or other residents in the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; uncleanliness; partial destruction. 
(2)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following terms are defined as follows: 
Buildings shall mean any structure which is used or intended to be used by humans but not specifically included in the term "dwellings." Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to those buildings used primarily in an agriculturally related manner. 
Dwelling shall mean any dwelling or structure, or part thereof; used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
Junk shall include, but is not limited to, abandoned barrels or drums, dismantled or inoperable industrial or commercial equipment or machinery, and the following old, scrap, or used items: metal, rope, rags, batteries, paper, cardboard, plastic, rubber, pallets, appliances, motors, industrial or commercial fixtures, rubbish, debris, and wrecked, dismantled or disabled motor vehicles or parts thereof. The term shall also mean, but not be limited to, old or scrap copper, brass, aluminum, rope, rags, paper, trash, tire carcasses, rubber debris, old vehicle parts, non-working major appliances, and other old ferrous or nonferrous materials. 
Owner shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest shall mean all individuals, associations, corporations, and others who have interest of record in a dwelling or building and any who are in possession thereof. 
Residential area is defined as property developed primarily for residential use. 
Suspended construction shall mean that construction of an unfinished structure has ceased and that no good faith effort has been made to complete the construction. 
(3)  Standard. The standard for evaluation of nuisances for the implementation of this section shall be the latest revision of the International Property Maintenance Code except where its provisions conflict with other provisions of state law or city ordinance. 
(4)  Investigation by city staff. Whenever the city, through the building official or his designee becomes aware that there exists a situation which is harmful to the general health, safety, welfare or security of the community, the building official or his designee shall institute an investigation to determine if there is a reasonable basis for the complaint. The building official or his designee is authorized to request that other agencies or departments assist him in making such a determination. 
(5)  Warning. If city staff determines that a nuisance exists, and the nuisance is not an emergency situation and poses no threat of immediate danger, the city building official or his designee shall issue a formal written warning to the property owner or responsible party to abate the nuisance or correct the situation within 30 calendar days of the date of the warning. Notice shall be provided to the property owner or responsible party either personally or via U.S. First Class Mail to the address indicated in the tax assessor property records, or to the last known address. Only one warning shall be issued to an individual for any violation under chapter 10, section 10-11, nuisances, of the Aiken City Code of Ordinances. Second and subsequent offenses by the same individual for any alleged violation of this section will be immediately placed on a summons. 
(6)  Monitoring fees. If a party of interest has been previously issued a warning for a violation of this section, any subsequent violations in regard to any one or more lots, parcels or areas within the city, such party of interest shall be subject to a monitoring fee of fifty dollars for such administrative tasks as inspecting the property to determine compliance, determining ownership and preparing and mailing notices. This fee may be collected in the same manner as provided in subsection (11) of this section. 
(7)  Suspended construction projects. If any structure in the city becomes a nuisance due to suspended construction, the city may use the procedures in this ordinance to remedy any unsafe conditions caused by the unfinished structure and the suspended construction. All the applicable procedures set out in this section shall apply, but upon the building official's finding that construction has been suspended and that the unfinished structure and the suspended construction create conditions that are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of neighboring residents or the general public or the safety of neighboring structures, the building official may order that construction resume or that the owner make the unfinished structure safe by boarding up the structure, removing construction debris and other safety hazards from the construction area, and otherwise removing or neutralizing health or safety hazards. If the owner fails to take the actions within ten days after being ordered to do so, the city may cause the unfinished structure to be boarded and the debris and other health and safety hazards removed or neutralized. The costs of doing so shall be assessed against the owner and may be collected as provided in subsection (11) of this section. 
(8)  Abatement agreements. The building official may enter into an abatement agreement with the property owner by which the city will agree to abate the nuisance subject to such terms and conditions as the building official deems appropriate. 
(9)  Summons to appear in municipal's court. If after a warning has been issued, the nuisance is not abated within the 30-day period, unless the delay is caused by another government agency, the building official may issue a summons to the property owner or responsible party to appear in municipal's court. If the building official determines that the nuisance cannot be abated within the 30-day period and the property owner has attempted to remedy the nuisance, the building official may extend the 30-day period an additional 30 days before issuing the summons. If the building official determines that the situation is an emergency or poses a threat of immediate danger, no warning is required, and the building official may immediately issue a summons or pursue any other available legal remedy. 
(10)  Alternative legal procedure. If city staff determines that the owner or other person responsible for the property on which the nuisance exists cannot be located or that the summons procedure is not appropriate for other reasons, then staff may request in writing that the building official request the city attorney or his designee to institute an action in the appropriate court, seeking injunctive relief requiring the person, persons or entities to abate the nuisance(s) or to cease and desist from the offending behavior. 
(11)  Abatement by city; lien. The building official may determine that the situation is so deleterious or injurious to the health, security, general welfare and safety of the city that he may request the city manager to approve the expenditure of funds to abate the nuisance. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove, clean up, demolish, or abate the nuisance within the time frame defined by the building official, the city may cause such nuisance to be removed, cleaned up, demolished or otherwise abated. Any such public funds used to abate the nuisance shall be deemed to be a lien upon the real property upon which such costs were incurred, shall be recorded in the office of the registrar of mesne conveyance, and shall accrue interest at the rate set by statute for interest on judgments. 
If a structure is removed or demolished by the city, it shall sell the materials of such a structure and shall credit proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance shall be disbursed to the owner of the property. 
(12)  Emergency summary abatement procedure. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, whenever the building official determines that a public nuisance exists within the city and that nuisance constitutes an imminent hazard or danger to public health or safety, the building official, without observing the provisions of this chapter with regard to abatement procedures, may take the following steps to abate the nuisance: 
a.  Give the property owner written notice by U.S. mail and, if reasonable under the circumstances, serve personal notice upon the property owner, of the public nuisance, the city's proposed timing and method of the abatement, and the city's intent to collect the abatement costs as lien against the property subject to collection as property taxes; 
b.  Following notice to the property owner, take all necessary and reasonable steps to cause the abatement of such nuisance in such manner as the building official determines is reasonably required; 
c.  Promptly report any such emergency abatement action to the city council; and 
d.  Cause to be maintained an itemized account of the costs incurred by the city in abating the imminently dangerous condition. Such costs may be recovered by the city in the same manner that abatement costs are recovered pursuant to subsection (11) of this section. 
(13)  Penalty. Any person, persons or entities violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be sentenced as follows: 
a.  For a first offense, by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $300.00. 
b.  For a second or subsequent offense, by a fine not less than $400.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(14)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies provided within this section are not exclusive and shall not prohibit pursuit of any other remedies available in law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 10252010A, § 1, 10-25-2010)  
Sec. 10-12. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended. 
Dwelling unit means a single housekeeping unit, whether in a single-family or multi-family structure, including at a minimum, a kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area. 
Landlord means any person who owns or controls a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rental unit and rents such unit, either personally or through a designated agent, to any person. 
Owner means the legal title holder of a rental unit or the premises within which the rental unit is situated. 
Owner-occupied rental unit means a rental unit that is occupied in whole or in part by an individual whose name specifically appears on the deed for the property where the rental unit is located. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation or receiver, personal representative, trust, trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon, which also includes dwelling units and dwellings. 
Rental unit means any dwelling unit or residential structure containing sleeping units, including but not limited to apartments and single-family units which are leased or rented from the owner or other person in control of such units, to any tenant. The term does not include hotel, motel, dorm, medical or long term care facilities, bed and breakfast establishments, and rental housing funded wholly or in part by federal or state sources. 
Responsible local agent means a natural person having his or her place of residence within a 50-mile radius from the Aiken city limits and designated by the property owner as the agent responsible for operating such property in compliance with the ordinances adopted by the city. 
Tenant means any individual who has the temporary use and occupation of real property owned by another person in subordination to that other person's title and with that other person's consent; for example, a person who rents or leases a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rental unit from a landlord. 
(Ord. No. 09242007C, § 1, 9-24-2007)  
Sec. 10-13. - Registration. 
No person shall lease, rent, occupy, or otherwise allow a rental unit within the city to be occupied without first registering the rental unit with the city and designating a responsible local agent. 
(1)  Registration forms. Registration shall be made upon forms furnished by the city and shall require all of the following information. 
a.  The street address and current tax map, block, and parcel identification number of each rental unit; 
b.  The number and types of rental units within the rental property at each street address; 
c.  Name, residence address, daytime and after hours telephone numbers, and, where applicable, an e-mail address, mobile telephone number, and facsimile number of all property owners of the rental unit(s); 
d.  Name, residence address, telephone number, and, where applicable, an e-mail address, mobile telephone number, and facsimile number of the responsible local agent designated by the owner; and 
e.  The name, address and telephone number of the person, if any exists, who holds a lien on the rental unit or the real property on which the rental unit is located. 
(2)  Registration term and renewals. Registration of a rental unit shall be effective for one year. The permitting year shall begin on July 1. All registrations shall expire on June 30 of each year. Renewals of permits after August 31 will be assessed a late penalty of $10.00 and an additional $10.00 per month for each month thereafter that the owner or agent fails to complete the annual registration. Starting on November 1 the city may also issue a uniform ordinance summons to the property owner to appear in municipal court. The property owner will be susceptible to other code enforcement action depending upon the circumstance. 
(3)  Responsible local agent. The rental property owner or designated responsible local agent, if applicable, shall be responsible for all of the following: 
a.  Operating the registered rental unit in compliance with all applicable city ordinances; 
b.  Providing access to the rental unit for the purpose of making any and all inspections necessary to ensure compliance with the applicable city ordinances; 
c.  Accepting all legal notices or services of process with respect to the rental unit; 
d.  Remaining available on a 24-hour basis. 
(Ord. No. 09242007C, § 1, 9-24-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09242007C, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 2007, set out provisions intended for use as § 10-14. For purposes of preserving the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 10-13.  
Sec. 10-14. - Notice procedure. 
(a)  Violation notices will be sent to registered rental property owner(s), or the local responsible agent, if applicable, if the rental property has not been so registered. 
These notices will: 
(1)  Be in writing and include a description of the property. 
(2)  Include a violation description and any required corrective action to be taken by the owner. 
(3)  State the compliance and appeal period. 
(4)  Be delivered personally or by first-class mail to the rental property owner(s) or responsible local agent, if applicable, at the last address furnished as part of the registration process. 
(b)  When there is a transfer of ownership of any rental unit, including an owner-occupied rental unit, the new owner shall comply with the requirements of section 10-13 by registering the rental unit within 60 calendar days following the transfer of the property. Failure to register the unit within the 60-day period will result in a $10.00 late penalty and an additional $10.00 per month for each month thereafter that the owner or agent fails to complete the registration. After a period of 120 days from the date of the property transfer, if the unit(s) has still not been registered, the city may issue a uniform ordinance summons to the property owner to appear in municipal court. The property owner will be susceptible to other code enforcement action depending upon the circumstance. 
(Ord. No. 09242007C, § 1, 9-24-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09242007C, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 2007, set out provisions intended for use as § 10-15. For purposes of preserving the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 10-14.  
Chapter 11 - MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Creation; powers and duties. 
There is hereby established, pursuant to S.C. Code 1976 § 31-10-10, et seq., known as the Community Development Law, the City of Aiken Municipal Development Commission with all of the powers and duties provided by the statute. 
(Ord. No. 08122019A , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 11-2. - Membership; terms of members. 
The redevelopment commission established by this chapter shall consist of nine members, three commissioners shall be city council members and six commissioners shall be appointed by city council. The three city council members shall serve an initial term of one year and the six appointed commissioners shall serve an initial term of two years. Thereafter, all commissioners shall serve for two years. The city manager will serve as an ex-officio non-voting member of the redevelopment commission. 
(Ord. No. 08122019A , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 11-3. - Designated area. 
The redevelopment commission established by this chapter shall exercise its powers within the city limits of the City of Aiken. 
(Ord. No. 08122019A , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Secs. 11-4—11-20. - Reserved.  
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 4; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; noise for purpose of soliciting business, § 22-34; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 28; litter from business establishments not to be placed in sidewalk trash receptacles, § 32-42; special sales, ch. 34; taxation, ch. 38; telecommunications, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 44; vehicles for hire, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Professions and occupations, S.C. Code 1976, title 40. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 12-1—12-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, adopted May 9, 2005, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 12-31—12-49, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 040896A, §§ 1—21, adopted Apr. 8, 1996; Ord. No. 102599A, adopted Oct. 25, 1999; Ord. No. 11132000B, adopted Nov. 13, 2000; and Ord. No. 04262004A, § 1, adopted Apr. 26, 2004. 
Cross reference— Business license for taxicabs, § 46-56 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to levy business license tax on gross income, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30. 
 
Sec. 12-31. - License required. 
Every person engaged or intending to engage in any calling, business, occupation or profession listed in the rate classification index portion of this ordinance, in whole or in part, within the limits of the City of Aiken, South Carolina, is required to pay an annual license fee for the privilege of doing business and obtain a business license as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed herein: 
Business means a calling, occupation, profession, or activity engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or indirectly. 
Charitable purpose means benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose which does not result in personal gain to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization. A charitable organization shall be deemed a business subject to a license tax unless the entire net proceeds of its operation, after necessary expenses, are devoted to charitable purposes. Compensation in any form to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization shall not be deemed a necessary expense of operation. 
Classification means that division of businesses by major groups subject to the same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability to pay based on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden, relationships of services, or other basis deemed appropriate by city council. 
Gross income means the total income of a business, received or accrued, for one calendar year or business fiscal year collected or to be collected from business done within the city, excepting therefrom income from business done wholly outside of the city on which a license tax is paid to some other city or a county and fully reported to the city. Gross income for brokers or agents means gross commissions received or retained, unless otherwise specified. Gross income for insurance companies means gross premiums collected. Gross income for business license tax purposes shall not include taxes collected for a governmental entity, escrow funds, or funds which are the property of a third party. The value of bartered goods or trade-in merchandise shall be included in gross income. 
The gross income for business license purposes may be verified by inspection of returns and reports filed with the Internal Revenue Service, the South Carolina Department of Revenue, the South Carolina Insurance Commission, or other government agency. 
License official means a person designated to administer this article. 
Municipality means the City of Aiken, South Carolina. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, LLP, LLC, cooperative non-profit membership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding company, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or employee having charge or control of a business in the absence of the principals. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-33. - Purpose and duration. 
The business license levied by this article is for the purpose of providing such regulation as may be required for the business subject thereto and for the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a privilege tax. Each license shall be issued for the period commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30. The provisions of this article and the rates herein shall remain in effect from year to year as amended by council. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-34. - License fee. 
(a)  The required license fee shall be paid for each business subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before July 31 each year, except for those businesses in Rate Class 8 for which a different due date is specified. 
(b)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business and for each classification or business conducted at one place. If gross income cannot be separated for classifications at one location, the license fee shall be computed on the combined gross income for the classification requiring the highest rate. A license fee based on gross income shall be computed on the gross income for the preceding calendar or fiscal year. The fee for a new business shall be the base rate determined by their classification. No refund shall be made for a business that is discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-35. - Registration required. 
(a)  The owner, agent or legal representative of every business subject to this article, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall register the business and make application for a business license on or before the due date of each year; provided, a new business shall be required to have a business license prior to operation within the municipality. 
(b)  Application shall be on a form provided by the license official which shall contain the Social Security Number and/or federal employer's identification number, the business name as reported on the South Carolina income tax return, and all information about the applicant and the business deemed appropriate to carry out the purpose of this article by the license official. Applicants shall not be required to submit copies of portions of state and federal income tax returns reflecting gross income figures at the time of filing this form or annual renewal of the business license. 
(c)  The applicant shall certify under oath that the information given in the application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported, without any unauthorized deductions, and that all assessments and personal property taxes on business property due and payable to the municipality have been paid. 
(d)  Insurance agents and brokers shall report the name of each insurance company for which a policy was issued and the total premiums collected for each company for each type of insurance coverage on a form approved by the license official. An insurance agent not employed by a company shall be licensed as a broker. 
(e)  All mobile vendors of any type (merchandise, food or other goods and services) must be located on private property when open for business and must be able to provide written permission of the owner or the owner's agent to be on the property to any city official when requested. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005; Ord. No. 04252011, § 1, 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 12092013D, § 1, 12-9-2013)  
Sec. 12-36. - Deductions, exemptions, and charitable organizations. 
(a)  No deductions from gross income shall be made except income from business done wholly outside of the municipality on which a license tax is paid to some other municipality or a county, taxes collected for a governmental entity, or income which cannot be included for computation of the tax pursuant to state or federal law. The applicant shall have the burden to establish the right to exempt income by satisfactory records and proof. 
(b)  No person shall be exempt from the requirements of the ordinance by reason of the lack of an established place of business within the municipality, unless exempted by state or federal law. The license official shall determine the appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the latest issue of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) for the United States published by the office of management and budget. No person shall be exempt from this article by reason of the payment of any other tax, unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be relieved of liability for payment of any other tax by reason of application of this article. 
(c)  Charitable organizations which have exemptions from state and federal income taxes shall be exempt from a business license tax only in cases where the sponsors, organizers, directors, trustees, or persons who exercise ultimate control of the organization receive no part of the proceeds of operation, and all proceeds are devoted to charitable purposes as defined by this article. Payment of necessary costs of operation and wages to nonmanagement employees will not disqualify a charitable organization from exemption. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-37. - False application unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this article to make a false application for a business license, or to give or file, or direct the giving or filing of any false information with respect to the license or fee required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-38. - Display and transfer. 
(a)  All persons shall display the license issued to them on the original form provided by the license official in a conspicuous place in the business establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or nonresident shall carry the license upon his person or in a vehicle used in the business readily available for inspection by any authorized agent of the municipality. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, each electrical, plumbing, mechanical, general or service contractor who shall individually or through an entity or other person construct, service or repair buildings of any type within the city shall purchase one decal for each vehicle used at any job site within the city which shall be displayed on the lower right (passenger) corner of the front windshield of the vehicle. The decal shall be issued annually at such charge to the licensee as shall be set by the city manager based upon the costs of administering the decal program. 
(c)  A change of address must be reported to the license official within ten days after removal of the business to a new location and the license will be valid at the new address upon written notification by the license official and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to obtain the approval of the license official for a change of address shall invalidate the license and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing business without a license. 
(d)  A business license shall not be transferable to another person and a transfer of controlling interest of a business for purposes of this article shall be considered a termination of the existing business and the establishment of another business requiring another business license based on the existing business's gross income as determined by the inspector, but the inspector shall credit the fee paid by the prior owner of the business against the fee due and payable by the succeeding owner for the same license year. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-39. - Administration of ordinance. 
The license official shall administer the provisions of this article, collect license fees, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations and audits to insure compliance, initiate denial or revocation procedures, report violations to the municipal attorney, assist in prosecution of violators, produce forms, make reasonable regulations relating to the administration of this article, and perform such other duties as may be duly assigned. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-40. - Inspection and audits. 
(a)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article the license official or other authorized agent of the municipality is empowered to enter upon the premises of any person subject to this article to make inspections, examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records. In the event an audit or inspection reveals that the licensee has filed false information, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct license fee and late penalties in addition to other penalties provided herein. Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of license fee shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The license official shall make systematic inspections and random audits of all businesses within the municipality to insure compliance with the ordinance. Financial information obtained by inspections and audits shall not be deemed public records, and the license official shall not release the amount of license taxes paid or the reported gross income of any person by name without written permission of the licensee. Statistics compiled by classifications are public records. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-41. - Assessments, payment under protest, appeal. 
(a)  If a person fails to obtain a business license or to furnish the information required by this article or the license official, the license official shall examine such records of the business or any other available records as may be appropriate, and conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as the license official may deem appropriate to assess a license tax and penalties as provided herein. 
(b)  A notice of assessment shall be served by certified mail. An application for adjustment of the assessment may be made to the license official within five days after the notice is mailed or the assessment will become final. The license official shall establish by regulation the procedure for hearing an application for adjustment of assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment. 
(c)  A final assessment may be appealed to the municipal council only by payment in full of the assessment under protest within five days and the filing of written notice of appeal within ten days after payment pursuant to the provisions of this article relating to appeals to council. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-42. - Delinquent license fees. 
For non-payment of all or any part of the correct license fee, the license official shall levy and collect a late penalty of five percent of the unpaid fee for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. Penalties shall not be waived. If any license fee remains unpaid for 60 days after its due date, the license official shall report it to the municipal attorney for appropriate legal action.  
Sec. 12-43. - Notices. 
The license official may, but shall not be required to, mail written notices that license fees are due. If notices are not mailed there shall be published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality three times prior to the due date in each year. Failure to receive notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution for failure to pay the tax due or grounds for waiver of penalties. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-44. - Denial of license. 
The license official shall deny a license to an applicant when the application is incomplete, contains a misrepresentation, false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact, or when the activity for which a license is sought is unlawful or constitutes a public nuisance per se; or when the applicant has any fees or taxes due to the city which remain unpaid by the applicant or for a predecessor business or occupation with substantial identity to the applicant. A decision of the license official shall be subject to appeal to council as herein provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005; Ord. No. 12092013E , § 1, 12-9-2013)  
Sec. 12-45. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
When the license official determines: 
(1)  A license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or issued contrary to law; 
(2)  A licensee has breached any condition upon which the license was issued or has failed to comply with the provisions of this article; 
(3)  A licensee has obtained a license through a fraud, misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact in the license application; 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving moral turpitude, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; or 
(5)  A licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related to the business; the license official shall give written notice to the licensee or the person in control of the business within the municipality by personal service or certified mail that the license is suspended pending a hearing before council for the purpose of determining whether the license should be revoked. The notice shall state the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, which shall be at a regular or special council meeting within 30 days from the date of service of the notice, unless continued by agreement. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for suspension and proposed revocation and a copy of the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-46. - Appeals to council. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision, final assessment, revocation, suspension, or a denial of a business license by the license official may appeal the decision to the municipal council by written request stating the reasons therefor, filed with the license official within ten days after the payment of the assessment under protest or notice of denial is received. Payment under protest shall be a condition precedent to appeal. 
(b)  An appeal or a hearing on revocation shall be held by the municipal council within 30 days after receipt of a request for appeal or service of notice of suspension at a regular or special meeting of which the applicant or licensee has been given written notice, unless continued by agreement. At the hearing all parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded and transcribed at the expense of the party so requesting. The rules of evidence and procedure prescribed by council shall govern the hearing. Council shall by majority vote of members present render a written decision based on findings of fact and application of the standards herein which shall be served upon all parties or their representatives and shall be final unless appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within ten days after service. 
(c)  No person shall be subject to prosecution for doing business without a license until the expiration of ten days after notice of denial or revocation which is not appealed or until after final judgment of a circuit court upholding denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-47. - Permission to use streets required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain or operate in, on, above or under any street or public place under control of the municipality any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure or facility for utilities, communications, cablevision or other purposes without a consent agreement or franchise agreement issued by the municipal council by ordinance that prescribes the term, fees and conditions for use. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-48. - Consent, franchise or business license fee required. 
The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance approving the agreement and shall be consistent with limits set by state law. Existing franchise agreements shall continue in effect until expiration dates in the agreements. Franchise and consent fees shall not be in lieu of or be credited against business license fees unless specifically provided by the franchise or consent agreement. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-49. - Confidentiality. 
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any report or return required under this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns. Any license data may be shared with other public officials or employees in the performance of their duties, whether or not those duties relate to enforcement of the license ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-50. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both, upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties and costs provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-51. - Separability. 
A determination that any portion of this article is invalid or unenforceable shall not affect the remaining portions. 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005)  
Sec. 12-52. - Classification and rates. 
(a)  The sectors of businesses included in each rate class are listed with the United States North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes. The alphabetical index in this article is a tool for classification, not a limitation on businesses subject to a license tax. The license official shall determine the proper class for a business according to the applicable NAICS manual, whether or not the business is listed in the alphabetical index. 
(b)  The license fee for each class of businesses subject to this article shall be computed in accordance with the following rates: 
RATES 
RATE CLASS 	INCOME: 0—$2,000.00 
MINIMUM FEE 	ALL OVER $2,000.00 
Rate per Thousand or fraction thereof 
1 	25.00 	0.80 
2 	30.00 	0.95 
3 	35.00 	1.10 
4 	40.00 	1.25 
5 	45.00 	1.40 
6 	50.00 	1.55 
7 	55.00 	1.70 
8 	See individual business in Class 8 	
 
NONRESIDENT RATES 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all minimum fees and rates shall be doubled for nonresidents and itinerants having no fixed principal place of business within the municipality. 
CLASS 8 RATES 
Each NAICS number designates a separate subclassification. The businesses in this section are treated as separate and individual subclasses due to provisions of state law, regulatory requirements, service burdens, tax equalization considerations, etc., which are deemed to be sufficient to require individually determined rates. Nonresident rates do not apply except where indicated. 
NAICS 23 —Contractors, Construction, All Types: 
(1)  Having permanent place of business within the municipality. 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....35.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction over $2,000.00 from all work .....1.10 
(2)  Nonresident (no permanent place of business in the municipality). 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....75.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $2,000.00 .....2.20 
(nonresident double rates do not apply). 
A trailer at the construction site, or structure in which the contractor temporarily resides is not a permanent place of business under this article. 
No contractor shall be issued a business license until all state and municipal qualification examination and trade license requirements have been met. Each contractor shall post a sign in plain view on each job identifying the contractor with the job. 
Sub-contractors shall be licensed on the same basis as general or prime contractors for the same job. No deductions shall be made by a general or prime contractor for value of work performed by a sub-contractor. 
No contractor shall be issued a business license until all performance and indemnity bonds required by the building code have been filed and approved. Zoning permits must be obtained when required by the zoning ordinance. 
Each prime contractor shall file with the license official a list of sub-contractors furnishing labor or materials for each project. 
NAICS 482—Railroad Companies (See S.C. Code § 12-23-210): 
For the first 1,000 inhabitants of the city .....25.00 
For each additional 1,000 inhabitants according to the last US census .....35.00 
per 1,000 or major fraction thereof. 
[2000 census population: 25,337. Fee = $865.00] 
NAICS 5171, 5172—Telephone companies: 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of the business license ordinance, the business license tax for "retail telecommunications services", as defined in S.C. Code § 58-9-2200, shall be at the maximum rate authorized by S.C. Code § 58-9-2220, as it now provides or as provided by amendment. The business license tax year shall begin on January 1 of each year. The rate for the 2005 business license tax year shall be the maximum rate allowed by State law in effect on February 1, 2005. Declining rates shall not apply. 
(2)  In conformity with S.C. Code § 58-9-2220, the business license tax for "retail telecommunications services" shall apply to the gross income derived from the sale of retail telecommunications services for the preceding calendar or fiscal year which either originate or terminate in the municipality and which are charged to a service address within the municipality regardless of where these amounts are billed or paid and on which a business license tax has not been paid to another municipality. The measurement of the amounts derived from the retail sale of mobile telecommunications services shall include only revenues from the fixed monthly recurring charge of customers whose service address is within the boundaries of the municipality. For a business in operation for less than one year, the amount of business license tax shall be computed on a 12-month projected income. 
(3)  For the year 2005, the business license tax for "retail telecommunications services" shall be due on February 1, 2005, and payable by February 28, 2005, without penalty. For years after 2005, the business license tax for "retail telecommunications services" shall be due on January 1 of each year and payable by January 31 of that year, without penalty. 
(4)  The delinquent penalty shall be five percent of the tax due for each month, or portion thereof, after the due date until paid. 
(5)  Exemptions in the business license ordinance for income from business in interstate commerce are hereby repealed. Properly apportioned gross income from interstate commerce shall be included in the gross income for every business subject to a business license tax. 
(6)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to interfere with continuing obligations of any franchise agreement or contractual agreement in the event that the franchise or contractual agreement should expire after December 31, 2003. 
(7)  All fees collected under such a franchise or contractual agreement expiring after December 31, 2003, shall be in lieu of fees or taxes which might otherwise be authorized by this article. 
(8)  As authorized by S.C. Code § 5-7-300, the agreement with the Municipal Association of South Carolina for collection of current and delinquent license taxes from telecommunications companies pursuant to S.C. Code § 58-9-2200 shall continue in effect. Notwithstanding the provisions of the agreement, for the year 2005, the Municipal Association of South Carolina is authorized to collect current and delinquent license taxes, in conformity with the due date and delinquent date for 2005 as set out in this article and is further authorized, for the year 2005, to disburse business license taxes collected, less the service agreed charge, to this municipality on or before April 1, 2005, and thereafter as remaining collections permit. 
NAICS 5175—Television, Cable or Pay, Services using public streets .....5% of gross income 
Cable television services not using public streets: 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....65.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $2,000.00 .....1.90 
NAICS 22112—Electric power distribution .....3% of gross income 
NAICS 22121—Natural gas distribution .....3% of gross income 
NAICS 423930—Junk or scrap dealers [nonresident rates apply] 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....60.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $2,000.00 .....1.90 
NAICS 4411, 4412—Automotive, motor vehicles, boats, farm machinery, retail (except auto supply stores - see 4413) 
Business license fees are determined by classification. 
One sales lot not more than 400 feet from the main showroom may be operated under this license provided that proceeds from sales at the lot are included in gross receipts at the main office when both are operated under the same name and ownership. 
Gross receipts for this classification shall include full sales price without deduction for trade-ins. Dealer transfers shall not be included in gross receipts. 
NAICS 722410—Drinking places, bars, lounges, cabarets (Alcoholic beverages consumed on premises) 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....195.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $2,000.00 .....5.00 
NAICS 522298—Pawn Brokers (All types) 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....60.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $2,000.00 .....1.90 
NAICS 454390—Peddlers, solicitors, canvassers, door-to-door sales, direct retail sales of merchandise. [Nonresident rates apply] 
Business license fees are determined by classification. 
Applicant for a license to sell on private property must provide written authorization from the property owner to use the intended location. 
Selling is not permitted in city streets or on sidewalks unless a business license is issued during a festival or parade and a permit is issued by the director of public safety setting conditions for public safety. 
SIC CODE or 	NAICS CODE 	
63 	5241 	Insurance Companies: Except as to fire insurance, "gross premiums" means gross premiums written for policies for property or a risk located within the municipality. In addition, "gross premiums" shall include premiums written for policies that are sold, solicited, negotiated, taken, transmitted, received, delivered, applied for, produced or serviced by (1) the insurance company's office located in the municipality, (2) the insurance company's employee conducting business within the municipality, or (3) the office of the insurance company's licensed or appointed producer (agent) conducting business within the municipality, regardless of where the property or risk is located, provided no tax has been paid to another municipality in which the property or risk is located based on the same premium. 
		Solicitation for insurance, receiving or transmitting an application or policy, examination of a risk, collection or transmitting of a premium, adjusting a claim, delivering a benefit, or doing any act in connection with a policy or claim shall constitute conducting business within the municipality, regardless of whether or not an office is maintained in the municipality. 
		As to fire insurance, "gross premiums" means gross premiums (1) collected in the municipality, and/or (2) realized from risks located within the limits of the municipality. 
		Gross premiums shall include all business conducted in the prior calendar year. 
		Gross premiums shall include new and renewal business without deductions for any dividend, credit, return premiums or deposit. 
		Declining rates shall not apply. 
631—632 	52411 	Life, health and accident 	2% of gross premiums 
633—635 	524126 	Fire and casualty 	2% of gross premiums 
636 	524127 	Title insurance 	2% of gross premiums 
 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, license taxes for insurance companies shall be payable on or before May 31 in each year without penalty. The penalty for delinquent payments shall be five percent of the tax due per month, or portion thereof, after the due date until paid. 
Any exemptions in the business license ordinance for income from business in interstate commerce are hereby repealed. Gross income from interstate commerce shall be included in the gross income for every business subject to a business license tax. 
Pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 38-45-10 and 38-45-60, the Municipal Association of South Carolina is designated the municipal agent for purposes of administration of the municipal broker's premium tax. The agreement with the association for administration and collection of current and delinquent license taxes from insurance companies as authorized by S.C. Code § 5-7-300 and administration of the municipal broker's premium tax in the form attached hereto is approved, and the mayor is authorized to execute it. 
NAICS 713120—Amusement machines, coin operated (except gambling) 
Music machines, juke boxes, kiddy rides, video games, pin tables with levers, and other amusement machines with or without free play feature licensed by state department of revenue pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2720(A)(1) and (A)(2) [Type I and Type II] 
(1)  Operator of machine(per machine) .....12.50 
PLUS $12.50 business license for operation of all machines (not on gross income) [S.C. Code § 12-21-2746]. 
(2)  Distributor selling or leasing machines (not licensed by the state as an operator pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2728) [Nonresident rates apply.] 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....60.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $2,000.00 .....1.90 
NAICS 713290—Amusement machines, coin operated, nonpayout; Bingo 
Amusement machines of the nonpayout type or in-line pin game licensed by state department of revenue pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2720(a)(3) [Type III] 
(1)  Operator of machine (owner of business) .....180.00 per machine 
PLUS $12.50 business license for operation of all machines (not on gross income) [S.C. Code § 12-21-2720(B)]. 
(2)  Distributor selling or leasing machines (not licensed by the state as an operator pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2728) [Nonresident rates apply.] 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....60.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $2,000.00 ......90 
(3)  Bingo halls, parlors. 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....195.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $2,000.00 .....5.00 
NAICS 713990—Billiard or pool rooms, all types 
$5.00 stamp per table PLUS 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....45.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $2,000.00 .....1.45 
NAICS 711190—Carnivals and circuses 
Minimum on first $2,000.00 .....195.00 PLUS 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $2,000.00 .....2.00 
NAICS 442110—Itinerant furniture dealers and mobile sales of any merchandise. All such dealer and merchants must be located on private property with written permission of the owner or the owner's agent and cannot remain in the same location more than one day unless located in an enclosed permanent structure complying with all applicable codes and ordinances. 
Minimum on first $5000.00 .....105.00 Plus 
Per $1,000.00, or fraction, over $5,000.00 .....2.75 
(Ord. No. 05092005F, § 1, 5-9-2005; Ord. No. 11262012B, §§ 1—4, 11-26-2012; Ord. No. 03142016 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-14-2016)  
Secs. 12-53—12-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
 
Sec. 12-71. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Aiken Adult Entertainment License Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 2, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-72. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meanings given in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult booth means any area of an adult entertainment establishment set off from the remainder of such establishment by one or more walls or other dividers or partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
Adult entertainment establishment means any of the following commercial establishments, as defined in this section: 
(1)  Adult cabaret means any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides any of the following: 
a.  Persons who appear nude or semi-nude. 
b.  Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
c.  Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(2)  Adult store means any commercial establishment that (i) contains one or more adult booths; (ii) that as a substantial or significant portion of its business offers for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials; or (iii) that has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of adult materials. 
(3)  Adult theater means any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
Adult establishment employee means any individual, including entertainers, who work in or at, or render any services directly related to the operation of, an adult entertainment establishment; provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises. 
Adult establishment license means a license issued for an adult entertainment establishment pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Adult establishment patron means any individual, other than an adult establishment employee, present in or at any adult entertainment establishment at any time when such adult entertainment establishment is open for business; provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises. 
Adult material means any of the following, whether new or used: 
(1)  Books, periodicals, or other printed matter, or digitally-stored materials; or 
(2)  Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind, that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities; 
(3)  Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or describe specified anatomical areas. 
Adult use commissioner means the business license administrator of the city. The terms "adult use commissioner" and "business license administrator" shall be used interchangeably throughout this article. 
City zoning ordinance means the city zoning ordinance adopted November 22, 1999, and as may be amended from time to time. 
Commercial establishment means any place where admission, services, performances, or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of consideration. 
Days means calendar days, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this article. 
Licensed premises means the place or location described in an adult establishment license where an adult entertainment establishment is authorized to operate. No sidewalks, streets, parking areas, public rights-of-way, or grounds adjacent to any such place or location shall be included within the licensed premises. 
Effective date means the effective date of this article, which shall be deemed to be January 1, 2000. 
Licensee means any person or entity that has been issued an adult establishment license pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Nude or state of nudity means a state of dress or undress that exposes to view (i) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed; or (ii) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates human genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Reviewing departments means the city manager, the public safety department, business license administrator, the planning department, and the finance department. 
Semi-nude means a state of undress in which clothing covers no more than the human genitals, pubic region, anus, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor accessory apparel such as hats, gloves, and socks. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Specified criminal act means any unlawful lewd, indecent, or immoral conduct, including specifically, but without limitation, any of the lewd, indecent or immoral criminal acts specified in any of the statutes of the state involving sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, child pornography, controlled substances, illegal drugs, and any crime of moral turpitude. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts. 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy. 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated. 
(4)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence. 
(5)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this definition. 
Straddle dance means the use of any person, including specifically, but without limitation, an adult establishment employee, or any part of his or her body to touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast of any adult establishment patron or any other person, or the touching of the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast of any person by any adult establishment patron. Conduct shall be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" occurs while the person is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. Conduct shall also be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" is direct or through a medium. Conduct commonly referred to by the slang terms "lap dance," "table dance," and "face dance" shall be included within this definition of straddle dance. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 3, 12-13-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 12-73. - Adult use commissioner designated; powers and duties. 
(a)  The business licensing administrator is hereby designated as the adult use commissioner pursuant to the terms and conditions of this article. 
(b)  The adult use commissioner shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To administer and rule upon the applications for, and the issuance, renewal, suspension, and revocation of, adult establishment licenses as set forth in this article. 
(2)  To conduct or provide for such inspections of adult entertainment establishments as shall be necessary to determine and ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable provisions of law. 
(3)  To periodically review the provisions of this article and the conduct and operation of adult entertainment establishments and adult establishment licensees, and to make such related reports and recommendations to the city council as the adult use commissioner shall deem necessary. 
(4)  To conduct such hearings, studies, and reports on adult entertainment establishments, and the regulations relating thereto, as the adult use commissioner shall deem necessary, and to conduct such hearings on the revocation or suspension of an adult establishment license as required pursuant to section 12-86. 
(5)  To take such further actions as the adult use commissioner shall deem necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this article and to exercise such additional powers in furtherance thereof as are implied or incident to those powers and duties expressly set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 4, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-74. - Adult establishment licenses generally. 
(a)  Adult establishment license required. An adult establishment license shall be required to establish, operate, or maintain an adult entertainment establishment within the city. 
(b)  Operation without license prohibited. Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section with regard to adult entertainment establishments existing prior to the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person not having a current and valid adult establishment license to establish, operate, or maintain an adult entertainment establishment within the city at any time after the effective date of this article. 
(c)  Operation in violation of license prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to establish, operate, or maintain an adult entertainment establishment within the city except in the manner authorized by, and in compliance with, the provisions of this article and the licensee's adult establishment license. 
(d)  Content and display of license. Every adult establishment license shall be provided by the city and shall, at a minimum, prominently state on its face the name of the licensee, the expiration date, and the address of the adult entertainment establishment. Every licensee shall cause the licensee's adult establishment license to be posted in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises so that it can be easily seen and read at any time by any person entering the licensed premises. 
(e)  License term. Except as provided in this article, adult establishment licenses shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended, or revoked, for a term of one year commencing on July 1 of the year following the year of issuance and terminating on June 30 of the next year. Adult establishment licenses issued after July 1 of any year for operations to commence in that year shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended, or revoked, for a term commencing on the date of issuance and terminating on June 30 of the next year. 
(f)  Existing establishments. 
(1)  Application generally. An adult entertainment establishment existing and operating on or prior to the effective date ("existing establishment") may continue to exist and operate as of the effective date; provided, however, that the existing establishment (i) shall submit an application for an adult establishment license not later than 60 days after the effective date; (ii) shall cease operations not later than 240 days after the effective date (the "licensure date"), unless it has secured an adult establishment license by the licensure date; and (iii) shall comply with, and continue at all times to comply with, the requirements of subsection (f)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Required compliance on effective date. An existing establishment shall, as of the effective date, be subject to the provisions of section 12-78, subsections 12-80(a) through 12-80(c), 12-80(e), 12-80(j), 12-81(b), 12-81(f), 12-81(g), 12-82(c), and sections 12-83 and 12-84, and shall at all times continue in compliance with such provisions. 
(g)  Renewal. An adult establishment license may be renewed only by making application as required for an initial license pursuant to section 12-75. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration of the then-current license term. The expiration of the license shall not be affected or extended by a renewal application that is made less than 30 days before expiration. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 5, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-75. - Form and submittal of license application. 
(a)  Required form. An application for an adult establishment license, or the renewal thereof, shall be made in writing to the adult use commissioner on a form prescribed by the adult use commissioner and shall be signed (i) by the applicant, if the applicant is an individual; (ii) by at least one of the persons entitled to share in the profits of the organization and having unlimited personal liability for the obligations of the organization and the right to bind all other such persons, if the applicant is a partnership (general or limited), joint venture, or any other type of organization where two or more persons share in the profits and liabilities of the organization; (iii) by a duly authorized agent, if the applicant is a corporation; or (iv) by the trustee, if the applicant is a land trust. The application shall be verified by oath or affidavit as to all statements made on or in connection with the application and any attachments thereto. Each application shall specifically identify the applicant and the premises for which an adult establishment license is sought. 
(b)  Administrative processing fee. Every applicant for an adult establishment license or for the renewal of an existing adult establishment license shall pay an administrative processing fee in the amount of $100.00 to the city at the time of filing such application. The administrative processing fee shall in all cases be nonrefundable and shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(c)  Required information and documents. Each application shall include the following information and documents: 
(1)  Name and identification: 
a.  Individuals: The applicant's legal name, all of the applicant's aliases, the applicant's business address and social security number, written proof of the applicant's age, the citizenship and place of birth of the applicant, a full set of fingerprints, two photographs, and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of the applicant's naturalization. 
b.  Corporations: The applicant corporation's complete name and official business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, business addresses, and social security numbers of all of the directors, officers, and managers of the corporation and of any person owning or controlling more than 50 percent of the voting shares of the corporation; the corporation's date and place of incorporation and the objects for which it was formed; proof that the corporation is a corporation in good standing and authorized to conduct business in the state; and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office of service of process. 
c.  Partnerships (general or limited), joint ventures, or any other type of organization where two or more persons share in the profits and liabilities of the organization: The applicant organization's compete name and official business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, business addresses, and social security numbers of each partner (other than limited partners) or any other person entitled to share in the profits of the organization, whether or not any such person is also obligated to share in the liabilities of the organization. 
d.  Land trusts: The applicant land trust's complete name; the legal name, all aliases, and the business address of the trustee of the land trust; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, business addresses, and social security numbers of each beneficiary of the land trust and the specific interest of each such beneficiary in the land trust; and the interest, if any, that the land trust holds in the licensed premises. 
(2)  If a corporation or partnership is an interest holder that must be disclosed pursuant to subsection (c)(1)b or c of this section, then such interest holders shall disclose the information required in such subsections with respect to their interest holders. 
(3)  The general character and nature of the business of the applicant. 
(4)  The length of time that the applicant has been in the business of the character specified in responses to subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(5)  The location, including street address and legal description, and telephone number, of the premises for which the adult establishment license is sought. 
(6)  The specific name of the business that is to be operated under the adult establishment licenses. 
(7)  The identity of each fee simple owner of the licensed premises. 
(8)  A diagram showing the internal and external configuration of the licensed premises, including all doors, windows, entrances, exits, the fixed structural internal features of the licensed premises, plus the interior rooms, walls, partitions, stages, performance areas, and restrooms. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; provided, however, that each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches and sufficient to show clearly the various interior dimensions of all areas of the licensed premises and to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this article. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted for the license sought to be renewed and if the licensee certified that the licensed premises has not been altered since the immediately preceding issuance of the license and that the previous diagram continues to accurately depict the exterior and interior layouts of the licensed premises. The approval or use of the diagram required pursuant to this subsection shall not be deemed to be, and shall not be interpreted or construed to constitute, any other city approval otherwise required pursuant to applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
(9)  The names of each governmental body from which, within five years immediately prior to the date of the present application, the applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section, has received a license or other authorization to conduct or operate a business (i) substantially the same as an adult entertainment establishment, and the names and addresses of each such business; (ii) requiring a federal, state, or local liquor license; or (iii) requiring a federal, state, or local gaming license. 
(10)  The specific type or types of adult entertainment establishment that the applicant proposes to operate in the licensed premises. 
(11)  A copy of each adult establishment license, liquor license, and gaming license currently held by the applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsection (c)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(12)  Whether the applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section, has been, within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, or diverted from prosecution of any felony; or convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, or diverted from prosecution within the last two years on any misdemeanor offense, on any specified criminal act. As to each conviction, the applicant or other individual shall provide the conviction date, the case number, the nature of the misdemeanor or felony violation or offenses, and the name and location of the court. 
(13)  Whether the applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section, has had a license or other authorization to conduct or operate a business substantially the same as an adult entertainment establishment or any business requiring either a liquor or gaming license, revoked or suspended, and, if so, the date and grounds for each such revocation or suspension, and the name and location of the establishment at issue. 
(14)  The name of the individual or individuals who shall be the day-to-day, on-site managers of the proposed adult entertainment establishment. If the manager is other than the applicant, the applicant shall provide, for each manager, all of the information required pursuant to subsection (c)(1)a of this section, and subsections (c)(9), (11), (12) and (13) of this section. 
(15)  For the individual or individuals executing the application pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, and the individual or individuals identified pursuant to subsection (c)(14) of this section, a fully executed waiver on a form prescribed by the city to obtain criminal conviction information pursuant to the state Uniform Conviction Information Act. 
(16)  Copy of city business license application. 
(d)  Incomplete applications returned. Any application for an adult establishment license that does not include all information and documents required pursuant to subsection (c) of this section as well as the administrative processing fee required pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be acted on or processed by the city. The adult use commissioner shall, within five days of such submittal, return the incomplete application to the applicant along with a written explanation of the reasons why the application is incomplete. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 6, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-76. - Processing of license application. 
(a)  Reviewing departments. Within three days after receipt of a complete application for an adult establishment license that includes all of the information and documents required pursuant to subsection 12-75(c), as well as the administrative processing fee security required pursuant to subsection 12-75(b), the adult use commissioner shall transmit a copy of the application to the reviewing departments. 
(b)  Reviewing department reports. Each of the reviewing departments shall, within 25 days after transmittal of the application thereto, or within such other period of time as the city and the applicant may otherwise agree, (i) review the application; (ii) conduct such inspections of the proposed licensed premises and background investigations of the applicant and any of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsections 12-75(c)(1), (2) or (14), regarding matters within their respective jurisdictions, as shall be reasonably necessary to verify the information set forth in the application and to determine whether the proposed adult entertainment establishment and licensed premises comply with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations; and (iii) prepared and submit to the adult use commissioner a written report regarding the results and findings of such reviews, inspections and investigations. 
(c)  Adult use commissioner review. The adult use commissioner shall also conduct such inspections and investigations as the adult use commissioner shall deem reasonably necessary to verify the information set forth in the application and to determine whether the proposed adult entertainment establishment and licensed premises comply with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(d)  Reliance on diagram. In the event that the licensed premises has not yet been constructed or reconstructed to accommodate the proposed adult entertainment establishment, the adult use commissioner and the reviewing departments shall base their respective written reports, investigations, and inspections to the extent necessary, on the diagram submitted pursuant to subsection 12-75(c)(8). Any adult establishment license issued prior to the construction or reconstruction necessary to accommodate the proposed adult entertainment establishment shall contain a condition that the adult entertainment establishment shall not open for business until the licensed premises has been inspected and determined to be in substantial compliance with the diagram submitted with the application. 
(e)  Applicant cooperation required. An applicant for an adult establishment license shall cooperate fully in the inspections and investigations conducted by the adult use commissioner and the reviewing departments. The applicant's failure or refusal (i) to give any information reasonably relevant to the investigation of the application; (ii) to allow the licensed premises to be inspected; (iii) to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding the application; or (iv) to otherwise cooperate with the investigation and inspection required by this article, shall constitute an admission by the applicant that the applicant is ineligible for an adult establishment license and shall be grounds for denial of the license by the adult use commissioner. 
(f)  Time for issuance or denial. The adult use commission shall, within 30 days after submittal of a properly completed application, or within such other period of time as the city and the applicant shall otherwise agree, either issue an adult establishment license pursuant to the provisions of subsection 12-77(a) or deny issuance of the adult establishment license pursuant to the provisions of subsection 12-77(b). The adult use commissioner shall issue or deny the license within such 30-day period, or such other period of time as shall have been agreed to by the city and the applicant, regardless of whether or not the adult use commissioner has received all of the reviewing department reports. 
(g)  Decision final. The action taken by the adult use commissioner to issue or deny an adult establishment license pursuant, respectively, to subsections 12-77(a) or 12-77(b) shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 7, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-77. - Standards for issuance or denial of license. 
(a)  Issuance. The business licenses administrator shall issue an adult establishment license to an applicant if, but only if, the business license administrator finds and determines all of the following, based on the reports, investigations, and inspections conducted by the business license administrator and the reviewing departments and on any other credible information on which it is reasonable for the adult use commissioner to rely: 
(1)  All information and documents required by this section for issuance of an adult establishment license have been properly provided and the material statements made in the application are true and correct. 
(2)  For adult stores and adult theaters, all persons identified in the application pursuant to subsections 12-75(c)(1), (2) or (14) are at least 18 years of age and not under any legal disability. For adult cabarets, all persons identified in the application pursuant to subsections 12-75(c)(1), (2) or (14) are at least 21 years of age and not under any legal disability. 
(3)  No person identified in the application pursuant to subsections 12-75(c)(1), (2) or (14) has been convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, any specified criminal act within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(4)  No person identified in the application pursuant to subsections 12-75(c)(1), (2) or (14) has been convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, any violation of a provision of this article within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(5)  No person identified in the application pursuant to subsections 12-75(c)(1), (2) or (14) is overdue on payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against, or imposed on, any such individual in connection to any adult entertainment establishment. 
(6)  No person identified in the application pursuant to subsections 12-75(c)(1), (2) or (14) is residing with, or married to, a person (i) who has been denied an adult establishment license within 12 months immediately preceding the date of the application, (ii) whose adult establishment license has been revoked within 12 months immediately preceding the date of the application, or (iii) whose adult establishment license is under suspension at the time of application. 
(7)  The adult entertainment establishment and the licensed premises, and the proposed operation of the adult entertainment establishment, comply with all then-applicable building, health, and life safety codes and regulations and have received all necessary zoning approvals required pursuant to the then-applicable provision of the city zoning ordinance, including specifically, but without limitation, the special use permit required for the adult entertainment establishment. 
(8)  The applicant has confirmed in writing and under oath as part of the application that the applicant has read this article and all provisions of the city zoning ordinance applicable to adult entertainment establishments, that the applicant is familiar with their terms and conditions, and that the licensed premises and the proposed adult entertainment establishment and its proposed operation are and shall be in compliance therewith. 
(b)  Denial. If the adult use commissioner determines that the applicant has not met any one or more of the conditions set forth in subsection (a) of this section, then the adult use commissioner shall deny issuance of the adult establishment license and shall give the applicant a written notification and explanation of such denial. The adult use commissioner's notice of denial shall be delivered in person or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the applicant's address as set forth in the application. The adult establishment license shall be deemed denied on the date that the notice of denial is delivered in person or three days after it is placed in the United States mail as provided in this subsection. 
(c)  License deemed to be issued. If the adult use commissioner does not issue or deny the adult establishment license within 30 days after the properly completed application is submitted, then the adult establishment license applied for shall be deemed to have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 8, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-78. - Inspections by the city. 
(a)  Authority. The adult use commissioner and other city representatives and departments with jurisdiction shall periodically inspect all adult entertainment establishments as shall be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all other applicable law. 
(b)  Licensee cooperation. A licensee shall permit representatives of the city to inspect the licensed premises and the adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this article and all other applicable law at any time during which the licensed premises is occupied or the adult entertainment establishment is open for business. 
(c)  Interference or refusal illegal. It shall be unlawful for the licensee, any adult establishment employee, or any other person to prohibit, interfere with, or refuse to allow, any lawful inspection conducted by the city pursuant to this article or any other authority. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation. Any such prohibition, interference, or refusal shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the adult establishment license pursuant to section 12-86. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 9, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-79. - Change in information. 
During the pendency of any application for, or during the term of, any adult establishment license, the applicant or licensee shall promptly notify the adult use commissioner in writing (i) of any change in any material information given by the applicant or licensee in the application for such license, including specifically, but without limitation, any change in managers of the adult entertainment establishment or in the individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsections 12-75(c)(1) or (2); or (ii) if any of the events constituting grounds for suspension or revocation pursuant to subsection 12-86(a) occur. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 10, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-80. - Regulations applicable to all adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  General compliance. All licensed premises and adult entertainment establishments shall comply with the provision of this article; all other applicable city ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations; and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws. 
(b)  Hours of operation. 
(1)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business at any time on a state or federal holiday. 
(2)  No adult cabaret or adult theater shall be open for business at any time after midnight on any Saturday. 
(3)  No adult store shall be open for business between the hours of 12:00 a.m. Sunday and 11:00 a.m. on any Monday. 
(4)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday. 
(c)  Animals. No animals, except only for seeing-eye dogs required to assist the blind, shall be permitted at any time at or in any adult entertainment establishment or licensed premises. 
(d)  Restrooms. All restrooms in adult entertainment establishments shall be equipped with standard toilets, sinks, and other traditional lavatory facilities. No adult materials or live performances shall be provided or allowed at any time in the restrooms of an adult entertainment establishment. Separate male and female restrooms shall be provided for and used by adult establishment employees and adult establishment patrons. 
(e)  Restricted access. No adult establishment patron shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of any adult entertainment establishment, including specifically, but without limitation, any storage areas or dressing or other rooms provided for the benefit of adult establishment employees. This subsection shall not apply to persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the licensed premises; provided, however, that any such persons shall remain in such nonpublic areas only for the purposes and to the extent and time necessary to perform their job duties. 
(f)  Specific prohibited acts. 
(1)  No adult establishment patron or any other person at any adult entertainment establishment, other than an adult establishment employee employed to provide adult entertainment in accordance with the regulations of this article, shall appear, be present, or perform while nude or semi-nude; provided, however, that no such employee shall appear, be present, or perform while nude at any adult entertainment establishment that serves or otherwise provided alcoholic liquor pursuant to a licensed issued by the state. 
(2)  No adult establishment employee or any other person at any adult entertainment establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any adult establishment patron or any other adult establishment employee or any other person. No adult establishment patron or any other person at any adult entertainment establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any adult establishment employee or any other adult establishment patron or any other person. 
(3)  Straddle dances shall be prohibited at all adult entertainment establishments. 
(g)  Exterior display. No adult entertainment establishment shall be maintained or operated in any manner that causes, creates, or allows public viewing of any adult material or any entertainment depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way, or any property other than the lot on which the licensed premises is located. No portion of the exterior of an adult entertainment establishment shall utilize or contain any flashing lights, search lights, or spotlights or any other similar lighting systems, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent specifically allowed pursuant to subsection (h) of this section with regard to signs. This subsection shall apply to any advertisement, display, promotional material, decoration, or sign; to any performance or show; and to any window, door, or other opening. 
(h)  Signage limitations. All signs for adult entertainment establishments shall be flat wall signs. The maximum allowable sign area shall be one square foot of sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street, but in no event exceeding 32 square feet. The maximum number of signs shall be one per lot frontage. Signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this article shall contain only (i) the name of the adult entertainment establishment and/or (ii) the specific type of adult entertainment establishment conducted on the licensed premises. Temporary signage shall not be permitted in connection with any adult entertainment establishment. 
(i)  Noise. No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the licensed premises shall be used at any time. 
(j)  Manager's station. Each adult entertainment establishment shall have one or more manager's stations. The interior of each adult entertainment establishment shall be configured in such a manner that there is a direct and substantially unobstructed view from at least one manager's station to every part of each area, except restrooms, of the establishment to which any adult establishment patron is permitted access for any purpose. 
(k)  Alcohol prohibition. No adult entertainment establishment that serves or otherwise provides alcoholic liquor pursuant to a liquor license shall provide or allow adult establishment employees that appear, are present, or perform while nude. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 11, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-81. - Special regulations for adult booths. 
(a)  Prohibited except in adult stores. Adult booths shall be prohibited in all adult entertainment establishments except adult stores. 
(b)  Occupancy and prohibited acts. Only one individual shall occupy an adult booth at any one time. No individual occupying an adult booth shall engage in any specified sexual activities. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of an adult booth. 
(c)  Open booth requirement. In addition to satisfying the manager stations requirements of subsection 12-80(j), all adult stores containing adult booths shall be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of each adult booth shall be visible from the common area of the adult store. To satisfy this requirement, there shall be a permanently open and unobstructed entranceway for each adult booth and for the entranceway from the area of the adult store that provides other adult materials to the area of the adult store containing the adult booths. Each of these entranceways shall not be capable of being closed or obstructed, entirely or partially, by any door, curtain, partition, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever that would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring the area of the adult store containing the adult booths or any person situated in an adult booth. It shall be unlawful to install adult booths within an adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of providing secluded viewing of adult materials or live performances. 
(d)  Aisle required. There shall be one continuous lighted main aisle along side the adult booths provided in any adult store. Each person situated in a booth shall be visible at all times from the aisle. 
(e)  Holes prohibited. Except for the open booth entranceway, the walls and partitions of each adult booth shall be constructed and maintained of solid walls or partitions without any holes or openings whatsoever. 
(f)  Signage. A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entranceway to each adult booth that states (i) that only one person is allowed in an adult booth at any one time, (ii) that it is unlawful to engage in any specified sexual activities while in an adult booth, and (iii) that it is unlawful to damage or deface any portion of an adult booth. 
(g)  Age limitations. 
(1)  No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an adult booth or a licensed premises that includes an adult booth shall be under the age of 18. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult booth or any licensed premises that includes an adult booth. 
(3)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult booth or at any licensed premises that includes an adult booth. 
(4)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult booth or any licensed premises that includes an adult booth. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 12, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-82. - Special regulations for adult cabarets. 
(a)  Performance area. The performance area of an adult cabaret shall be limited to one or more stages or platforms permanently anchored to the floor (a "cabaret stage"). Each cabaret stage shall be elevated above the level of, and separate from, the patron seating areas. Each cabaret stage shall be separated by a distance of at least 18 inches from all areas of the premises to which adult entertainment patrons have access. A continuous barrier at least two feet in height and located at least 18 inches from all points of each cabaret stage shall separate each cabaret stage from all patron seating areas. No adult patron shall be allowed at any time on any cabaret stage. 
(b)  Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the adult cabaret so that all objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of not less than 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on ten-foot centers shall be maintained at all times for all areas of the adult cabaret where adult establishment patrons are admitted. 
(c)  Tipping. No adult establishment patron shall offer, and no adult establishment employee having performed on any cabaret stage shall accept, any form of tip or gratuity offered directly or personally to the employee by the adult establishment patron. Rather, all tips and gratuities to adult establishment employees performing on any cabaret stage shall be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of such tips and gratuities by the adult entertainment establishment or shall be placed by the adult establishment patron on the cabaret stage on which the adult establishment employee is performing. 
(d)  Notice of select rules. A sign at least two feet by two feet, with letters at least one inch high shall be conspicuously displayed on or adjacent to every cabaret stage stating the following: THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF AIKEN. ENTERTAINERS ARE: 
(1)  NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT. 
(2)  NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS DIRECTLY OR PERSONALLY FROM PATRONS. ANY SUCH TIPS MUST BE PLACED INTO THE RECEPTACLE PROVIDED BY MANAGEMENT OR MUST BE PLACED DIRECTLY ON THE CABARET STAGE. 
For adult cabarets with a liquor license, the following third rule shall also be included in the sign required by this subsection: 
(3)  NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR IN A STATE OF NUDITY. 
(e)  Age limitations. 
(1)  No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an adult cabaret or a licensed premises used for an adult cabaret shall be under the age of 18. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult cabaret or to any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret. 
(3)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult cabaret or any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret. 
(4)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult cabaret or any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 13, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-83. - Special regulation for adult stores. 
(a)  Windows and signs. Window areas for adult stores shall not be covered or obstructed in any way. No signs or other obstructions shall be placed on the windows. 
(b)  Age limitations. 
(1)  No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an adult store or a licensed premises used for an adult store shall be under the age of 18. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult store or to any licensed premises used for an adult store. 
(3)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult store or any licensed premises used for an adult store. 
(4)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult store or any licensed premises used for an adult store. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 14, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-84. - Special regulations for adult theaters. 
(a)  Seating. Each adult theater shall provide seating only in individual chairs with arms or in seats separated from each other by immovable arms and not on couches, benches, or any other multiple person seating structures. The number of seats shall equal the maximum number of persons who may occupy the adult theater. 
(b)  Aisle. Each adult theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating area in order that each person seated in the adult theater shall be visible from the aisle at all times. 
(c)  Sign. Each adult theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entranceway to the auditorium or similar area that lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats in the auditorium area. 
(d)  Age limitations. 
(1)  No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an adult theater or a licensed premises used for an adult store shall be under the age of 18. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult theater or to any licensed premises used for an adult theater. 
(3)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult theater or any licensed premises used for an adult theater. 
(4)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult theater or any licensed premises used for an adult theater. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 15, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-85. - Licensee responsibility for employees. 
Every act or omission by an adult establishment employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be the act or omission of the licensee if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, or as a result of the licensee's negligent failure to supervise the adult establishment employee. The licensee shall be punishable for any such act or omission in the same manner as if the licensee committed the act or caused the omission. Accordingly, any such act or omission of any such employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed, for purposes of determining whether the licensee's adult establishment license shall be revoked, suspended, or renewed, to be the act or omission of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 16, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-86. - License revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Grounds. Pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the adult use commissioner may suspend for not more than 30 days, or revoke, any adult establishment license if the adult use commissioner, based on credible or reasonably reliable information and evidence, determines that any one or more of the following has occurred: 
(1)  The licensee has violated any of the provision or requirements of this article or the adult establishment license issued pursuant to this article, or the provisions of the city zoning ordinance applicable to the licensed premises or the adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)  The licensee (i) knowingly or negligently furnished false or misleading information or withheld information on any application or other document submitted to the city for the issuance or renewal of any adult establishment license or (ii) knowingly or negligently caused or suffered any other person to furnish or withhold any such information on the licensee's behalf. 
(3)  The licensee has committed a felony or specified criminal act on the licensed premises. 
(4)  The licensee authorizes, approves, or, as a result of the licensee's negligent failure to supervise the licensed premises or the adult entertainment establishment, allows, an adult establishment employee, and adult establishment patron, or any other person to (i) violate any of the provisions or requirements of this article or of the provision or requirements of the adult establishment license issued pursuant hereto, or (ii) commits any felony or specified criminal act on the licensed premises. 
(5)  The licensee, or any person identified pursuant to subsections 12-75(c)(1), (2) or (14) becomes disqualified for the issuance of an adult establishment license at any time during the term of the license at issue. 
(b)  Procedure. An adult entertainment establishment license may be suspended for not more than 30 days or revoked pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in this subsection (b) of this section. 
(1)  Notice. Upon determining that one or more of the grounds for suspension or revocation under subsection (a) of this section may exist, the adult use commissioner shall serve a written notice on the licensee in person or by certified United States mail, postage paid, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee's address as set forth in the licensee's application. The written notice shall, at a minimum, (i) state that adult use commissioner has determined that the adult establishment license may be subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to subsection (a) of this section; (ii) identify the specific grounds for the adult use commissioner's determination, and (iii) set a date for a hearing regarding the adult use commissioner's determination as to the possibility of suspension or revocation of the adult establishment license. The date of the hearing shall be no less than five days after service of the adult use commissioner's notice, unless an earlier or later date is agreed to by the licensee and the adult use commissioner. 
(2)  Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the adult use commissioner. At the hearing, the licensee may present and submit evidence and witnesses to refute the grounds cited by the adult use commissioner for suspending or revoking the license and the city and any other persons may submit evidence to sustain such grounds. The administrative record compiled on the adult entertainment establishment pursuant to section 12-87 shall be made part of the hearing record. Within three days after the close of the hearing, the adult use commissioner shall, having considered the record made at the hearing, render a decision in writing, setting forth the reasons for the decision. The action taken by the adult use commissioner shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review. 
(3)  Notice and effective date of suspension or revocation. The adult use commissioner's written decision shall be posted at the office of the adult use commissioner and shall be served on the licensee in person or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee's address as set forth in the licensee's application. Any suspension or revocation, as the case may be, shall take effect on the day that the adult use commissioner's written decision is delivered in person or three days after it is placed in the United States mail as provided in this subsection. 
(4)  Surrender of license. Upon the suspension or revocation of an adult establishment license pursuant to this article, the adult use commissioner shall take custody of the suspended or revoked license. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 17, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-87. - Administrative record. 
The business license administrator shall cause to be kept in the adult use commissioner's office an accurate record of every adult establishment license application received and acted on, together with all relevant information and material pertaining to such application, any adult establishment license issued pursuant thereto, and any adult entertainment establishment operated pursuant to such adult establishment license. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 18, 12-13-1999) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 12-88. - Recordkeeping by licensee. 
(a)  The licensee of every adult entertainment establishment shall maintain a register of all of its adult establishment employees. For each such employee, the register shall include the following information: 
(1)  Legal name. 
(2)  Any and all aliases. 
(3)  Date of birth. 
(4)  Gender. 
(5)  Social security number. 
(6)  Date of commencement of employment. 
(7)  Date of employment termination, if applicable. 
(8)  Specific job or employment duties. 
(b)  The register shall be maintained for all current employees and all employees employed at any time during the preceding 36 months. The licensee shall make the register of its adult establishment employees available for inspection by the city immediately upon demand at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 19, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-89. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or assists or participates in any way in the violation of, any of the provision or requirements of this article or of any of the provision or requirements of any adult establishment license, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-13 for each such violation. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The adult use commissioner shall give written notice to any such person of any such violation and the fine imposed by serving a citation in person or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee's address as set forth in the licensee's application. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 20, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-90. - Nuisance declared. 
Any adult entertainment establishment established, operated, or maintained in violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this article or of any adult establishment license shall be, and such establishment is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this article, commence an action to enjoin, remove, or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from establishing, operating, or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 21, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-91. - Computation of time. 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this article, the time within which any act required by this article is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a federal or state holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. If the day immediately following such Saturday, Sunday, or holiday is also Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. No. 121399B, § 22, 12-13-1999)  
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Elections, S.C. Code 1976, title 7; nominations and elections for municipal offices, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Election of mayor and council members. 
The mayor shall be elected from the city at large, and one member of council shall be elected from each of the six districts set forth and designated upon the map and accompanying documents entitled "City of Aiken Election Plan (2012)" that are on file in the official records maintained by the city clerk. The City of Aiken Election Plan (2012) in its entirety is incorporated into this section by reference. Candidates seeking election to council from one of the six districts must be a resident of the district for which the candidate is seeking election and, if elected, must continue to be a resident of that district for the entire term of office. Candidates seeking election as mayor must be a resident of the city and, if elected, must continue to be a resident of the city for the entire term of office. 
(Code 1980, § 7-1; Ord. No. 05122003A, § 1, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 07092012, § 1, 7-9-2012) 
State Law reference— Duty to provide by ordinance for method of election by council, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-20.  
Sec. 14-2. - Terms of office. 
The mayor and members of council shall be elected for terms of four years. Commencing with the 2013 general municipal election, council members for Districts 2, 4, 5 and 6 shall be elected. Commencing with the 2015 general municipal election, the mayor and council members for Districts 1 and 3 shall be elected. The districts referred to in this section are those set forth and designated upon the map and accompanying documents identified in section 14-1. 
(Code 1980, § 7-2; Ord. No. 07092012, § 2, 7-9-2012) 
State Law reference— Terms of mayor and council members, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-40.  
Sec. 14-3. - Election commission. 
(a)  A municipal election commission is hereby established composed of three electors who are residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the council. Initial appointments shall be for staggered terms. Thereafter, appointments shall be for terms of six years. 
(b)  No member of the municipal election commission may participate in political management or in a political campaign over whose election the member has jurisdiction during the member's term of office. No member may make a contribution to a candidate or knowingly attend a fundraiser held for the benefit of a candidate over whose election the member has jurisdiction. Violation of this subsection may subject the member to removal by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3; Ord. No. 02142000D, § 1, 2-14-2000; Ord. No. 09112000, § 1, 9-11-2000) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-141 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal election commission, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-90 et seq.  
Sec. 14-4. - Time for primaries to be set by ordinance. 
The city council shall, by ordinance, set the times for holding primaries in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 7-5) 
State Law reference— Governing body to enact ordinances relating to time requirements for primaries, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-70.  
Sec. 14-5. - Voting precincts. 
(a)  For the purpose of voting in primary, general and special municipal elections in the city, there are hereby established in the city, six voting precincts described as follows: 
(1)  Precinct No. 1. Starting at Laurens Street and Southern Railway proceed westerly along the railroad tracks to the city limits, follow the city limits as a southern, western and northern boundary to Vancluse Road, follow the property line of property on north side of Richland Avenue from Vancluse Road to Laurens Street, proceed down the center of Laurens Street to the Southern Railway. 
(2)  Precinct No. 2. Starting on Laurens Street near Richland Avenue follow the property line of property on north side of Richland Avenue from Laurens Street to Vancluse Road, follow the city limits as western boundary to Edgefield Highway, proceed down the center of Edgefield Highway or Laurens Street to starting point. 
(3)  Precinct No. 3. Starting at York Street and Southern Railway proceed westerly along railroad tracks to Laurens Street, follow the center of Laurens Street or Edgefield Highway to city limits, follow city limits as northern boundary to York Street, follow city limits from York Street to Two Notch Road, follow city limits from Two Notch Road to Rutland Drive, follow property line of property on south side of Rutland Drive to York Street, follow center of York Street to Southern Railway. 
(4)  Precinct No. 4. Starting at Southern Railway and York Street proceed northerly along center of York Street to Rutland Drive, follow line of property on south side of Rutland Drive to Two Notch Road, follow city limits as eastern boundary to Southern Railway, follow Southern Railway as southern boundary to York Street. 
(5)  Precinct No. 5. Starting at Mead Avenue and Whiskey Road proceed westerly along property lines between Berrie Road and DuPree Place to the city limits, follow in a northerly direction the city limits to Southern Railway, follow easterly along Southern Railroad to city limits, follow city limits to Powder House Road, follow center of Powder House Road to Audubon Drive, follow center of Audubon Drive to Two Notch Road, follow property line of property on west side of Two Notch Road to Mead Avenue, follow centerline of Mead Avenue to Whiskey Road. 
(6)  Precinct No. 6. Starting at Mead Avenue and Whiskey Road proceed westerly along property lines between Berrie Road and DuPree Place to the city limits, follow in a southerly direction the city limits to Silver Bluff Road, follow city limits to Audubon Drive, follow center of Audubon Drive to Two Notch Road, follow property line of property on west side of Two Notch Road to Mead Avenue, follow centerline of Mead Avenue to Whiskey Road. 
(b)  The voting precincts of the city shall be automatically enlarged and extended so as to include all areas which may have been annexed by the city on and after May 30, 1967, which are contiguous to the respective voting precincts designated in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 7-6) 
State Law reference— Duty of council to establish precinct lines, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-50.  
Sec. 14-6. - Voting places. 
To the extent permitted by the laws of the state, the municipal election commission shall prescribe voting places within the respective precincts lying partially or wholly within the corporate limits of the city for each municipal election. The municipal election commission shall take every measure within its power to ensure that each council election district has an equivalent number of polling places at locations convenient to voters. 
(Code 1980, § 7-7)  
Sec. 14-7. - When newly elected officers to qualify and take office; incumbent to hold over until contest determined. 
(a)  Newly elected officers shall not be qualified pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-120 until at least 48 hours after the closing of the polls. 
(b)  Newly elected officers shall take office at the next regular meeting of the city council following the expiration of 14 days after the time for protest of the election has passed. In case the results of the election are contested, the incumbent who fills that contested office shall hold over until the contest is finally determined. 
(Code 1980, § 7-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-120.  
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; fire districts, § 10-1. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention in municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Fire prevention code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion in the city, that certain code known as the International Fire Code, 2003 edition, and as amended, of which code one copy is filed in the office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out in this section word for word. 
(Code 1980, § 8-1; Ord. No. 10092006E, § 2(Exh. A), 10-9-2006) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt standard code or technical regulations by reference, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-280.  
Sec. 16-2. - Fire prevention code amended as to board of appeals and adjustments. 
(a)  Chapter 2 of the International Fire Code, 2003 edition, and as amended, as applicable in the city, is amended so members of the board of appeals is the "City of Aiken Building Code Board of Appeals " as the board of appeals and adjustments under Chapter 2 of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(b)  All functions, duties, powers and responsibilities of the fire prevention code board of appeals under the International Fire Code are hereby delegated to the city building code board of appeals. 
(c)  In all other respects, Chapter 2 of the International Fire Code shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1980, § 8-1.1; Ord. No. 10092006E, § 2(Exh. A), 10-9-2006)  
Sec. 16-3. - Charges for fire protection services. 
(a)  Effective July 1, 2017, the charges for residential fire service for out of city customers receiving or connected to city water service shall be as follows: 
Appraised value of each structure 	Monthly charge per structure 
Up to $20,000 	$11.50 
$20,001 and above 	$11.50 plus 30 cents per thousand dollars of appraised value exceeding $20,001 with the total monthly charge not to exceed $41.00. 
 
(b)  Effective July 1, 2017, the charges for residential fire service for out of city customers that do not have city water service available or is not connected to city water service, an annual charge of $115.00. 
(c)  Effective July 1, 2017, the charges for commercial or industrial fire services for out-of-city customers shall be as follows: 
Minimum Value 	Maximum Value 	New Rate 
$1.00 	$20,000.00 	$11.50 
$20,001.00 	$30,000.00 	$12.65 
$30,001.00 	$40,000.00 	$13.25 
$40,001.00 	$50,000.00 	$13.80 
$50,001.00 	$75,000.00 	$24.15 
$75,001.00 	$100,000.00 	$35.00 
$100,001.00 	$125,000.00 	$46.00 
$125,001.00 	$150,000.00 	$56.00 
$150,001.00 	$175,000.00 	$66.00 
$175,001.00 	$200,000.00 	$76.50 
$200,001.00 	$250,000.00 	$88.50 
$250,001.00 	$300,000.00 	$101.50 
$300,001.00 	$400,000.00 	$114.00 
$400,001.00 	$500,000.00 	$126.50 
$500,001.00 	$1,000,000.00 	$139.00 
$1,000,001.00 	$2,000,000.00 	$158.50 
$2,000,000.00 		$221.50 
$3,000,000.00 		$253.00 
$5,000,000.00 		$316.50 
$18,000,000.00 		$727.50 
$40,000,000.00 		$1,423.00 
 
(Code 1980, § 8-2; Ord. No. 06092003B, § 1, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 06122017C , § 1, 6-12-2017)  
Sec. 16-4. - Interfering with public safety officer in suppressing fire; tampering with firefighting equipment; unlawful parking near a fire hydrant or in a designated fire lane or fire zone. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any public safety officer while in the discharge of his duties in fire suppression or to tamper with or interfere with any firefighting equipment belonging to the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorized transportation device, trailer, or any wheeled vehicle near a fire hydrant or to park, stop, stand, or otherwise block a designated fire lane or fire zone. 
(c)  "Tamper" or "interfere with" shall mean parking, standing, stopping, or otherwise placing any motor vehicle, or other wheeled device, or any other item, material, substance, or object near a fire hydrant or in a fire lane or fire zone. "Tamper" or "interfere with" shall also mean any action taken by any person which impedes or interferes with any fire suppression, maintenance, or other effort undertaken by the Aiken Department of Public Safety, or other city employee, to access or utilize its hydrant system, and a designated fire lane or fire zone. 
(Code 1980, § 8-3; Ord. No. 02142005A, § 1, 2-14-2005) 
State Law reference— Interfering with fire alarm system, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-570.  
Sec. 16-5. - Fire hydrants; unauthorized use; tampering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee, agent or representative of the city, to open, use or tamper with any fire hydrant owned or maintained by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 8-4)  
Sec. 16-6. - Manufacture, sale, discharge, etc., of fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful in the city for any person to use, fire, shoot, discharge, sell, offer for sale, store, exchange, give away or possess any fireworks within the city, except as specifically authorized in this section. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not include nor prevent the sale, possession or use of toy cap pistols or toy pistol paper caps which contain not more than one-fifth grain of explosive mixture, fireworks known as "sparklers" or firecrackers commonly known as "Chinese firecrackers," which are defined as follows: Being not over one-quarter inch in outside diameter, not over two inches long and containing not over four grains of explosive composition. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the manufacture in this city of fireworks or the storing, selling or offering for sale for shipment out of the state of fireworks, the use of which is made unlawful in this city and state. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use fireworks in public displays or exhibits except when the person desiring to give such displays or exhibits shall have first obtained written approval therefor from the city council, which may, in its absolute discretion, grant or refuse to grant the permission so applied for, or may grant it subject to such restrictions and limitations as it may, in its absolute discretion, deem to be in the interest of public safety in connection with such display or exhibit. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the use of signals necessary for the safe operation of railroads, buses, trucks or boats, nor shall the provisions of this section apply to any common carrier, while acting as such, lawfully transporting or having custody of fireworks in interstate commerce or for delivery within this city for use as provided in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 8-5)  
Sec. 16-7. - Vacant buildings to be free of combustible materials; cleaning by city and collection of costs thereof. 
(a)  Every owner, or agent of an owner, in charge of a vacant building in the city, shall keep the vacant building clear and free of all trash, debris and other type of combustible materials at all times. The director of public safety shall have the right at all times to go upon and inspect vacant buildings, and to request that the owner or agent in charge of any such building clean and clear the building of trash, debris and other combustible materials, and to keep the building securely locked or sealed until again placed in use, and it shall be the duty of such owner or agent to forthwith comply with such request of the director of public safety. 
(b)  The director of public safety shall have the right to enter any premises left vacant for more than five days, to clear the premises of trash, debris or other combustibles and to then lock or securely seal the premises against intruders, and the cost and expenses incident thereto shall be charged against the owner of the premises and shall become a lien thereon against such property, enforceable as are taxes or other city liens. 
(c)  The lien arising under this section to the city against such property shall be entered in the office of the city clerk, and the clerk shall thereupon give notice to any mortgagees or lien holders having claims or liens against the premises of the claim held by the city, giving them the right to pay the lien of the city and prevent the sale of the property. In the event the property owner does not, for himself or through another person, forthwith pay the lien of the city, the city clerk shall issue a warrant or execution through the city tax collector, in which the latter shall be directed to seize sufficient of the property of the person defaulting in the payment of the city's lien to pay the amount of the lien, with costs, whereupon the tax collector, under and by virtue of such warrant or execution, shall: 
(1)  Seize and take exclusive possession of so much of the defaulting owner's estate, real, personal or both, as may be necessary to raise the necessary sum of money for payment of the lien and the costs therein. 
(2)  After due advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and county, sell the property so seized before the county courthouse door on the next legal sales day thereafter, during the usual hours for public sale (on the first Monday of the month following the third publication of such advertisement), at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. 
(3)  Give to the person, upon his complying with the terms of sale, a receipt for the purchase money and annex such receipt to the duplicate warrant with the endorsement thereon of his action thereunder. 
(4)  After deducting from the proceeds of sale the costs and expenses of sale, pay over to the city treasurer the charges and penalties due and accrued by the defaulting lienor. 
(5)  Upon written notice given or information ascertained of any mortgage or other lien on the premises so sold, hold the excess, if any, until authorized or directed by the proper judicial authority as to the mode of disposition thereof or until he shall receive the written consent of the defaulting lien debtor that the excess be paid over to a mortgagee or lien creditor, according to priority, of more than one, when he shall comply with such authorization or direction of proper judicial authority, or with the terms of such written consent. 
(d)  The tax collector shall not make title to the purchaser until the expiration of 12 months from the day of sale provided for in subsection (c) of this section, and then only if the property sold is not redeemed as provided by law. A deed of conveyance from the city tax collector shall carry with it the full force and effect of a fee simple title to the premises sold and conveyed, and all right, title and interest of the defaulting lien debtor shall be forever barred, foreclosed and terminated. The procedural form to be followed in the enforcement of this subsection and subsection (c) above is set forth in S.C. Code 1976, §§ 12-49-280—12-49-460, which are specifically referred to in this section and hereby made by reference a part and parcel of this section, where applicable, with the same force and effect as though the whole of the text thereof were set out in this section word for word. 
(Code 1980, § 8-7)  
Chapter 18 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 18-31—18-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— South Carolina Fair Housing Law, S.C. Code 1976, § 31-21-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-46. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as the fair housing ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5-1)  
Sec. 18-47. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the city that no person shall be discriminated against in the sale or rental of housing on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, familial status or handicap. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5-2)  
Sec. 18-48. - Definitions. 
The definitions of terms in 42 USC, 3602, and successor provisions, shall apply to the use of those terms in this division, mutatis mutandi. Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms as used in this division shall have the following meanings. 
Discrimination means any direct or indirect act or practice of exclusion, distinction, restriction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial, or any other act or practice of differential or preference in the treatment of a person or persons because of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, familial status, or handicap, or the aiding, abetting, inciting, coercing or compelling thereof. 
Housing accommodations means a building, structure, lot or part thereof which is used or occupied as a home or residence of one or more individuals. 
Real estate broker or real estate salesman mean an individual who, on behalf of others, for a fee, commission, salary or other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of receiving or collecting such consideration, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real estate, or the improvements thereon, including options, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others such an activity; or who advertises or holds themselves out as engaged in such activities; or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others a loan secured by mortgage or other encumbrances upon a transfer of real estate, or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting whereby he undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real estate through its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose, or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
Real estate operator means any individual or combination of individuals, labor unions, joint apprenticeship committees, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trust, incorporated organizations, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers or other legal or commercial entity, the city or county or any of its agencies, or any owner of real property that is engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging, renting or leasing real estate, or the improvements thereof, including options, or that derived income, in whole or in part, from the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real estate; or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
Real property means buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives, condominiums, mobile homes, and hereditaments, or any interest in such buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives, condominiums, mobile homes, and hereditaments. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-49. - Purposes; construction and effect. 
(a)  The general purposes of this division are: 
(1)  To provide for execution within the city of the applicable policies embodied in Title VIII of the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, (Fair Housing Act). 
(2)  To safeguard individuals within the city from discrimination in housing opportunities because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap; to protect their interest in personal dignity and freedom from humiliation; to preserve the public health and general welfare; and to further the interests, rights, and privileges of individuals within the city. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to repeal any other ordinance of the city relating to discrimination because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5-4)  
Sec. 18-50. - Unlawful housing practices. 
It is an unlawful practice for a real estate owner or operator or for a real estate broker, real estate salesman, or any individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of such persons to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease or otherwise deny to or withhold real property from an individual because of his or her race, color, age, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap; 
(2)  Discriminate against an individual because of his race, color, age, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap, in terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property or in the furnishings of facilities or services in connection therewith; 
(3)  Refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to purchase, rent, or lease real property from an individual because of his race, color, age, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap; 
(4)  Refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental, or lease of real property to an individual because of his race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap; 
(5)  Represent to an individual that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or to refuse to permit an individual to inspect real property because of his race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap; 
(6)  Print, circulate, post, or mail or cause to be printed, circulated, posted or mailed an advertisement or sign, or to use a form of application for the purchase, rental, or lease of real property, or to make a record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental, or lease of real property, which indicates, directly or indirectly, a limitation, specification, or discrimination as to race, color, religion, race, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap, or an intent to make such a limitation, specification or discrimination; 
(7)  Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property for sale, rental, or lease with the understanding that an individual may be discriminated against in the sale, rental, or lease of that real property or in connection therewith because of race, color, age, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap; or 
(8)  Otherwise deny to or withhold real property from an individual because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5-5)  
Sec. 18-51. - Blockbusting. 
It is an unlawful practice for a real estate owner or operator, a real estate broker, a real estate salesman, a financial institution, an employee of any of these, or any other person, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction from which that person may benefit financially: 
(1)  To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition with respect to race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood, or areas in which the real property is located; or 
(2)  To represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior or a decline in the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood, or area in which the real property is located. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5-6)  
Sec. 18-52. - Exemptions from housing provisions. 
Nothing in section 18-50 shall apply: 
(1)  To the rental of housing accommodations in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner or family member of his family resides in one of the housing accommodations; 
(2)  To the sale of single-family dwellings provided that the owner is a private individual who does not own more than three such single-family houses, does not advertise the sale or rental of such houses in a newspaper, magazine, or advertising circular, and does not employ the services of a real estate operator, real estate broker, or real estate salesman; 
(3)  To the rental of one-room or one-room units in a housing accommodation by an individual if the owner or a member of the owner's family resides therein; or 
(4)  A religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such a religion is restricted on account of race, color, age, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5-7)  
Sec. 18-53. - Complaints. 
All complaints of violations of this division shall be made, referred, and reported to the state human affairs commission for the purpose of the commission receiving, reviewing, and resolving the complaint pursuant to the powers granted it by the laws of this state. All such complaints also shall be reported to the city manager for informational purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5-8)  
Sec. 18-54. - State fair housing law. 
This division shall not establish or be construed to establish any requirements or prohibitions different or greater than those in the South Carolina Fair Housing Law, S.C. Code 1976, § 31-21-10 et seq. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this division and those of the South Carolina Fair Housing Law, the latter provisions shall control. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5-10)  
Sec. 18-55. - Conspiracy to violate this division unlawful. 
It shall be an unlawful practice for a person, or for two or more persons to conspire: 
(1)  To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he or she has opposed a practice declared unlawful by this division, or because he or she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, or proceedings, or hearings under this division; 
(2)  To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce a person to engage in any of the acts or practices declared unlawful by this division; 
(3)  To obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provisions of this division or any order issued thereunder; or 
(4)  To resist, prevent, impede, or interfere with the enforcing agent or officials, housing board of appeal, or any of its members or representatives in the lawful performance of duty under this division. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5-12)  
Chapter 20 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 22; traffic, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-5 et seq. 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Statute adopted. 
The council of the city hereby adopts by reference S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-15 et seq. relating to municipal courts. 
(Code 1980, § 11-1)  
Sec. 20-2. - Term of municipal judge. 
The municipal judge, shall serve for a term not to exceed four years and shall be elected by the council. 
(Code 1980, § 11-2) 
State Law reference— Appointment and term of municipal judge, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-15.  
Sec. 20-3. - Assistant municipal court judge. 
An assistant municipal court judge may be appointed by the council.  
Sec. 20-4. - Municipal court ordinance summons. 
Any person violating any provision of this Code or any other code or ordinance adopted by the city council may be issued a municipal court ordinance summons. Issuance of the summons shall vest jurisdiction in the municipal court to hear and dispose of the charge for which the summons was issued and served. The summons may be issued by any city public safety officer or any other city employee commissioned by the city manager to enforce city codes and ordinances. The bond amount for violations or categories of violations shall be prescribed by the chief municipal court judge. City public safety officers and other city enforcement officers are prohibited from accepting bonds. Bonds shall be posted in the manner prescribed by the summons. The summons shall not be used for and does not authorize custodial arrests. This municipal court ordinance summons procedure does not apply to any code or ordinance regulating the use of motor vehicles on streets within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 11-3) 
State Law reference— Municipal ordinance summons, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-7-80.  
Sec. 20-5. - Ministerial recorder. 
The city council hereby adopts, by reference, S.C. Code 1976 § 14-25-115, et seq., to establish the office of ministerial recorder, to have all powers, privileges, and responsibilities as allowed under this, and all applicable provisions of state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 09272004C, § 2, 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 20-6. - Term of ministerial recorder. 
The ministerial recorder shall serve, on a part-time or full-time basis, for a term not to exceed four years, or until a successor is elected and validated. The part-time or full-time ministerial recorder shall be appointed by city council, upon the advice of the city manager, with the concurrence of the public safety department director. 
(Ord. No. 09272004C, § 2, 9-27-2004)  
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal court, ch. 20; traffic, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, S.C. Code 1976, title 16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - State misdemeanors adopted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit within the limits of the city any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions of the state law adopted in this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, § 13-1)  
Sec. 22-2. - Violation of rules or regulations of state department of health and environmental control. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate any rule or regulation of the state department of health and environmental control currently in effect, the enforcement of which is the responsibility of the city, and all such rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of health and environmental control are hereby adopted by the city and made a part of this Code the same as if set out in full in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 13-2)  
Sec. 22-3. - Resisting arrest; failure to comply with order of public safety officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to oppose or resist, whether passively or actively, arrest by any officer of the city's public safety department, who has identified himself as an officer of the law or who is identifiable by uniform as an officer of the law, after such officer announces the person is under arrest and offers him a copy of the applicable arrest warrant, if there is one, or announces the crime for which such person is charged. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully fail or refuse to comply with a lawful order or direction of a city public safety officer, while such officer is about the duties of his office within the city or upon properties owned by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 13-3)  
Sec. 22-4. - Discharging firearms or other weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, air rifle, or other weapon within the corporate limits of the city. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to persons discharging firearms in protection of their life or property; to peace officers in the actual discharge of their duties as such; to members of the United States Armed Forces, National Guard, or Reserve when in the performance of their duties. 
(b)  Landowners discharging a firearm on that landowner's property to protect the landowner's family, employees, the general public, or the landowner's property from animals that the landowner reasonably believes pose a direct threat or danger to the landowner's property, people on the landowner's property, or the general public commit no violation of this section nor commit any unlawful act under the Aiken City Code by doing so. 
For purposes of this section landowners' properties must be a parcel of land comprised of at least 25 contiguous acres. 
(c)  Nothing in this Code shall prevent the discharge of firearms on the Aiken Department of Public Safety firing range in accordance with their procedures or on an approved indoor firing range constructed, operated, and maintained within all applicable local, state, and federal rules, regulations, and laws. 
(d)  Firearms may be discharged in compliance with a permit issued by the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources (DNR) pursuant to South Carolina Code Sections 50-11-1050, 50-11-1090, 50-11-1180, and other appropriate statutes and regulations that are promulgated by the State of South Carolina to permit the removal of destructive and/or hazardous wildlife. The permittee shall fully comply with all conditions of the permit issued by DNR. The permittee shall submit a copy of the DNR permit to the chief of the department of public safety prior to discharging any firearms in the City of Aiken. The permittee shall also comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The permittee shall pay to the city an application fee as determined by the cost of the operation plus administrative costs as determined by the city manager. 
(2)  The permittee shall comply with all requirements set by the city on-call wildlife manager [e.g., justification for permit, wildlife management plan, etc.). 
(3)  All wildlife management permittees and the applicant must have a minimum amount of liability insurance of $2,000,000.00 with the city named as an additional insured. A certificate of insurance shall be supplied to the chief of the department of public safety prior to beginning any wildlife management operations. 
(4)  The permittee shall use sharpshooters with a minimum of two years sharpshooting experience, with no safety incidents, and possessing an NRA marksmanship certificate, the Nuisance Wildlife Control Operators Association (NWCOA} suburban marksman firearms proficiency certifications, military or ex-law enforcement credentials, shooting competition results, or the equivalent. 
(5)  Prior to beginning wildlife management operations, the permittee shall identify "safe shooting zones" in areas with the needed buffer from occupied dwellings. Appropriate methods approved by the on-call certified wildlife manager will be used to attract wildlife to these safe removal locations. 
(6)  Shooting will only be from elevated positions assuring that shots are directed into the ground as a backstop. 
(7)  The permittee's contractors shall only use frangible bullets approved by the certified wildlife manager to prevent ricochets. 
(8)  The permittee's contractors shall only conduct shooting operations at times determined by the city's certified wildlife manager using sound suppressed rifles. Safety of residents will be a priority. 
(Code 1980, § 13-4; Ord. No. 09082008B, § 1(Exh. A), 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 09102012B, § 1(Exh. A), 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 11112019 , § 1(Exh. A), 11-11-2019)  
Sec. 22-5. - Obtaining food and lodging by fraud. 
Any person who shall obtain food, lodging or other accommodations at any hotel, apartment house, roominghouse, inn, boardinghouse or restaurant with intent to defraud the owner or keeper thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not apply where there has been an agreement in writing for delay of payment. 
(Code 1980, § 13-5)  
Sec. 22-6. - Damaging or destroying city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or recklessly damage or destroy any property belonging to or under the control of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 13-8)  
Sec. 22-7. - Accumulations of trash, weeds, etc., on private property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or to permit to be maintained any premises owned or occupied by him or under his control, including vacant lots or land, upon which grass, weeds, undergrowth, trash, garbage offal, stagnant water, building materials, glass, wood or other matter deleterious to good health and public sanitation, which is permitted or caused to accumulate in any manner which is or may become a nuisance causing injury to the health or welfare of residents or the public in the vicinity or causing injury to neighboring property. 
(b)  Upon determining that there is cause to believe that a violation of the provisions of this section has occurred, the building inspection officer investigating the matter shall mail or otherwise serve the owner, operator or other person in control of the property a notice describing the conditions that violate the provisions of this section and informing the owner, operator or other person (i) that such conditions must be remedied within 30 days of the date of such mailing or service; (ii) that if such conditions are not remedied, the owner or operator or other person may be charged with a violation of this section; (iii) that if such conditions are not remedied within the aforesaid period, the city or its agents may enter the property and remedy the conditions and the owner, operator or other person shall be liable for all such costs incurred in effecting the remedy of such conditions. If such costs are not paid within 30 days of the mailing or service of a statement of such costs thereon, such costs shall become a lien upon the real property and shall be collectible in the same manner as municipal real property taxes. 
(c)  In addition to or in lieu of the foregoing and any other remedies available to the city, any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 for each such offense, and each day any violation of any provision of this section or any provision thereof shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Any owner, or owner's agent who feels aggrieved by the actions of the building inspection official may appeal the decision of the inspection official to the building official within 30 days of the issuance of the notice. Such appeal shall be in writing. Upon notice of an appeal, the building official shall schedule a hearing in which both the city and the appealing party shall be allowed to present facts concerning the case. The notice of appeal shall stay any enforcement action by the city prior to the hearing. 
(Code 1980, § 13-9) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 32. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-80.  
Sec. 22-8. - Use of automatic dialing in alarm or security systems to call the 911 emergency telephone number. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to program or otherwise set an alarm or security system automatically to dial or connect with the emergency 911 telephone number operated by or for the city. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, § 13-12)  
Sec. 22-9. - Providing false information. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to provide false information to any official, officer, employee or representative of the city on any matter pertaining to or affected by his official duties with the city. It also shall be unlawful for any person to conceal his identity, or to falsely identify himself in response to any inquiry by any official, officer, employee or representative of the city in connection with the performance of his official duties with the city. 
(Code 1980, § 13-13)  
Sec. 22-10. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall knowingly appear nude or nearly nude in a public place. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings designated in this subsection: 
(1)  Nude means completely without clothing or other cover of any type, so that the person leaves exposed to view the male or female genitals, pubic region, bare buttocks or the areola of the nipple of the female breasts. 
(2)  Nearly nude means a state of dress in which clothing or other material covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting belts, straps, strips of cloth or like devices, or a state of dress which leaves exposed a substantial portion of the buttocks so that the effect of viewing such appearance is substantially the same as viewing nudity. 
(3)  Public place means any location which is open to members of the public, whether free of charge or subject to charge. By way of example, the term "public place" includes, but is not limited to, any street, sidewalk, park, recreation facility, community center, school, auditorium, parking lot, restaurant, retail operation, warehouse, factory or other business operation. However, the term "public place" shall not include any room designed or intended for sleeping accommodations in a hotel, motel, inn or like facility, although it shall include any lobby, assembly room, hall or other part of such facility utilized by the public; nor shall the term "public place" include the examining room of a physician's office or medical center, or any area within a hospital where, removed from view of the public at large, nudity is reasonable and customary in receiving diagnosis and treatment. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit nudity or near nudity in a locker room or shower room for one sex and associated with a gymnasium, recreation facility, swimming pool or comparable facility, or prohibit nudity or near nudity in a restroom open to the public when the nudity is incidental to the customary and reasonable use of the restroom. 
(2)  No provision in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit nudity or near nudity incidental to a theatrical performance or presentation in a theater or auditorium ordinarily used for theatrical performances or presentations. 
(3)  No prohibition in this section shall be deemed to apply to a private residence, nor shall any prohibition be deemed to apply to an artist's model appearing nude in an artist's studio, provided such modeling is not open to the general public and otherwise complies with municipal law. 
(4)  No provision of this section shall be deemed to apply to the inadvertent exposure of body parts identified in subsection (b)(1) of this section when such exposure is incidental to reasonable and customary conduct in a public place. 
(5)  No provision of this section shall be deemed to apply to the intentional acts of children less than seven years of age. 
(Code 1980, § 13-14; Ord. No. 06272011D, § 1(Exh. A), 6-27-2011)  
Sec. 22-11. - Hours of operation of certain coin-operated machines or devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who maintains for use or permits the use on any place or premises owned, occupied, managed or controlled by him of any coin-operated nonpayout amusement or gaming machines or devices with free play or similar features for which any person is paid or reimbursed for free games accumulated thereon to operate or allow the operation of such machines or devices between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 7:59 a.m. For purposes of this section, "coin-operated" includes the deposit or insertion of anything of value. Each machine or device operated or allowed to be operated in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Each separate game or play on a machine or device in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 13-15)  
Sec. 22-12. - Urinating or defecating in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or on any public place, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, alley or parkway, or at any public gathering other than in an enclosed area set aside and designated as a restroom by the city or the owner or other person in control of the premises. 
(Code 1980, § 20-9)  
Secs. 22-13—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03122007E, § 1(Exh.A), adopted March 12, 2007, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 22-31—22-38, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1980, §§ 12-1—12-8. 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Definitions 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Background noise means noise which exists at a point as a result of the combination of many distant sources, individually indistinguishable. 
City manager means the duly appointed city manager. 
Construction means the assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition, or site preparation for, or of, public or private rights-of-way, buildings, or other structures, utilities, or property. 
Daytime hours means the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Excessive noise means any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the standards set forth in section 22-36, employing a Realistic ® sound level meter, or one of higher quality, adjusted to dB"A" weighting, with the response selector on "slow" and the 70dB range setting or as may be determined in the discretion of a trained law enforcement officer or other city official authorized to issue a city ordinance summons who utilize their faculties of perception to discern. 
Impulsive noise means sound of short duration, usually less than a second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
Intrusion alarm means a device with an audible signal which, when activated, indicates intrusion by an unauthorized person or by unauthorized persons. 
Loud, raucous, and disturbing noise means any sound within the city limits which, because of its volume, level, duration, and character, annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, health, peace, safety, or welfare of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities or as may be determined in the discretion of a trained law enforcement officer or other city official authorized to issue a city ordinance summons who utilize their faculties of perception to discern that the sound violates the provisions of this chapter. 
Motor vehicle means a vehicle as defined by state law. 
Nighttime hours means the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday evening through Saturday morning, and between 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Saturday evening through Sunday morning. 
Noise level means a frequency weighted sound pressure level as measured with a Realistic ® sound level meter, or one of higher quality, using the A-weighting network response "level slow" and in the 70 dB range setting. The level so read is designated dBA and as set forth in these definitions. 
Premises mean any building, structure, land, or portion thereof, including all appurtenances, owned, or controlled, by a person. 
Property maintenance equipment means all engine or motor tools - whether electrically or fuel source powered - and equipment used occasionally in the repair and upkeep of exterior property and including, but not limited to, lawn mowers, riding tractors, wood chippers, power saws, and leaf blowers. 
Public emergency sound signal means a device, either stationary or mobile, producing audible signals associated with a set of circumstances involving actual or imminent danger to persons or damage to property which demands immediate action. 
Public facility maintenance means all activity related to the clearing, cleaning, repairing, and upkeep of public roads, sidewalks, sewers, water mains, utilities, and publicly owned property. 
Recreational vehicle means any internal combustion, engine-powered, nonregistered vehicle which is being used for recreational purposes. 
Sound means a transmission of energy through solid, liquid, or gaseous media in the form of vibrations which constitute alterations in pressure or position of the particles in the medium and which, in air, evoke physiological sensations, including but not limited to an auditory response, when impinging on the human ear. 
(Ord. No. 03122007E, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-32. - Declaration of policy. 
Excessive noise must be controlled by the city to protect, preserve, and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. The Aiken City Council recognizes the fact that people have a right to, and should be ensured of, an environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize their health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 03122007E, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-33. - Exclusions from article. 
This article shall not apply to noise emitted by or related to the following: 
(1)  Natural phenomena. 
(2)  The unamplified sound made by any wild animal. 
(3)  A bell or chime from any building clock, school, or church. 
(4)  A public emergency sound signal. 
(5)  Farming equipment or farming activity. 
(6)  Noise created by refuse and solid waste collection. 
(7)  Noise created by fire or intrusion alarms. 
(8)  Noise created by public facility maintenance. 
(9)  Sounds emanating from any authorized emergency vehicle responding to an emergency or acting during the time of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 03122007E, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-34. - Conditional exemptions from article. 
The following shall be exempt from this article, subject to the special conditions noted: 
(1)  Noise created by the operation of property maintenance equipment during daytime hours. 
(2)  Noise generated by any construction equipment, provided that it is operated during daytime hours or under a permit for such noise that has been obtained from local authorities. 
(3)  Noise created by any recreational activities which are sanctioned by the city, including but not limited to parades, sporting events, concerts, and fireworks displays. 
(4)  Noise created by blasting, provided that a permit for such blasting has been obtained from local authorities. 
(Ord. No. 03122007E, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-35. - General prohibitions on loud, raucous, and disturbing noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons, regardless of number, to willfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, raucous, or disturbing noise as defined in section 22-31. The term "loud, raucous, and disturbing noise" shall be limited to noises heard from any public right-of-way, public park, public building or grounds while in use, school building or grounds while in use, church or grounds while in use, hospital or grounds while in use, parking lots open to members of the public as invitees or licensees, or so heard in any residential zone. 
(Ord. No. 03122007E, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-36 - Prohibited noise activities. 
The following acts are hereby declared to be public nuisances in violation of this article. The acts enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive and nothing in the sound level measurement levels listed shall be exclusive of the observations made by a sworn law enforcement officer or city official authorized to issue city ordinance summonses who are utilizing their faculties of perception to discern a prohibited noise activity. 
(1)  The use or operation of any mechanical or electrical device, apparatus, or instrument to amplify, intensify, produce, or reproduce a human voice or any other sound when the sound from such activity is noticeably audible or is in excess of 75dB as measured by the device described in section 22-31 "Excessive Noise" more than 50 feet from the sound producing device, apparatus, or instrument. 
(2)  The playing or operation of any sound producing device, apparatus, or instrument when the speaker volume is elevated to such an extent that the sound is in excess of 75dB as measured by the device described in section 22-31 "Excessive Noise" audible more than 50 feet from the device. Where the provisions of this subsection apply to any device, apparatus, or instrument installed or located in a vehicle, they are intended to apply, regardless of whether the vehicle is traveling upon the streets of the city, stopped in traffic, or parked on public, or private, property. 
(3)  The sounding of a horn or any other signal device, except as a danger signal, so as to create an unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device for an unreasonable period of time. The provisions of this subsection are not intended to apply to sounds emanating from any authorized emergency vehicle responding to an emergency situation. 
(4)  The owning, keeping, or harboring of any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes other sounds which disturb the reasonable comfort and peace of any person in the vicinity by creating a loud, raucous, and disturbing noise. 
(5)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so overloaded, or altered to amplify sound which creates a loud, raucous, and disturbing noise. All motor vehicles must operate within the standards set forth by State law. 
(6)  The creation of any other sound defined as a loud, raucous, or disturbing noise as well as those noises encountered by trained law enforcement authorities utilizing their faculties of perception to discern loud, annoying, raucous and disturbing noises over and above those noises associated with city living. 
(Ord. No. 03122007E, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-37. - Loud and unseemly noise. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully disturb any neighborhood or business in the city by making or continuing loud and unseemly noises, or by profanely cursing and swearing, or using obscene language. It shall further be unlawful for any person to willfully disturb any neighborhood or business within the city by the use of words which threaten or tend to threaten or incite physical violence, or which endanger or tend to endanger the health and safety of others within the city. 
(2)  The loud playing of sound reproduction devices, amplifiers, loudspeakers, and other sound devices in any public park, outdoor public place, or privately owned or controlled courtyards or outdoor areas, including from vehicles, the sound and/or noise which is audible or measures in excess of 75dB by the device described in section 22-31 "Excessive Noise" to the distance of 50, or more, feet shall be an inference of a violation of subsection (a). Notwithstanding any time periods or other provisions of this section, sound (from any of the sources specified herein) which exceeds 85 decibels (dB(C)) measured at any time at the property line of the establishment from which the music is being generated shall be considered prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (1). 
(3)  There shall be no violation under subsections (2) of this section for special events, provided a permit is first obtained from the city. 
(Ord. No. 03122007E, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-38. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Any person in violation of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in section 1-13, Aiken City Code, and any applicable provisions of the South Carolina Code, Annotated. In lieu of arrest, a public safety officer or designated city official may serve upon a violator an ordinance summons. Payment of the fine prescribed by the noised code violation ordinance summons within the time limit specified shall constitute a plea of nolo contendere and shall save the violator harmless from prosecution for the offense cited. 
(Ord. No. 03122007E, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-39. - Variances. 
(1)  Any person residing or doing business in the city may apply to the city manager or the designee of the city manager for a variance from one or more of the sections of this article which is more stringent than the state department of environmental protection's regulations for the control of noise, provided that the applicant supplies all of the following information to the city manager, or the designee of the city manager, at least 20 days prior to the start of such activity: 
(a)  The location and nature of activity; 
(b)  The time period and hours of operation of the activity; 
(c)  The nature and intensity of the noise that will be generated; and 
(d)  Any other information required by the city manager, or the designee of the city manager. 
(2)  No variance from this article shall be issued unless it has been demonstrated that: 
(a)  The proposed activity will not violate any provisions of the state department of environmental protection regulations; 
(b)  The noise levels generated by the proposed activity will not constitute a danger to the public health; and 
(c)  Compliance with this article constitutes an unreasonable hardship on the applicant. 
(3)  The application for variance shall be reviewed and either approved or rejected at least five days prior to the proposed start of the activity. The approval or rejection shall be in writing and shall state the condition of approval, if any, or the reasons for rejection. 
(4)  Failure to rule on the application in the designated time shall constitute approval of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 03122007E, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2007)  
Secs. 22-40—22-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA AND COUNTERFEIT DRUGS 
 
Sec. 22-56. - Definitions; determination of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this article. The term includes but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, or growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances. 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance. 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances. 
(5)  Scales or balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances. 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana. 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles, or other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use to ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, ice, crank, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, including but not limited to: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens; permanent screens; hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
b.  Water pipes. 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. 
g.  Chamber pipes. 
h.  Carburetor pipes. 
i.  Electric pipes. 
j.  Air-driven pipes. 
k.  Chillums. 
l.  Bongs. 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(b)  Determination of drug paraphernalia. In determining whether or not an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance. 
(3)  Proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this article. 
(4)  Proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
(5)  Existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons who he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this article; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this article shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(7)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
(8)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 
(9)  National and local advertising concerning its use. 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(11)  Whether or not the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
(12)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
(13)  Existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(14)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Ord. No. 03272000B, § 1(26-20), 3-27-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-57. - Civil forfeiture. 
(a)  Any item of personal property listed in section 22-56 which is legally confiscated by the city will be forfeited. Any such property will be secured by the city police department for a period of ten days and thereafter, the city will either destroy or sell such thereof as may be used for legitimate purposes. 
(b)  Property subject to be forfeited under this article may be seized by the city municipal judge. Seizure without process may be made if the seizure is incident to an arrest or a search under a search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 03272000B, § 1(26-70), 3-27-2000)  
Sec. 22-58. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating sections 22-59 through 22-63 shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 03272000B, § 1(26-80), 3-27-2000)  
Sec. 22-59. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this article. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 03272000B, § 1(26-30), 3-27-2000)  
Sec. 22-60. - Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. 
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia to persons who he knows, or reasonably should know, will use it to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this article. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 03272000B, § 1(26-40), 3-27-2000)  
Sec. 22-61. - Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. 
Any person 18 years of age or over who violates section 22-60 by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 03272000B, § 1(26-50), 3-27-2000)  
Sec. 22-62. - Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. 
It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of this advertisement, in whole or part, is to promote the sale of any objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 03272000B, § 1(26-60), 3-27-2000)  
Sec. 22-63. - Counterfeit drugs. 
Any person who shall distribute or sell any substance under the pretense that the substance is an illegal drug, illegal narcotics, or controlled substance when the substance is, in fact, not an illegal drug, illegal narcotics, or controlled substance shall be guilty of the sale of counterfeit drugs for the purposes of this section and, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 03272000B, § 1(26-10), 3-27-2000)  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 22-64. - Findings and determinations. 
The Aiken City Council ("council") hereby finds and determines: 
(1)  The City of Aiken, South Carolina ("city"), is an incorporated municipality located in Aiken County, South Carolina, and as such possesses all powers granted to municipalities by the Constitution and the laws of the State of South Carolina, including the powers enumerated in S.C. Code (2007 Supp.), § 5-7-30 relating to regulating streets, markets, and public health. 
(2)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke (also known as environmental tobacco smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. The National Cancer Institute has determined that secondhand smoke is responsible for the early deaths of up to 65,000 americans annually. (National Cancer Institute (NCI), "Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke: the report of the California Environmental Protection Agency. Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph 10,"Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute (NCI), August 1999.). The surgeon general has declared that: 
a.  Secondhand smoke causes disease and premature death in nonsmokers exposed to smoke; 
b.  Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk for sudden death syndrome, acute respiratory infections, ear problems, and more severe asthma; 
c.  Adults exposed to secondary smoke have a higher risk of coronary heart disease and lung cancer; 
d.  There is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke; and 
e.  Separating smoking and nonsmoking sections of indoor areas does not sufficiently remove the threats of secondhand smoke in enclosed areas. 
(3)  A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace. Employees who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a 25 to 50 percent higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and measurable decrease in lung function. (Pitsavos, C.; Panagiotakos, D.B.; Chrysohoou, C.; Skoumas, J.; Tzioumis, K.; Stefanadis, C.; Toutouzas, P., "Association between exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and the development of acute coronary syndromes: the CARDIO2000 case-control study,"Tobacco Control 11(3): 220-225, September 2002.) 
(4)  Smoke-filled workplaces result in higher worker absenteeism due to respiratory disease, lower productivity, higher cleaning and maintenance costs, increased health insurance rates, and increased liability claims for diseases related to exposure to secondhand smoke. ("The high price of cigarette smoking", Business & Health 15(8), Supplement A: 6-9, August 1997.) 
(5)  The presence of secondhand smoke in enclosed spaces inevitably results in persons who do not smoke being forced to bear unwarranted health risks and inappropriate deprivation of peaceful enjoyment of the premises to which they have been invited or permitted to enter, even when steps have been taken to separate "smoking" and "nonsmoking" areas within the confined space. 
(6)  The city recognizes that smoke creates a danger to the health and safety of the public at large and that, in order to protect the health and welfare of the public, it is necessary to restrict smoking in the manner provided for in this article ("article"). 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-65. - Definitions. 
Unless the context shall clearly indicate some other meaning, the terms defined in this section shall, for all purposes of this article and other documents herein referenced, have the meanings herein specified. Definitions shall be equally applicable to both the singular and plural forms of any of the terms herein defined. 
Bar shall mean an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business shall mean a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are offered for sale; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs. 
Employee shall mean a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages, commission, goods or services in kind or like compensation, and it shall also mean a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including stationary structures and mobile public conveyances. It does not mean an area open at least 50 percent to the outdoors, and not including any roof or ceiling over it in this calculation. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of persons having diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes (except as otherwise permitted herein), homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Infiltrate means to permeate an enclosed area by passing through its walls, ceilings, floors, windows, or ventilation systems to the extent that an individual can smell second hand smoke. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" for purposes of this article unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. Nor is a private passenger motor vehicle a "place of employment" when used in the performance of employment responsibilities, provided it is not being used as public conveyance. 
Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes, or for purposes of benefiting particular club members and their guests, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501. Establishments which are in fact operating as bars, restaurants, or entertainment venues primarily for the pecuniary benefit of the owner, or chief operating officer, or other person having substantial control shall not be treated as private clubs under this article. 
Public place means an area to which the public is invited or to which the public is permitted to have access, including but not limited to, the indoor areas of banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, hotel and motel lobbies, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, theaters, or waiting rooms. A private club is a "public place" when being used for a function to which the general public is allowed entry. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means the indoor areas of a eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, ice cream parlors, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. The term specifically includes cigar bars, which are establishments licensed for the on-premises sale of beer, wine, and alcoholic beverages as well as some food service, but the term does not include any establishment which is primarily a bar or restaurant and which undertakes to make retail offerings of tobacco products as a means of circumventing the purposes of this article. 
Second hand smoke means smoke emitted from lighted, smoldering, or burning tobacco when the person smoking is not inhaling, smoke emitted at the mouthpiece during puff drawing, and smoke exhaled by the person smoking. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public plaza, promenade, walkway, or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product and any electronic cigarette in any manner or in any form. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008; Ord. No. 04242017C , § 1, 4-24-2017)  
Sec. 22-66. - Application to city-owned facilities. 
All enclosed facilities or buildings owned, leased, or operated by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-67. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, including but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Galleries, libraries, and museums. 
(2)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels, and motels. 
(3)  Bars. 
(4)  Bingo facilities. 
(5)  Conference centers and exhibition halls. 
(6)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(7)  Elevators. 
(8)  Health care facilities. 
(9)  Hotel and motel lobbies. 
(10)  Licensed childcare and adult day care facilities. 
(11)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(12)  Polling places. 
(13)  Private clubs when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. 
(14)  Public transportation facilities, including buses and taxicabs, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots. 
(15)  Restaurants. 
(16)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas. 
(17)  Retail stores. 
(18)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings. 
(19)  Service lines. 
(20)  Shopping malls. 
(21)  Theaters, performance halls, lecture halls, and similar facilities, inclusive of lobbies, audience seating areas, dressing rooms, projections booths, back stage areas, and the stage, but excluding smoking on stage when it is an integral part of a theatrical performance. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-68. - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment without exception, including but not limited to common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles used for the conveyance of the public, but not including vehicles used in performing employment responsibilities when the sole occupants and users are persons who smoke. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated by employers to all existing employees by the effective date of this article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-69. - Where smoking not regulated. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 22-67 and 22-68 of this article: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(5)  Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the general public is admitted. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-70. - Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking also shall be prohibited in any place in which a "No Smoking" sign is posted. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-71. - Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. 
(a)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. 
(b)  An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-72. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the city manager or an authorized designee. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the office of the city manager. 
(d)  The building codes division, fire department, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(e)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or member of the public may bring legal action against a person, business, or organization in violation of this article to enforce this article. 
(g)  In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the city or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-73. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(b)  A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, repeated violations of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any occupancy permit or business license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the city may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(e)  Each day of a continuing violation of this article shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(f)  No ordinance summons nor any enforcement action shall be taken under this ordinance prior to January 14, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-74. - Public education. 
The city will engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners/operators, and managers in their compliance with it. The program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-75. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The city shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the city to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this article. This includes urging all federal, state, county, city, and school district agencies to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current health findings regarding secondhand smoke. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-76. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 22-77. - Interpretation for intent. 
It is the intent of council to prohibit smoking whenever the private choice of smoking intrudes or has the capacity to intrude upon the right of persons concerned about protecting their own rights to be free from the hazards and inconvenience of secondhand smoke in indoor places where they work, stand, sit, walk, dine, drink, read, study, or engage in entertainment. All provisions shall be construed to achieve these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 07142008C, § 1, 7-14-2008)  
Chapter 24 - PARADES AND OTHER ASSEMBLIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36; driving in processions, § 42-34; driving through processions, § 42-35. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate processions and assemblages, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(3). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the word "parade" means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 14-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 24-2. - Permit for use of streets, etc., for demonstrations or picketing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use any of the parks, streets or other ways of the city for the purpose of demonstrations, or for any purposes other than traveling by foot or vehicle without first obtaining a permit from the director of public safety. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use the sidewalks or streets of the city for the purpose of picketing any business establishment without first obtaining a permit from the director of public safety. 
(Code 1980, § 14-2) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 24-3. - Method of parading, picketing or demonstrating generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for participants in a parade or pickets or demonstrators to walk in other than a general straight line within the boundary set aside by the permit issued under this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any demonstrator or person picketing or parading to interfere with or cause to be interfered with any person or vehicle in the act of entering or walking on any sidewalk, street, road or public or private business or building within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in any demonstration, picketing or parading in the city to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any public safety officer of the city while such officer is about his lawful duties. 
(Code 1980, § 14-3)  
Sec. 24-4. - Time limit for parades, pickets and demonstrators. 
It shall be unlawful for pickets or demonstrators or parades to extend their operation beyond the time limit set forth in the permit issued to them by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1980, § 14-4)  
Sec. 24-5. - Limitation on signs carried by pickets, demonstrators and paraders. 
It shall be unlawful for a picket, demonstrator or parader to use any sign larger than three feet wide and four feet high, and which is not carried by one person. Special permission to carry larger signs in parades may be granted where the normal flow of traffic has been detoured and is under control of the department of public safety. 
(Code 1980, § 14-5)  
Sec. 24-6. - Demonstrators and pickets to leave space for pedestrians and motorists. 
All persons demonstrating or picketing pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter shall leave a clear space of at least ten feet in all directions for pedestrians and motorists. 
(Code 1980, § 14-6)  
Sec. 24-7. - Pickets and demonstrators not to sit or lie down. 
It shall be unlawful for pickets or demonstrators to sit or lie down while picketing or demonstrating, so as to interfere with the normal flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 14-7)  
Sec. 24-8. - Disorderly conduct by participants in group gatherings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is affiliated with any organized group gathering to conduct himself in a disorderly manner or in such manner as to disturb the peace and tranquility of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 14-8)  
Sec. 24-9. - Interfering with parades generally. 
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(Code 1980, § 14-9)  
Sec. 24-10. - Driving vehicle through parade. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(Code 1980, § 14-10) 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 42.  
Sec. 24-11. - Parking vehicle on parade route. 
The director of public safety shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The director of public safety shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for a violation of this section, unless such signs are posted. 
(Code 1980, § 14-11) 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 42.  
Secs. 24-12—24-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARADE PERMIT 
 
Sec. 24-31. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the director of public safety. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1980, § 14-22)  
Sec. 24-32. - Application. 
(a)  A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the director of public safety on forms provided by such officer. Such application shall be filed with the director of public safety not less than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. Such application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade. 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(9)  The location, by streets, of any assembly areas for such parades. 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area. 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the director of public safety a communication, in writing, from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(b)  The director of public safety, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than five days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Code 1980, § 14-23; Ord. No. 01132011, § 1, 1-13-2011)  
Sec. 24-33. - Standards for issuance. 
The director of public safety shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of public safety officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(4)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire fighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(5)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(6)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(7)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Code 1980, § 14-24)  
Sec. 24-34. - Time of issuance or denial; notice of denial. 
The director of public safety shall issue or deny a parade permit within two days after the filing of the application therefor. If the director of public safety disapproves the application and denies the permit, he shall mail to the applicant, within three days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 14-25)  
Sec. 24-35. - Appeal of denial. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within five days after the notice provided for in section 24-34. The city council shall act upon the appeal within 15 days after its receipt. 
(Code 1980, § 14-26)  
Sec. 24-36. - Issuance of alternate permit. 
The director of public safety, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within three days after notice of the action of the director of public safety, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-27)  
Sec. 24-37. - Contents. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(3)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(Code 1980, § 14-28)  
Sec. 24-38. - Compliance with conditions; permit to be carried by parade chairperson or leader. 
The person to whom a parade permit is issued shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading the parade shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1980, § 14-29)  
Sec. 24-39. - Revocation. 
The director of public safety shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in section 24-66. 
(Code 1980, § 14-30)  
Secs. 24-40—24-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BLOCK PARTIES 
 
Sec. 24-61. - Authorization. 
In accordance with the provisions of this article, a street or parkway may be temporarily closed and/or used for a block party or similar event to be conducted within an area in the city not exceeding one city block which is located within a residential zoning district and which event is sponsored and conducted solely by owners in or residents of the block and is not for any commercial or advertising purpose or for profit. 
(Code 1980, § 14-40)  
Sec. 24-62. - Permit required and unlawful activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in, advertise, promote, organize, conduct, control, manage, solicit, or induce participation in conducting a block party or similar event, close a street, or use a parkway for such purpose, unless a permit has first been obtained from the director of public safety or his designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the terms or conditions of a permit issued pursuant to this article or any other provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to conduct a party or gathering on premises he owns, rents, occupies, resides in or has control of after having been notified by a city public safety officer to terminate the party, because activities relating to or arising from the party on or off such premises are creating or resulting in disturbance of the peace, a public nuisance, public safety hazards, or the consumption of alcoholic liquors, beer or wine in a public place or places. 
(Code 1980, § 14-41)  
Sec. 24-63. - Permit application. 
An application for a permit for temporary street closure or use of a street or parkway for the purpose of conducting a block party or similar event shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be prepared by the applicant and submitted to the director of the department of public safety or his designee setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, residence, and home and business telephone numbers of each person sponsoring the event; 
(2)  The location, date, beginning and ending hours and purpose of such temporary street closure; 
(3)  A brief explanation of the activities which will occur during the event; and 
(4)  Such other information as the director of the department of public safety deems reasonably necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-42)  
Sec. 24-64. - Time of filing. 
The application for the permit required by this article shall be filed with the director of the department of public safety or his designee not less than seven days prior to the scheduled date of such event. The failure to file an application within such period may be grounds for denial of a permit. 
(Code 1980, § 14-43)  
Sec. 24-65. - Permit conditions. 
Any permit granted under this article shall contain such terms and conditions as the director of the department of public safety or his designee determines are reasonably necessary to reduce or minimize the dangers and hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic or public health, safety, tranquility, morals or welfare, including, but not limited to, changes or limitations in time, duration, numbers of participants, noise, sound, or any other relevant matter. 
(Code 1980, § 14-44)  
Sec. 24-66. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
A permit authorized by this article shall be issued by the director of the department of public safety or his designee, when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he concludes that the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  The time, duration, size and nature of the temporary street closure, the block party or other event will not substantially disrupt the orderly and safe movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
(2)  The concentration of persons will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection or ambulance service or the operation of any established commercial, business, government or public operations or institutions in the area; and 
(3)  The nature and time of the event will not unduly interfere with or disturb the reasonable tranquility of adjoining residential areas. 
(Code 1980, § 14-45)  
Sec. 24-67. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit for a temporary street closure, block party or other event issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the director of the department of public safety or his designee at any time when by reason of emergency, disaster, disorder, riot, traffic conditions, violation of this article or any permit conditions, violations of any other laws or ordinances, or undue burden on public services, he determines that the health, safety, tranquility, morals or welfare of the public requires such revocation. The determination of such revocation may be delivered to the applicant, if the applicant can be reasonably located, orally or in writing by personal contact, personal service, or telephone. 
(Code 1980, § 14-46)  
Sec. 24-68. - Appeal from denial of permit. 
Any person aggrieved by the denial of a block party permit shall have the right to appeal to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within five days after the denial of the permit. The city council shall act upon the appeal within 15 days after its receipt.  
Sec. 24-69. - Other temporary street closures. 
Nothing contained in this article shall limit the authority of city council to close temporarily any street within the city for any purpose it determines is proper. 
(Code 1980, § 14-47) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Department of parks and recreation, § 2-260; recreational vehicles and campers, ch. 30; littering parks, § 32-33; streets and sidewalks, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Municipal parks and recreational systems, S.C. Code 1976, § 51-15-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Closing hours for parks and recreation areas. 
(a)  Unless otherwise posted all public parks, ball fields and other recreation areas of the city shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  The parks and recreation director of the city is hereby granted authority to extend the closing hours for any public park, ball field or other recreation area of the city, or for a specific area thereof, for a particular event, taking into account the type of event or activity and the number of persons involved and other circumstances affecting such use. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an employee of the city while in the course of his official duties, to enter or remain in any public park, ball field or other recreation area of the city between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., or other hours as posted, or the later closing hour set be the parks and recreation director, if the posted closed hours, or other closing hours, have been extended or modified under the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section. 
(d)  Any person failing to abide by these closing hours by entering the premises during closing hours shall be guilty of an offense, and upon a plea of guilty, nolo contendere, or other plea; forfeiture of bond; or conviction in the municipal court shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. The violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense, and each violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 15-1)  
Sec. 26-2. - Closing of parks and recreation areas in emergencies. 
The parks and recreation director of the city or his authorized assistant in charge of a recreation area of the city is hereby granted authority and power to declare any public park, ball field or other recreation area of the city, or a portion thereof, to be closed immediately when there reasonably appears to be immediate danger of injury or damage to persons or property, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to leave the area so declared closed or having left, to return thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 15-2)  
Sec. 26-3. - Riding, driving or parking vehicles or animals in parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to ride, drive, operate or park any vehicle or animal on or over any portion of a city park, either public or private, except on paths, roads, thoroughfares or areas specifically posted or marked out for such purposes or when special permission is granted in writing by the director of the department of public safety. As used in this section, a "city park" includes, but is not limited to, all premises and facilities owned, leased or used by the city or its recreation department for recreational purposes and all improved and unimproved areas located in a block between streets having the same name and owned by the city or over which the city has obtained a right-of-way or other right of possession and use. 
(b)  A vehicle parked in a city park in violation of this section may be towed or otherwise removed pursuant to the provisions set forth in subsection 42-75(c). 
(Code 1980, § 15-3) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 8; traffic, ch. 42.  
Sec. 26-4. - Damaging park property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to mutilate, injure, pluck, break, move, tear up or carry off any plant, shrub, flower, tree, fence or other improvement growing or erected in or around any of the parks of the city, or to in any manner injure any of the walks, ways or roads thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 15-4)  
Sec. 26-5. - Rules and regulations for public parks and public facilities—Trespassing. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to promulgate necessary rules and regulations for the preservation of health, peace and order in all public parks and public facilities owned or maintained by the City of Aiken. 
(b)  Such rules and regulations shall be conspicuously posted in such public parks and public facilities and shall be deemed sufficient notice forbidding certain conduct for the purposes of this section. Any person in violation of such rules and regulations shall be subject to immediate removal from the premises and to being placed on trespass notice. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  Having violated rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this section to, without good cause or good excuse, refuse to leave immediately from the premises of a public park or public facility, after being ordered or requested to leave by any official, officer, employee or representative of the city. 
(2)  After having been previously placed on trespass notice for violation of rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this section to, without good cause or good excuse, enter upon the premises of a public park or public facility. 
(Ord. No. 07122010B, § 1, 7-12-2010) 
State Law reference— S.C. Code of 1976, §§ 5-7-30, 51-15-20  
Chapter 28 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Peddlers and hawkers, S.C. Code 1976, § 40-41-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Peddling and soliciting without registering and other unlawful activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, not having an established place of business in the city, to go upon private property in the city for the purpose of peddling or selling goods, wares, merchandise, or services or soliciting donations for any purpose, who has not been requested or invited to do so by the owners or occupants of such property, without first having registered with the director of public safety pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person not having an established place of business in the city, to peddle or sell any goods, wares, merchandise, or services or to solicit donations for any purpose upon the public streets, rights-of-way, or sidewalks located in the city without first having registered with the director of public safety pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Except as authorized by section 28-3, it shall be unlawful for any person to stand on or adjacent to a street or enter a street for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or donations from the occupants of vehicles. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit donations in any form from occupants of vehicles in violation of a permit issued by the director of the department of public safety, or to set up road blocks or in any way unreasonably impede traffic while conducting such solicitations, or to conduct such solicitations from any area other than the sidewalk, street shoulder, or other public area designated in the permit. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not he has an established place of business in the city, to engage in soliciting or peddling as described in this section any time other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. when eastern standard time is in effect in this state and 9:00 p.m. when daylight savings time is in effect in this state. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not he has an established place of business in the city, to engage in peddling or soliciting as described in this section by entering on any property on which a sign is displayed stating "no soliciting" or words of similar effect or by refusing to leave any property after having been requested to do so by the owner or any occupant. 
(Code 1980, § 16-1)  
Sec. 28-2. - Registration. 
An informational registration for the activities described in subsection 28-1(a) or (b) of this Code shall be made with the director of the department of public safety by the persons prior to engaging in such activities and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, date of birth, Social Security Number, and driver's license number of each person involved in activities regulated by this chapter. 
(2)  A complete description of all vehicles used by persons involved in any such activities, including the owner, registration information, license tag number, model, year, and color of all such vehicles. 
(3)  The complete name of the company, firm, or organization on behalf of which such activities are conducted, including the complete mailing address, location address, and telephone number of the company, firm or organization, and the name of the person or persons there with whom may be contacted by the city about any such activities. 
(4)  The name and location of the person in the city or immediate vicinity in charge of all persons conducting such activities for the company, firm, or organization. 
(5)  The date or dates for which such activities are to be conducted in the city and the location and schedule of such activities. 
(6)  A copy of a current city business license, if required, for the company, firm or organization on behalf of which such activities are conducted, or if a nonprofit organization, some documentation of that status from the South Carolina Secretary of State or similar regulatory agency. 
(7)  For such activities to be conducted on the premises of a place of business, a letter from the owner or owner's designee granting permission to engage in such activities. 
(8)  Upon completion of the registration process, the director of public safety or his or her designee shall issue a permit specifying the time period the individual listed may peddle or solicit. This time period shall not be for more than six months. 
(9)  Activities described in subsection 28-1(a) or (b) of this Code shall not be permitted until after a check of the criminal history of each person listed on the registration form has been completed. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or allow another to engage in activities described in subsection 28-1(a) or (b) of this Code prior to a criminal background check being completed. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or allow another to conduct activities described in subsection 28-1(a) or (b) of this Code if the person has been previously convicted of a felony or violation of a law or ordinance involving dishonesty. A felony is defined as a conviction for an offense considered a felony under South Carolina law. Any person that has a pending charge(s) of the same shall be prohibited from engaging in the above activities prior to the final disposition of said charges(s). For the purposes of this chapter, where there is a federal conviction or a conviction from another state, that conviction will be considered a felony if the equivalent South Carolina offense is classified as a felony. 
(Code 1980, § 16-2; Ord. No. 04112011A, § 1(Exh. A), 4-11-2011)  
Sec. 28-3. - Solicitations from occupants of vehicles, permit required. 
Any solicitations from occupants of vehicles for charitable donations as described in S.C. Code 1976, § 5-27-910 may be conducted only if the director of public safety issues a permit for such activity after receiving the information set forth in section 28-2. The director may include in the permit all such limitations and conditions as he determines are necessary to protect the health and safety of motorists, pedestrians, and those soliciting and to ensure that such solicitation does not unreasonably impede the flow of traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 16-3) 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 42.  
Sec. 28-4. - Designation of other officers by director. 
The director of public safety may designate another officer or officers in the department of public safety to discharge the duties delegated to the director in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 16-4)  
Sec. 28-5. - Other ordinances. 
Nothing contained in this chapter relieves any person of complying with or being subject to the business license ordinance or any other city ordinances, codes or regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 16-5)  
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; accumulations of trash, weeds, etc., on private property, § 22-7; utilities, ch. 44. 
State Law reference— Powers of municipalities generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; collection of garbage, S.C. Code 1976, § 44-55-1010 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11142011A, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 14, 2011, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 32-1—32-8, pertained to the same subject matter, and derived from Code 1980, §§ 18-1—18-8; Ord. No. 06112001D, § 6, adopted June 11, 2001; Ord. No. 07082002, § 1, adopted July 8, 2002; Ord. No. 07222002, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted July 22, 2002; Ord. No. 06092003A, § 1, adopted June 9, 2003; Ord. No. 04122004D, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Apr. 12, 2004; Ord. No. 06142004C, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted June 14, 2004; Ord. No. 06142004D, § 1, adopted June 14, 2004; Ord. No. 11222004, § 1, adopted Nov. 22, 2004; Ord. No. 12122005, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 12, 2005; Ord. No. 06112007C, § 1, adopted June 11, 2007; Ord. No. 06112007D, § 1, adopted June 11, 2007; Ord. No. 06162008B, § 1, adopted June 16, 2008 and Ord. No. 03222010, § 1, adopted March 22, 2010. 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Solid waste in general. 
(a)  The city, through its public services department, shall collect and dispose of residential garbage as set forth in section 32-2, residential yard trash as set forth in section 32-3, residential recycling as set forth in section 32-4, and weekend use of roll-off containers and trash trailers as set forth in section 32-5. 
(b)  The city shall provide residential garbage services and yard trash services one time per week for each residence throughout the city upon a schedule determined by the public works director. The city shall provide residential recycling services one time every two weeks for each residence throughout the city upon a schedule determined by the public works director. 
(c)  The city will charge a user fee per residence as set by city council in the annual budget process for these residential solid waste services. 
(d)  This fee will appear on the monthly city water bill. 
(e)  All residences in the city limits with an active water or sewer account must be charged the solid waste user fee. 
(f)  The city, through its public works department, shall collect and dispose of small business garbage as set forth in section 32-6 and small business recycling as set forth in section 32-7. 
(g)  The city will charge a user fee per small business as set by city council in the annual budget process and will appear on the business's monthly water bill. 
(h)  The city, through its public works department, shall contract with a private company for the collection and disposal of dumpster garbage set forth in section 32-8 and dumpster cardboard recycling set forth in section 32-9 in the historic downtown business district. The historic downtown business district, as it pertains to this solid waste ordinance, will be defined as those businesses located within the city block bound by Laurens Street, Richland Avenue, Newberry Street and Park Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 11142011A, § 1(Exh. A), 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 06242013B , § 1, 6-24-2013; Ord. No. 01122015E , § 1, 1-12-2015; Ord. No. 11142016A , §§ 1—3, 11-14-2016; Ord. No. 06102019B , § 1, 6-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-2. - Residential garbage. 
(a)  All residents must use the green roll cart that is provided by the city. No other garbage containers can be used. 
(b)  All newly constructed residences are required to obtain a green roll cart from the city for a cart fee that shall be set by city council in the annual budget process. The roll cart fee shall be paid before the residential building permit is issued. This cart will be delivered when the public services department is notified that a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(c)  All items may be disposed of in the green roll carts with the exception of yard trash pursuant to section 32-3, recyclable items pursuant to section 32-4, poisons, acids, caustics, medical waste, dead animals, explosives, automotive fluids, paints, pesticides, fertilizer, ewaste, or any item that may contain hot live coals or fire. 
(d)  If residents have more garbage than will fit into the city roll cart, it must be bagged and placed beside the roll cart at the street. 
(e)  The public services director may require residents, who consistently have extra bags outside roll carts, to purchase additional roll cart(s). 
(f)  Additional roll carts will be provided at a fee that shall be set by city council in the annual budget process. 
(g)  Additional carts will also incur an additional $5.00 user fee for each additional cart per month as follows: 
One roll cart 	Curbside service 	Included in user fee 
Two roll carts 	Curbside service 	User fee + $5.00/month 
Three roll carts 	Curbside service 	User fee + $10.00/month 
Four roll carts 	Curbside service 	User fee + $15.00/month 
 
(h)  No residence may have more than four roll carts without the permission of the public services director. 
(i)  At the discretion of the public services director, carts that become damaged, through no fault of the city, may be required to be replaced at a fee as set forth by city council in the annual budget process, which will be added to the residential monthly city water bill. 
(j)  Lost or stolen carts must be replaced at a fee that shall be set by city council in the annual budget process. If available, a refurbished cart may be provided for free. 
(k)  Carts remain the property of the city. If a resident moves, the cart is to be left at the residence. The resident is to clean the cart and leave it in the backyard for the next resident. 
(l)  Carts may be placed for pickup the night before pickup day and must be removed within 24 hours after pickup. If roll carts are out prior to, or not put back within 24 hours of pickup, city crews will return the roll cart to the house for a fee of $5.00 per incident. This fee will be billed on the monthly water bill. 
(m)  Collection routes begin at 7:00 a.m. each morning. All roll carts and other refuse must be ready for collection at that time. 
(n)  Carts must not be placed within three feet of mailboxes. 
(o)  Carts must not be placed within three feet of yard trash piles. 
(p)  The roll cart lid must be closed and latched when it is placed at the street. 
(q)  Optional backyard service (i.e. a city employee will roll the roll cart out to the collection truck, dump it, and return it back to the residence) is no longer offered. Residents currently signed up for this additional service may be allowed to continue with the following restrictions until the water account is closed or assigned to a new resident: 
One roll cart 	Backyard service 	Additional $5.00/month 
Two roll carts 	Backyard service 	Additional $15.00/month 
Three roll carts 	Backyard service 	Additional $25.00/month 
Four roll carts 	Backyard service 	Additional $35.00/month 
 
(1)  No roll cart can be serviced by city personnel if service requires opening a door, gate, or similar obstacle. City collection personnel will not enter enclosures, fences, carports, or garages in order to service any roll cart. 
(2)  City collection personnel will not enter yards when dogs are present. 
(3)  City personnel will only retrieve a backyard service cart if the cart is not overfilled. The resident will be responsible for removing the garbage to a level that the cart can be rolled without spillage. 
(4)  If a resident with backyard service has more garbage than will fit in the city roll cart they must place all additional bags at the street for collection themselves. City collection personnel will not carry any item from residents' backyard to the truck. Residents may put roll cart(s) and extra bags at the curb for regular pickup as long as they adhere to any time restrictions for placing garbage at the public right-of-way. No backyard fees will be discarded as a result. 
(5)  The city is not responsible for any broken or missing items on residents' property. 
(6)  The public services director may cancel customers' backyard service if there is any safety hazard to the city personnel present. 
(7)  Due to medical necessity or hardship, backyard service may be available and the additional backyard service fee waived if approved by the public services director, or his designee, in their sole discretion, subject to review by the city manager who shall have final authority in this decision. 
(Ord. No. 11142011A, § 1(Exh. A), 11-14-2011)  
Sec. 32-3. - Residential yard trash. 
Residential yard trash is defined as the collection of vegetative materials from residential property. This type trash may include, but is not limited to, trimmings, tree branches, pine straw, leaves, and grass clippings. These items, created through normal and routine residential property maintenance, may be placed by residents beside the road right-of-way in front of the property they own for curb collection provided that: 
(1)  Yard trash must be placed on or beside the paved portion of the right-of-way. In no event can this trash block the paved portion of the right-of-way. In no event can this trash be placed under utility lines or tree limbs with less than 20 feet of overhead clearance. 
(2)  On an unpaved street, yard trash must be placed beside the traveled portion of the right-of-way, but not in it. 
(3)  All yard trash must be placed either on owners' or tenants' property, or directly in front of and on the same side of the street as owners' or tenants' property. The City of Aiken is not responsible for the normal wear and tear to property associated with the collection of yard trash. No person shall place yard trash in front of, or on, property they do not own or lease from an owner. It shall be unlawful to place yard trash on, or within three feet of, the water meter, fire hydrant, or any other obstacle. Any damages to city equipment or infrastructure due to improper placement of yard debris may be charged to the customers' water account. When there is no active water account the charges may be levied on the owners' property taxes. 
(4)  No person shall place yard trash in, or adjacent to, any public or private park, or parkway, in the city. 
(5)  No person shall place yard trash in any location where it will cause a traffic hazard. If the trash as placed is deemed to be causing an unsafe condition by the public safety director, or his department designee, it may be removed by public services personnel and the resident may be charged in accordance with the prohibited material fee schedule in subsection (10). 
(6)  Where utility lines, tree limbs, road configuration, or any other safety concern makes it impracticable to locate the yard trash pile either on owners' or tenants' property, or directly in front of and on the same side of the street as owners' or tenants' property, at the public services director's discretion, the City of Aiken may identify an alternate location. Such alternate locations may include, but are not limited to, community piles with neighboring property owners. 
(7)  All limbs or other vegetative debris must be cut in lengths of six feet or less. 
(8)  Yard trash piles are limited to one pile per property. The maximum length of a yard trash pile is 12 feet. Yard trash piles are required to be built into compact mounds that can be efficiently collected. The public services director, or his department designee, may determine if a yard trash pile requires modification by the property owner or tenant before being collected. During leaf season, yard trash piles, consisting of predominately leaves, may exceed the 12-foot maximum length. The public services director, or his department designee, will determine when leaf season begins and ends each year. 
(9)  Yard trash piles that exceed either the maximum number per property or 12 feet in length are subject to additional fees in accordance with the special collections fee schedule. Special collection fees shall be set by city council in the annual budget process. The fees may be charged to the customers' water account. When there is no active water account the charges may be levied on the owners' property taxes. 
(10)  Following a recognized weather event or natural disaster, at the public services director's discretion, the City of Aiken may allow for oversized piles with no additional charges. During such events the City of Aiken may not be able to maintain a regular collection schedule. 
(11)  Collection begins at 7:00 a.m. and all yard trash must be placed at the curb before that time. 
(12)  Furniture, including, but not limited to, box springs, chairs, tables, white goods (i.e., appliances), and metal goods shall be considered a special collection. These special collections must be scheduled with the public services department. Special collection fees shall be added to the monthly city water bill. When there is no active water account the charges may be levied on the owners' property taxes. Special collection fees shall be set by city council in the annual budget process. The cost to pick up unscheduled special collections shall be double the normal special collection fee. 
(13)  No other materials, refuse, garbage, or waste may be mixed with residential yard trash for pickup. Railroad ties, landscaping timbers, treated lumber, any construction debris, building materials, lumber, brick, dirt, shingles, or any other similar materials shall be removed by the property owner. Tenants and property owners must ensure that debris left by any contractor is removed and properly disposed, whether by contractors, property owners, or tenants. 
(14)  If prohibited items, or vegetative materials mixed with prohibited items, are placed at the curb, tenants or property owners will be charged double the special collection fees through the customers' water account. When there is no active water account the charges may be levied on the owners' property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 11142011A, § 1(Exh. A), 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 02102020 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 32-4. - Residential recycling. 
(a)  The city residential recycling program is voluntary. 
(b)  Recycling collection begins at 7:00 a.m. All recyclable materials must be placed at the public right-of-way before that time. 
(c)  The city will provide the residents with a blue recycling roll cart for the collection of the recyclable materials. 
(d)  This blue roll cart must be placed at the curb for pickup. If there is no curb, the roll cart must be placed at the edge of the roadway in front of owners' own property. 
(e)  These blue roll carts remain city property. If a property owner sells the property, the recycling roll cart is to be left at the property. The owner must clean the roll cart and secure it inside the garage, or inside the residence if no garage is constructed on the property. 
(f)  Roll carts can only be put out the night before pickup and must be removed within 24 hours of pickup. If roll carts are out prior to, or not put back within, 24 hours of pickup, city crews will return the roll cart to the house for a fee of $5.00 per incident, and billed on the monthly water bill. 
(g)  Only these items can be placed in the blue recycling roll carts: 
(1)  Steel cans. 
(2)  Aluminum cans. 
(3)  Glass jars and bottles. 
(4)  #1 plastic—PET plastic (e.g., drink bottles). 
(5)  #2 plastic—HDPE plastic (e.g., milk jugs, laundry detergent jugs). 
(6)  Newspapers. 
(7)  Magazines. 
(8)  Cardboard. 
(9)  White paper. 
(h)  No other material may be placed in the recycling roll cart for city collection, except for additional materials or objects that are approved for city-wide recycling by the public services director. 
(i)  If recyclable roll carts contain other materials not on the accepted items list, none may be collected until the property owner or tenant removes the unapproved materials. 
(Ord. No. 11142011A, § 1(Exh. A), 11-14-2011)  
Sec. 32-5. - Weekend use of roll-off containers and trash trailers by city residents with existing residential city utility accounts. 
The city, from time to time, may make roll-off containers or trash trailers used during the week in the solid waste operation available on weekends. These items will not be available during the week. These trailers or containers may be used by the residents provided that: 
(1)  The use is scheduled at least two weeks in advance. 
(2)  They are not used for any commercial purpose. 
(3)  The resident is charged according to the special collection fee schedule in subsection 32-3(8). Residents that only put yard trash in the trailer will not be charged the user fee. 
(4)  The special user fee will be added to the resident's water bill. 
(5)  The resident will be given a list of use instructions and permitted materials that can be put into the trailer. 
(6)  The resident is responsible for any tipping fee incurred due to prohibited material being put in the container or trailer. 
(7)  The container or trailer must be placed on the resident's property or on the edge of the roadway in such fashion that does not cause a traffic problem. 
(8)  The container or trailer will be delivered by 5:00 p.m. on Friday. 
(9)  The container or trailer may be removed as early as 6:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(10)  Residents will not be allowed to move the container or trailer. 
(Ord. No. 11142011A, § 1(Exh. A), 11-14-2011)  
Sec. 32-6. - Small business garbage. 
Small businesses using roll carts will pay a solid waste user fee per month as set forth by city council in the annual budget process. This fee pays for one curbside collection of garbage per week pursuant to this section. Included in this user fee is one collection of yard trash and recyclables per week. Businesses may use 90-gallon roll carts provided that: 
(1)  All small businesses must use a city-provided roll cart. No other garbage carts may be used. 
(2)  All items may be disposed of in the roll carts with the exception of yard trash pursuant to section 32-3, recyclable items pursuant to section 32-7, poisons, acids, caustics, medical waste, dead animals, explosives, automotive fluids, paints, pesticides, fertilizer, ewaste, or any item that may contain hot live coals or fire. 
(3)  If the small business has more garbage than will fit into their roll carts it must be bagged and placed beside the roll cart at the street. 
(4)  The public services director may require small businesses that consistently have extra bags beside their roll cart(s) to use additional carts or contract collection services other than the city for the use of a commercial garbage dumpster instead of the 90-gallon roll carts. 
(5)  Additional roll carts will be provided at a fee as set forth by city council in the annual budget process per cart. Additional carts will also incur a $5.00 user fee for each additional cart each month as follows: 
One roll cart 	Curbside service 	Included in user fee 
Two roll carts 	Curbside service 	User fee + $5.00/month 
Three roll carts 	Curbside service 	User fee + $10.00/month 
Four roll carts 	Curbside service 	User fee + $15.00/month 
 
(6)  No small business will have more than four roll carts without the permission of the public services director. 
(7)  At the discretion of the public services director, carts that are damaged by the small business will be replaced by the city at a fee as set forth by city council in the annual budget process per roll cart replaced. This cost will be added to the small business monthly city water bill. 
(8)  Lost or stolen carts must be replaced at a fee as set forth by city council in the annual budget process per cart. If available, a refurbished cart may be provided for free. 
(9)  These roll carts remain city property. If a business closes or moves, the cart must be left at this location. The owner must clean the cart and leave it behind the building on the premises. 
(10)  Carts may only be put out the night before pickup and must be removed within 24 hours after pickup. If these roll carts are out prior to, or not put back within 24 hours of pickup, city crews will return the cart to the business for a fee of $5.00 per incident, and billed on the monthly water bill. 
(11)  Collection routes begin at 7:00 a.m. each morning. All roll carts and other refuse must be ready for collection at that time. 
(12)  Carts must not be placed within three feet of mailboxes. 
(13)  Carts must not be placed within three feet of yard trash accumulations. 
(14)  The lid on the cart must be closed and latched while it is at the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 11142011A, § 1(Exh. A), 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 01122015E , § 1, 1-12-2015; Ord. No. 06102019B , § 1, 6-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-7. - Small business recycling. 
(a)  The city commercial recycling program is voluntary. 
(b)  Recycling collection begins at 7:00 a.m. All recyclable materials must be placed at the public right-of-way before that time. 
(c)  The city will provide the businesses with a blue recycling roll cart for the collection of the recyclable materials. 
(d)  This blue roll cart must be placed at the curb for pickup. If there is no curb, the bin must be placed at the edge of the roadway in front of owners' own property. 
(e)  These blue roll carts remain city property. If a business owner sells the property, the recycling roll cart is to be left at the property. The owner must clean the roll cart and secure it inside the business or behind the business. 
(f)  Roll carts can only be put out the night before pickup and must be removed within 24 hours of pickup. If roll carts are out prior to, or not put back within, 24 hours of pickup, city crews will return the roll cart to the business for a fee of $5.00 per incident, and billed on the monthly water bill. 
(g)  Only these items can be placed in the blue recycling roll carts: 
(1)  Steel cans. 
(2)  Aluminum cans. 
(3)  Glass jars and bottles. 
(4)  #1 plastic—PET plastic (e.g., drink bottles). 
(5)  #2 plastic—HDPE plastic (e.g., milk jugs, laundry detergent jugs). 
(6)  Newspapers. 
(7)  Magazines. 
(8)  Cardboard. 
(9)  White paper. 
(h)  No other material may be placed in the recycling roll cart for city collection, except for additional materials or objects that are approved for city-wide recycling by the public services director. 
(i)  If recyclable roll carts contain other materials not on the accepted items list, none may be collected until the business owner or tenant removes the unapproved materials. 
(Ord. No. 11142011A, § 1(Exh. A), 11-14-2011)  
Sec. 32-8. - Historic downtown business district dumpster garbage collection. 
(a)  All businesses located in the historic downtown business district as defined in section 32-1(h) who are not covered as a small business garbage customer as defined in section 32-6 will pay a solid waste fee per month as set forth by city council in the annual budget process. This fee pays for the shared use of a garbage dumpster owned and maintained by the city which will be emptied on a regular basis by a private contractor. 
(b)  The fee for this service shall be determined by the public services director based upon the usage rates for each business pursuant to the fees set forth by city council in the annual budget process. Any appeals regarding the fees charged may be submitted to the city manager for review. The dumpster fees shall be included in the business's monthly water bill. 
(c)  All businesses needing garbage dumpster service in the historic downtown business district as defined in section 32-1(h) shall be required to use the garbage dumpsters owned and maintained by the city. 
(d)  All items may be disposed in the garbage dumpsters provided with the exception of cardboard pursuant to section 32-9, poisons, acids, caustics, medical waste, dead animals, explosives, automotive fluids, paints, pesticides, fertilizer, e-waste, any item that may contain hot live coals or fire, or any item that is prohibited by the public services director. 
(Ord. No. 06242013B , § 1, 6-24-2013)  
Sec. 32-9. - Downtown district cardboard dumpster recycling. 
(a)  All businesses located in the downtown district as defined in section 32-1(h), that are not covered as a small business recycling customer in section 32-7, will pay a cardboard dumpster recycling fee per month. This fee pays for the business's shared use of a cardboard dumpster that is owned and maintained by the city and which will be emptied by a private contractor. 
(b)  The fee for this cardboard dumpster service will be determined by the public services director and will be based on the frequency of use. Any appeals regarding this frequency of use may be submitted to the city manager for review. The cardboard dumpster fee will be charged on the business's monthly water bill. 
(c)  All businesses needing cardboard dumpster service in the downtown district, as defined in section 32-1(h), shall use the city provided dumpsters. No other dumpsters may be used. 
(d)  Cardboard is the only item that can be placed in the recycling dumpster. No other material may be placed in the recycling dumpster for collection, except for additional materials or objects that are approved by the public services director. 
(Ord. No. 06242013B , § 1, 6-24-2013)  
Secs. 32-10—32-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LITTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Littering, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-700; Litter Control Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 44-67-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 32-31. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aircraft means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
Authorized private receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in article I of this chapter. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Litter means garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined in this chapter, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited, as prohibited in this article, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach or recreation area set aside for use by the public. 
Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1980, § 18-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 32-32. - Littering public places generally. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in public receptacles, authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. 
(Code 1980, § 18-19) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 32-33. - Littering parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city, except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1980, § 18-20) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 26.  
Sec. 32-34. - Littering fountains, ponds, lakes, etc. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 18-21)  
Sec. 32-35. - Littering occupied private property. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Code 1980, § 18-22)  
Sec. 32-36. - Littering vacant lots. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not. 
(Code 1980, § 18-23)  
Sec. 32-37. - Removal of litter when premises vacated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person upon vacating or removing from any dwelling, storeroom or any other building to fail to remove all litter refuse from such buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto or to fail to place the buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto in a thoroughly sanitary condition within 24 hours after the premises have been vacated. 
(Code 1980, § 18-24)  
Sec. 32-38. - Throwing litter from vehicles. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. It shall be presumed that the driver of a motor vehicle from which litter is thrown or deposited upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property within the city, is the person who did such wrongful act. Such presumption is a rebuttable presumption which the driver may overcome by evidence showing that he was not, in fact, the person who threw or deposited such litter as provided in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 18-25) 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 42.  
Sec. 32-39. - Vehicle or vehicle loads causing litter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport by vehicle within the corporate limits of the city any loose material, unless the material is covered or secured so that it will not be blown or otherwise fall from the vehicle onto streets, public places or private property. The lack of a covering for and the securing of such loose material while the vehicle is in motion shall itself constitute a violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move within the corporate limits of the city any vehicle with wheels or tires which carry onto and deposit onto any street or other public place litter or a foreign matter or substance which defaces the street or public place. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to city vehicles while collecting garbage, trash or refuse but shall apply while such vehicles are in transit to dispose of garbage, trash or refuse. 
(Code 1980, § 18-26) 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 42.  
Sec. 32-40. - Dropping litter from aircraft. 
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Code 1980, § 18-27)  
Sec. 32-41. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1980, § 18-28)  
Sec. 32-42. - Litter from business establishments not to be placed in sidewalk trash receptacles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any litter from any business establishment in the sidewalk trash receptacles provided for the convenience of pedestrians in preventing the littering of public sidewalks. 
(Code 1980, § 18-29) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 32-43. - Sweeping litter into public places. 
(a)  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any place or private sidewalk or driveway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit floor sweepings from any business establishment on the public sidewalk, in the gutter or anywhere else within the public street right-of-way. 
(Code 1980, § 18-30) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 32-44. - Duty of owners or occupants of abutting property to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Code 1980, § 18-31)  
Chapter 34 - SPECIAL SALES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, ch. 36. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GARAGE SALES 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Defined. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "garage sale" means the sale of any new or used personal property, which sale is conducted on or about the premises of a private residence or in any residential zoning area that permits single-family residential use, by the owner or occupant and which sale is open to the public. 
(Code 1980, § 19-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-32. - Permit required; duration of sale; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale, without first obtaining a permit from the city for each sale and such permit shall be posted at the site of the sale. The maximum period of each permit shall be two consecutive days and the maximum number of permits allowed per year shall be two for any one-family unit, location, lot or premises. 
(b)  The fee for a permit required by this section shall be as prescribed by ordinance and all such ordinances shall continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 19-12)  
Sec. 34-33. - Parking requirements. 
Parking shall be provided for all persons attending a garage sale in a manner that will not affect the free flow of traffic on a public street near such sale. 
(Code 1980, § 19-13) 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 42.  
Sec. 34-34. - Signs. 
Only one nonilluminated sign, not to exceed two square feet, may be posted advertising a garage sale and such sign may only be placed on the property where the sale is being conducted. 
(Code 1980, § 19-14) 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 4.  
Sec. 34-35. - Merchandise not to be purchased or brought on premises for sale. 
No new or used merchandise shall be purchased or brought on the premises for the purpose of selling such new or used merchandise at a garage sale. 
(Code 1980, § 19-15)  
Sec. 34-36. - Display of goods for sale. 
Goods for sale at a garage sale shall not be displayed on public property, nor shall such goods be displayed on private property in a manner which will materially impede visibility of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on or off the premises. 
(Code 1980, § 19-16)  
Sec. 34-37. - Hours of sale; Sunday operation prohibited. 
A garage sale shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. No garage sale shall be conducted on Sunday. 
(Code 1980, § 19-17)  
Sec. 34-38. - Use of public address system prohibited. 
The use of a public address system is prohibited at garage sales. 
(Code 1980, § 19-18)  
Sec. 34-39. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages of any type shall be served or given away on or near the premises where a garage sale is held. 
(Code 1980, § 19-19) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Alcohol and alcoholic beverages, S.C. Code 1976, title 61.  
Sec. 34-40. - Inspections to enforce article. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, duly authorized representatives and employees of the city shall have the right of entry to any premise showing evidence of a garage sale and may close the premise from such a sale where any provision of this article is being violated. 
(Code 1980, § 19-20)  
Chapter 36 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement saved from repeal, § 1-5(6); any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city or establishing and prescribing street grades saved from repeal, § 1-5(9); banners extending across streets or parks, § 4-2; deposit or distribution of handbills on or in public places, § 4-32; drinking of beer or wine in public places, § 6-4; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; parades and other assemblies, ch. 24; permit for use of streets, etc., for demonstrations or picketing, § 24-2; other temporary street closures for block parties, § 24-69; parks and recreation, ch. 26; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 28; recreational vehicles and campers, ch. 30; littering public places generally, § 32-32; litter from business establishments not to be placed in sidewalk trash receptacles, § 32-42; sweeping litter into public places, § 32-43; special sales, ch. 34; telecommunications, ch. 40; conditions on street occupancy for telecommunications, § 40-13; traffic, ch. 42; driving on one-way streets, § 42-36; driving on play streets, § 42-37; driving on sidewalk, § 42-38; regulations for specific streets, § 42-64; riding bicycles on certain sidewalks prohibited, § 42-102; trains blocking street, § 42-152; utilities, ch. 44; vehicles for hire, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Streets and sidewalks, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-27-10 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Injuring streets or removing materials therefrom. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or plow up any street or to dig, or to cause any digging to be done, in any of the streets, roads, walks, paths or pavements within the corporate limits of the city, or to remove or cause to be removed therefrom any sand, clay, dirt or other earth, without the written permission of the director of public works. This section shall not apply to such work as may be done under the lawful direction of the city authorities. 
(Code 1980, § 20-2)  
Sec. 36-2. - Permit to build sidewalk or coping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build any concrete or other permanent sidewalk or coping in the streets of the city without first getting permission from the director of public works, whose duty it will be to designate the proper lines, width, levels, etc., to be followed in constructing such sidewalks or coping. 
(Code 1980, § 20-5)  
Sec. 36-3. - Cutting or removing curb or sidewalk—Permit and bond. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cut away or remove any curb or sidewalk, or any part thereof, in the city, unless and until a permit therefor has been granted by the director of public works. 
(b)  Before any permit shall be granted for the opening of or cutting of any curb or sidewalk in the city, the person making application for such permit may be required by the director of public works to deposit with the city a cash bond in such sum as may be estimated by the director of public works to insure the maintenance of lights and barricades during the period of construction work, the refilling of such opening and the repaving thereof, as is provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 20-6)  
Sec. 36-4. - Same—Maintenance of barricades and lights. 
Any person cutting or removing any sidewalk or curb in the city shall protect such opening by means of proper barricades and lights and maintain such barricades and lights during the period of the construction work. Any opening found not properly protected shall immediately be closed by the director of public works and the cost thereof charged against the owner of the abutting property. 
(Code 1980, § 20-7)  
Sec. 36-5. - Same—Refilling opening and replacing pavement. 
After the opening or cut has been made pursuant to a permit issued under section 36-3, the person receiving the permit shall refill the opening or cut and shall repave the filled opening with the same type of material as the surrounding surface or the same type of material as cut or excavated. Such work of refilling and repaving shall be done in such manner as is prescribed by the director of public works and, upon failure so to do, the city may cause such work to be done and the cost thereof shall be charged against the owner of the abutting property. 
(Code 1980, § 20-8)  
Sec. 36-6. - Rights-of-way generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon any public pavement, walk, sidewalk, street, or bicycle path in the city any open gate or to swing upon, it, or to place it or allow it to remain on any public right-of-way, or to allow any motor vehicle, bicycle, or other wheeled vehicle, horse, or other animal to remain upon any public right-of-way, pavement, walk, sidewalk, street, or bicycle path other than in a designated parking space or rack. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place upon any public right-of-way, street, highway, public road, or traveled place, or any part thereof within the corporate limits of the city, by placing or allowing to remain thereon any object, item, or wheeled vehicle not in actual and immediate use, or any other article; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall deprive any person who may be undertaking a city-permitted construction project, of the use of such number of feet, not to exceed 20 feet, from the pavement and the sidewalk as may be allowed by the director of public safety, for the temporary convenience of placing timber, brick, or such other building material as the public safety director may deem proper. 
(Code 1980, § 20-10; Ord. No. 04092007E, § 1, 4-9-2007)  
Sec. 36-7. - Display of merchandise. 
It shall be unlawful in the Downtown Business [DB]-zoned area of the city for any merchant or other person to place upon any public right-of-way, street, or sidewalk within the corporate limits of the city articles of merchandise or other things for display or sale of any kind further than two feet from the store front. This section shall not prevent any person from engaging in any business upon private property adjacent to, but not forming a part of such public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way; nor shall this section prohibit organized nonprofit groups from conducting, upon a public safety director-approved specified day or days, an annual sale of T.B. Christmas seals, buddy poppies or other like articles, for charitable or eleemosynary purposes and not for profit, upon such public sidewalks rights-of-way as may be designated by the director of public safety, upon application to him, at such points as will cause the least obstruction to the regular flow of traffic. The director may also approve seasonal sidewalk sales, not to exceed four in any given calendar year. Furthermore, nothing in this article shall prohibit other uses of public rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, sidewalk cafes, preapproved streetscaping objects, park benches, and any temporary directional commercial sign boards preapproved by the public safety director, in consultation with the planning department director. 
(Code 1980, § 20-11; Ord. No. 04092007E, § 1, 4-9-2007)  
Sec. 36-8. - Sale of food prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any merchant or other person to sell food from vehicles on the public streets of the city, or to sell food from vending machines on streets or sidewalks within the corporate limits of the city, unless otherwise permitted pursuant to section 3.5.7 of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 20-12; Ord. No. 07102017A , § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-2017)  
Sec. 36-9. - Deposit of injurious substances on street; removal. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove such material or cause it to be removed. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. 
(Code 1980, § 20-13)  
Sec. 36-10. - Use of public streets, alleys, ways and places by utilities. 
(a)  Permission to use streets required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, install, maintain or operate electric, gas, telephone, cablevision or other utility lines, poles, wires, equipment or facilities in, on, over, under, upon or across any public street, alley, way or place in the city without first obtaining a franchise or permit from the city council consenting to such use of the public streets, alleys, ways and places. A franchise or permit consenting to such use may be granted by the city council only through the adoption of an ordinance which prescribes the term, fees and conditions for use. 
(b)  Undergrounding of utilities. Where economically feasible, all electric, gas, telephone, cablevision and utility lines, wires, equipment and facilities crossing public streets, alleys, ways and places in the city shall be placed underground. 
(c)  Trimming of trees. No trees located in public streets, alleys, ways or places in the city shall be cut, destroyed or trimmed by any person except upon prior notice to and approval by the city horticulturist. 
(d)  Application to franchises. Subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall apply to and be a provision in all franchises and permits granted by the city council at any time authorizing the use of the public streets, alleys, ways and places as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Consent, franchise or business license fee required. The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance approving the agreement and shall be based on gross revenues derived from activities in the municipality, the length of lines installed in streets and public places, or other formula deemed appropriate by council. No consent fee or franchise fee shall be construed to be in lieu of a business license tax based on gross revenue unless specifically provided by ordinance. Credits for business license taxes paid may be applied to fees set by ordinance granting consent or a franchise when specifically authorized by the ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 20-14) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 44.  
Sec. 36-11. - Outdoor displays and cafes. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability of section. The provisions of this section shall apply to the establishment, operation and maintenance of outdoor cafes within the central business district. The purpose of this section is to promote the general economic development and atmosphere of the central business district for the benefit of all businesses and citizens located there, and no rights of individuals or individual businesses are created in this section. The city manager shall have broad discretion to grant, modify or revoke permits issued pursuant to this section in the interests of improving the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the zoning official or other person authorized by the city manager to enforce this section. 
Design requirements means the standards adopted for the central business district with this section that guide design and materials in encroachment areas. 
Encroachment means stands, tables, umbrellas, chairs, displays, objects related to the business, or other items for sale on the public right-of-way, sidewalk or common area on public property. 
Outdoor cafe means the placing, locating or permitting of the placing or locating of chairs and tables on the right-of-way, such as sidewalks, adjacent to a business licensed to operate as an eating establishment where food and/or other refreshments are served, or upon public property within designated areas. 
Sidewalk means that area of the public right-of-way between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines reserved for pedestrian traffic, not including street crossings. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-13. Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Permit required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged in the business of running an outdoor cafe, or place any items upon the sidewalks or public property, in the central business district in the city unless he shall hold a currently valid permit issued under the terms of this section. 
(2)  Permits shall be issued only to validly licensed businesses that wish to provide tables and chairs related to their business on the public property adjacent to their businesses for use by the general public. 
(e)  Application for permit; fee. 
(1)  Application for the permit required by this section shall be made at the department of public safety on a form deemed appropriate by the zoning official. Such application shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
a.  Name, home and business address and telephone number of the applicant, and the name and address of the owner of the business if other than the applicant. 
b.  Name, home address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's encroachment. 
c.  A copy of a valid business license to operate a business establishment adjacent to the public property which is the subject of the application. 
d.  Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, protecting the licensee and the city from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the encroachment permit. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date without 30 days' advance written notice to the city. The policy shall be a minimum required amount, or higher if deemed necessary by the city's risk management division. 
e.  Proof of any required ABC license, health permits or other state permits for the business involved. 
(2)  Not later than 15 days after the filing of a completed application for a temporary encroachment permit, the applicant shall be notified by the zoning administrator of the decision on the issuance or denial of the permit. Upon issuance of the permit, an annual fee set by the city manager shall be due and payable. This fee is in addition to the business license fee required for operation within the city. 
(3)  Application for a permit shall be made at the department of public safety within 48 hours of written notice for failure to obtain a permit. Where the same owner, occupant or person responsible has been given notice for the same violation at the same location within the previous 180 days, such requirements of written notice may be waived and legal proceedings commenced immediately. 
(f)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  No merchant, vendor, business or property owner shall: 
a.  Place any items for sale or other equipment, tables or chairs on any portion of the public property other than that directly adjacent to the existing place of business without the written consent of adjacent landowners and businesses. In no event shall such items be placed in the landscaped areas or extend beyond the authorized 25 feet from each side of the applicant's business. 
b.  Block or restrict the passageway to less than four feet in width, or block ingress or egress to or from any building. In areas of congested pedestrian activity, the zoning administrator is authorized to require a wider pedestrian path, as circumstances dictate. 
c.  Sublicense the encroachment separately to nonoccupants of the premises. 
d.  Place objects around the perimeter of an area occupied by tables and chairs which would have the effect of forming a physical or visual barrier. 
e.  Use tables, chairs, umbrellas and any other objects of such quality, design, materials and workmanship which are not authorized by the administrator. 
f.  Use umbrellas or other decorative materials which are not fire-retardant, pressure-treated or manufactured of fire resistive material. 
g.  Fail to secure permission of the landlord where a building has multiple occupants. 
h.  Sound or permit the sounding of any device on the public property which produces a loud noise, or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device in violation of the noise regulations of the city. 
i.  Fail to pick up, remove and dispose of all trash or refuse left by the business on the public right-of-way. 
j.  Store, park or leave any vehicle, truck or trailer within the encroachment area. 
(2)  The encroachment permit is a temporary license which may be denied, suspended or revoked for any conduct which is contrary to the provisions of this section or for conduct of the business in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the operator's or the public's health, safety or welfare. No property right is created by this section, and the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(g)  Form and conditions of permits. The permit required by this section shall be issued on a form deemed suitable by the zoning administrator. In addition to naming the permittee and any other information deemed appropriate by the administrator, the permit shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  Each permit shall be effective for one year, from July 1 to June 30, subject to annual renewal, unless revoked or suspended prior to expiration. 
(2)  The permit issued shall be personal to the permittee only and shall not be transferable in any manner. 
(3)  The permit may be suspended by the administrator when necessary to clear the public property for public safety for a community or special event authorized by a permit issued by the city. 
(4)  The city manager may require the temporary removal of items within the encroachment area when street, sidewalk, common area or utility repairs necessitate such action. 
(5)  The permit shall be specifically limited to the area shown on the plat diagram attached to the permit application. As a condition of approval, the city may reduce and otherwise reconfigure the proposed area and the number of requested chairs, tables, and items within the encroachment area. 
(6)  The encroachment area covered by the permit shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance at all times, and the area shall be cleared of all debris on a periodic basis during the day, and again at the close of each business day. 
(7)  No tables or chairs or any other parts of the business shall be attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign or other fixtures, curb or sidewalk within or near the permitted area. No additional outdoor seating authorized under this section shall be used for calculating seating requirements pertaining to location of, application for or issuance of an ABC license for any establishment, or be used as the basis for computing required seating for restaurants and dining rooms, or as grounds for claiming exemption from such requirements under the provisions of any city ordinance or state law. 
(8)  The issuance of a permit does not grant or infer vested rights to use of the area by the permittee. The city retains the right to deny the issuance of a permit or the renewal of a permit for any reason. 
(9)  Tables, chairs, umbrellas and any other objects provided shall be maintained in a clean and attractive appearance and shall be kept safe and in good repair at all times. 
(10)  The city retains the right to suspend the privilege of using glass containers within the encroachment area during major festivals and events and when streets are closed. The use of glass containers will be revoked if an incident jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of customers or the general public. Any violation of state or local laws will also result in a revocation of this privilege. Repeated offenses may result in revocation or denial of the encroachment permit. 
(11)  The serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages on city sidewalks and public property must be in compliance with applicable regulations of the state alcoholic beverage control commission and with applicable provisions of the South Carolina Code. The serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages in sidewalk encroachments is limited to patrons seated at tables. The serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages on other public property is not restricted to patrons seated at tables, provided the configuration and use of the encroachment does not result in undue interference with the public's safe access and use of the surrounding space. 
(12)  The city may require the posting or placement of the permit and relevant notices to facilitate the administration and enforcement of this section. 
(h)  Denial, suspension or revocation of permit; removal of property by city. 
(1)  Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation; removal of property by city. The administrator or his designee may deny, revoke or suspend a permit issued under this section at any time for any business authorized in the city if it is found that: 
a.  Any necessary business or health permit has been suspended, revoked or canceled. 
b.  The permittee does not have insurance in force which is correct and effective in the minimum required amount. 
c.  Changing conditions of pedestrian or vehicular traffic cause congestion necessitating removal of the encroachment. Such decision shall be based upon findings of the administrator that the minimum four-foot pedestrian path is insufficient under existing circumstances and represents a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
d.  The permittee has failed to correct violations of this section or conditions of his permit upon receipt of the administrator's notice of the violation delivered in writing to the permittee. 
e.  The permittee has failed to take positive actions to prohibit violations from reoccurring. 
f.  The permittee has failed to make modifications upon receipt of the administrator's notice to make such modifications delivered in writing to the permittee. Tables, chairs and other vestiges of the business may be removed by the department of public works, and a reasonable fee charged for labor, transportation and storage, should the permittee fail to remove the items within 36 hours of receipt of the zoning administrator's final notice to do so for any reason provided for under this section. If the action is taken based on subsection (h)(1)b or c of this section, the action shall become effective upon the receipt of such notice and the permittee shall have four hours to remove the items. 
(2)  Notice of denial or revocation. Upon denial or revocation, the zoning administrator shall give notice of such action to the applicant or the permittee, in writing, stating the action which has been taken and the reason therefore. The action shall be effective upon giving such notice to the permittee. 
(3)  Appeals. The permittee shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city official to the city manager within five working days from receipt of notice. An appeal does not stay the denial or revocation of the encroachment permit. The hearing shall be held within two working days from the date of notice of the request. The permittee or applicant may be represented by an attorney and may present witnesses, affidavits and any relevant documentary evidence. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The city manager or his designee shall notify the permittee or applicant of his determination in writing, and such determination shall constitute the final decision by the city in the matter. 
(Code 1980, § 20-15)  
Sec. 36-12. - Newsracks in the central business district. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability of section. The provisions of this section shall apply to the placement and maintenance of newsracks and modular newsracks within the central business district. The purpose of this section is to promote the general economic development and atmosphere of the central business district for the benefit of all businesses and citizens located there, and no rights of individuals or individual businesses are created in this section. The city manager shall have discretion, consistent with the provisions in this section, to grant, modify or revoke permits issued pursuant to this section in the interests of improving the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Location requirements. The city manager shall determine where newsracks and modular newsracks shall be located in the central business district. Initially, there shall be 11 modular newsracks locations [may be more than one modular newsrack] placed at or near the locations set forth on the map which is attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference. These modular newsracks shall be installed within six months of council's adoption of this ordinance. In determining future location requirements, the city manager shall establish objective criteria relating to the following: surrounding uses likely to generate a demand for periodicals and other material customarily supplied through newsracks, distances between locations, and the visual compatibility of newsracks and modular newsracks with surrounding facades and streetscape improvements. 
(c)  Design requirements. No person other than the city shall place or use for distribution of material any newsrack or modular newsrack on any public sidewalk, public park, or other public space owned by the city in the central business district. In determining design requirements, the city manager shall consider compatibility of design features with prevailing facade treatments and with streetscape improvements to the full extent modular newsracks having such features are reasonably available on the market. 
(d)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Central business district. The district bounded on the south by Colleton Avenue, then turning north on Laurens Street, then turning west on Park Avenue, then turning north on Hayne Avenue, then turning west on Hayne Avenue, then turning north on Greenville Street, then turning east on Abbeville Avenue, then turning south on Union Street and returning to Colleton Avenue. The district shall include all properties within the above described and all properties on both sides of the streets and avenues that comprise the central business district. This definition shall apply for purposes of this section only and is not to be confused with the downtown business district referred to in the City of Aiken Zoning Ordinance. 
Newsrack. Any industry standard self-service or coin operated machine which dispenses newspapers, periodicals, brochures, pamphlets and like material to the general public. 
Modular newsrack. One industry standard structure composed of a group of individual publication dispensing cabinets mounted as single cabinets or as cabinets in multiple cabinet configurations. 
Publisher. A person or corporation, or other legal entity, who engages in the business of publishing newspapers, periodicals, brochures, pamphlets and like material. 
(e)  Delegation of duties. The city manager may delegate, in whole or in part, the city manager's duties under this section to one or more city employees. 
(f)  Ownership of modular newsracks. The city shall own all of the modular newsracks authorized by the city manager under this section. The city shall be responsible for the upkeep, repair, and replacement of modular newsracks. 
(g)  Allocation of locations. The city manager shall develop written criteria to allocate the limited modular newsracks locations available for periodicals and other material. The criteria shall be non discriminatory among publishers, but may make reasonable limitations on the number of publications that any one publisher, or its affiliates, may have at any one location when spaces at that location are limited in number. The city manager may also implement reasonable regulations to promote the full utilization of modular newsrack spaces and to require the forfeiture of modular newsrack spaces when they are not fully utilized. The city manager may make limitations on the lettering, logos, and graphics that appear on the modular newsracks, but shall allow a reasonable basis for publications contained within spaces to be readily identified. The initial draft of these regulations is attached hereto as Exhibit "B" and is set out following this section. 
(h)  Permit not a property right. The permits for the use of public modular newsrack space as provided for under this section are not property rights or entitlements of any distributor of material found in the modular newsracks. 
(Ord. No. 01282008C, § 1, 1-28-2008) 
Exhibit A 
 
Exhibit B 
NEWSRACK UNIT REGULATIONS: 
ALLOCATION OF NEWSRACK UNIT SPACES 
The total number of public spaces on the right of way or other city-owned property to be made available for modular newsracks in the central business district [as defined in section 36-12 of the Aiken City Code] shall be allocated by the following criteria: 
(1)  The City of Aiken will purchase and install modular newsracks for the locations originally approved by city council. The city will lease space on a bi-annual basis to publications originally approved by city council. There will be a minimum of 400 feet between each modular newsrack location which may be comprised of more than one modular newsrack. 
(2)  No later than May 15 of each year following the initial allocation of spaces, all publishers interested in leasing unoccupied modular newsrack space shall submit to the city manager a request identifying the number of spaces and locations requested. No later than June 1 of each year, the city manager shall designate the number of spaces, if any, a requesting publisher shall have at any location, effective July 1. The space so allocated, subject to the terms and conditions of these regulations, shall be held by the permittee for two consecutive fiscal years at a cost per year to be determined and based upon the actual cost to the city amortized over a five-year period. 
(3)  If all spaces at all locations are available to meet all publishers' requests as submitted, then the city manager's office shall issue space permits as requested. Before newsrack spaces are allocated, the publisher will agree to remove all of its personal newsracks from the central business district within ten days of receiving its space from the city. If the publisher does not remove its racks within this time, the city will be authorized to remove the racks. 
(4)  If there are insufficient spaces at a location to meet all new requests for available spaces as submitted, then the city manager's office shall allocate by lottery for the locations where there are insufficient spaces. 
(5)  All publishers failing to receive a space at a particular location shall be put on a waiting list for that location for the applicable year in the sequence their names were drawn for that location. If spaces at the location become available during the year, then they shall be made available to publishers in the sequence their names appear on the waiting list for the location. 
(6)  No publisher may utilize more than 50 percent of the available modular newsrack space at any one location unless there is a space not being utilized at the location, but each publisher may offer more than one publication in the spaces provided. 
(7)  Publishers not participating in the May 15 application, may be placed on the waiting list behind those already on the list and they shall be placed in the order their requests are received. 
(8)  A publication's permit for a modular newsrack space is not transferable. 
(9)  All publishers must keep stocked the modular newsrack spaces allocated to them. If the city checks randomly and finds a space not stocked two out of four times over a four week period, the occupancy can be terminated, provided there is a publisher on the waiting list for the location. The city must keep the modular newsracks in good working order and good appearance. 
(10)  In the event a publisher desires to utilize a coin operated device for the purpose of collecting money for their publication, the publisher will be responsible for procuring the coin operated device and will be responsible for the upkeep, maintenance and repair of these coin operated devices. 
(11)  The city manager shall have the ability to amend these regulations from time to time with a minimum of 15 days written notice to all tenants. 
(Ord. No. 01282008C, § 1, 1-28-2008)  
Secs. 36-13—36-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREET NAMES 
 
Sec. 36-31. - Naming system established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a uniform system of street naming in the city, and all streets, avenues and other dedicated public ways shall be named in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  All streets and other public ways running in the same direction and having a deviation of not more than 125 feet from the nearest parallel street shall carry the same name unless special circumstances make such a plan impracticable or not feasible. 
(c)  All through east and west streets shall carry the designation "Avenue," and all through north and south streets shall carry the designation "Street." 
(d)  That part of any street ending in a dead-end or cul-de-sac shall carry the designation "Place." 
(e)  The name "Terrace" shall be used in any residential or business development for any north and south alley street which bisects or crosses a nominal block or series of blocks, and the name "Lane" shall be used for any such east and west alley street. 
(f)  No street established or named shall bear a name in conflict with the general directions set out in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 20-23)  
Sec. 36-32. - Preparation of naming plan by planning commission. 
(a)  For the purpose of clarifying and systematizing the street naming pattern in the city and to implement the application of the provisions set forth in section 36-31, the planning commission is hereby authorized to prepare and present to the city council a complete plan for the naming of all streets, avenues and public ways within the city which shall be adhered to, except where a conflict or duplication exists. The planning commission shall follow the general plan set forth in section 36-31 and such other rules as are set forth in this article. 
(b)  In preparing the plan under this section, if the planning commission shall find an existing street now carrying more than one name, it shall recommend that such street shall bear the name under which it currently travels the longest distance, both inside and outside of the city limits, unless circumstances indicate that another and different name would be desirable. The planning commission may hold public hearings at which interested property owners may express their views concerning the changing of the name or names of any street. 
(Code 1980, § 20-24) 
State Law reference— Approval of street names, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-1200.  
Sec. 36-33. - Subdivision plats to bear report of planning commission as to street names. 
Every subdivision plat submitted to the city council for its approval shall bear upon its face the report of the planning commission of the proper names of any and all streets, avenues and public ways dedicated to public use within the jurisdiction of the city council and shall first be checked by the planning commission as to their names under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 20-25)  
Sec. 36-34. - Street naming and renaming recommendations of planning commission. 
The planning commission shall recommend to the city council any change in the name or the naming of existing or newly established streets within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 20-26)  
Secs. 36-35—36-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STREET NUMBERS FOR LOTS AND BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 36-61. - System established; compliance with article. 
There is hereby established a uniform system for numbering parcels of land fronting on all streets, avenues and public ways in the city, and all houses and other buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 20-37)  
Sec. 36-62. - Baselines designated. 
(a)  Richland Avenue shall constitute the baseline for numbering parcels along all streets running northerly and southerly; and Chesterfield Street and Whiskey Road, as hereinafter named and established, shall constitute the base line for numbering parcels along all streets running easterly and westerly. 
(b)  Each parcel north of Richland Avenue and facing a street running in a northerly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location north of such base street. 
(c)  Each parcel south of Richland Avenue and facing a street running in a southerly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location south of such base street. 
(d)  Each parcel east of Chesterfield Street and Whiskey Road and facing a street running in an easterly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location east of such base street. 
(e)  Each parcel east of Chesterfield Street and Whiskey Road and facing a street running in a westerly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location west of such base street. 
(f)  All parcels on diagonal streets shall be numbered the same as parcels on northerly and southerly streets if the diagonal street runs more from the north to the south, and the same rule shall apply on easterly and westerly streets if the diagonal street runs more from the east to the west. All parcels on diagonal streets having a deviation of exactly 45 degrees shall be numbered the same as parcels on northerly and southerly streets. 
(Code 1980, § 20-38)  
Sec. 36-63. - Lot numbering to begin at baseline; one number for each 20 feet. 
The numbering of parcels on each street shall begin at the baseline. All numbers shall be assigned on the basis of one number for every 20 feet of street frontage. 
(Code 1980, § 20-39)  
Sec. 36-64. - Odd and even numbers. 
All parcels on the north and east side of each street running from the base street shall bear even numbers. All parcels on the south and west side of each street running from the base street shall bear odd numbers. 
(Code 1980, § 20-40)  
Sec. 36-65. - Numbering of lots facing streets not extending to baseline. 
All parcels facing streets not extending through to the baseline shall be assigned the same relative numbers as if the street had extended to the baseline. 
(Code 1980, § 20-41)  
Sec. 36-66. - Numbers and directional symbols for streets, avenues, etc., in addition to lot numbers. 
(a)  In addition to the numbers placed on each parcel as heretofore provided, all streets, avenues and other public ways within the city are hereby given numbers and directional symbols according to their distance and direction from the two base streets set forth in section 36-62. 
(b)  All streets east of Chesterfield Street and Whiskey Road and north of Richland Avenue shall carry the designation "Northeast" (N.E.). 
(c)  All streets west of Chesterfield Street and Whiskey Road and north of Richland Avenue shall carry the designation "Northwest" (N.W.). 
(d)  All streets east of Chesterfield Street and Whiskey Road and south of Richland Avenue shall carry the designation "Southeast" (S.E.). 
(e)  All streets west of Chesterfield Street and Whiskey Road and south of Richland Avenue shall carry the designation "Southwest" (S.W.). 
(f)  Each block shall bear a number or numbers corresponding to the distance of the block from the base street. Each block parallel to the base street shall carry the same block number between terminating streets. If the block is not parallel with either base Street, then its number shall vary according to the distance the block is from both base streets. 
(g)  Each house or other building, in addition to the number or numbers given it under other sections of this article, shall also bear the number and direction of the street on which it is located. 
(Code 1980, § 20-42)  
Sec. 36-67. - Numbering building entrances serving separate occupants. 
(a)  Where any building has more than one entrance serving separate occupants, a separate number shall be assigned to each entrance serving a separate occupant. If the building is not located on a lot, parcel or tract which would permit the assignment of one number to each such entrance, numerals and letters shall be used, as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Where only one number can be assigned to any building, the owner, occupant or agent of such building, who shall desire distinctive numbers for the upper and lower portion of the building, or for any part of such building fronting on any street, may use the suffix (A), (B), (C) and so on through the alphabet as may be required. 
(Code 1980, § 20-43)  
Sec. 36-68. - Assignment of numbers generally. 
It shall be the duty of the county E-911, in conjunction with the public works department, to inform any party applying therefor of the number or numbers belonging to or embraced within the limits of any parcel, as provided in this article. In case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned to any building, the building official shall determine the number of such building in accordance with the plats referred to in section 36-70. 
(Code 1980, § 20-44)  
Sec. 36-69. - Duty to procure and display number. 
(a)  Whenever any house, building or structure shall be erected or located in the city, it shall be the duty of the owner to procure the correct number or numbers, as designated on the plats referred to in section 36-70, from the building official. No building permit shall be issued for any house, building or structure until the owner has procured from the building official the official number of the premises. Final approval of any structure erected, repaired, altered or modified shall be withheld by the building official until durable and proper numbers have been affixed to the structure in accord with this section. 
(b)  The owner, occupant or agent shall place or cause to be placed upon each house or building controlled by him the number or numbers assigned under the uniform system as provided in this article. The cost of the number or numbers shall be paid for by the property owner or occupant. Replacement of numbers shall be procured and paid for by the owner or occupant. The numbers used shall be not less than 2½ inches in height and shall be painted or made of a durable and clearly visible material. 
(c)  The numbers referred to in this section shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the proper door of each building; or in lieu thereof they shall be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building and upon a gate post, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place within the lot lines, so as to be easily discernible from the street. 
(Code 1980, § 20-45)  
Sec. 36-70. - Plats showing proper numbers. 
For the purpose of facilitating correct numbering, a plat book of all streets, avenues and public ways within the city, showing the proper numbers of all parcels fronting upon all streets, avenue or public ways shall be kept on file in the office of the director of public works. These plats shall be open to inspection of all persons during the office hours of the department of public works. Duplicate copies of such plats shall be furnished to the city engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 20-46)  
Sec. 36-71. - Painting of addresses on street curbs. 
The director of the department of public safety shall promulgate written regulations for the voluntary painting of street address numbers on street curbs in the city. These regulations shall include requirements providing for the clear visibility of such numbers during all hours of the day, uniform standards for the sizes of the numbers, the color and type of paint or paints which may be used therefor, the written permission of the owner or his agent for the painting and the person or company providing the service notifying the owner or his agent in writing that it or he is not acting on behalf of the city in providing the service and that the painting of such numbers on curbs is not required by the city. The display of the street address numbers as allowed by this section does not relieve the owner of the duty to display those numbers as required by section 36-69. 
(Code 1980, § 20-47)  
Secs. 36-72—36-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ASSESSMENTS FOR PERMANENT IMPROVEMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Assessments for street and sidewalk improvements, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-27-310 et seq. 
 
Sec. 36-91. - Petition by abutting owners; plans and specifications; assessment roll generally; etc. 
When permanent improvements of any streets or sidewalks in the city are to be made, they shall be done in the following manner: Upon written petition by, and the consent of, two-thirds in number of the owners of the abutting property upon any streets proposed to be improved, the petition to be filed with the city clerk, agreeing to pay in the aggregate not to exceed one-half of the total cost of such improvements of the street, the city council shall, by order, direct the improvement of the street, as follows: The council shall determine the character of material to be used in the improvements to be made and the manner in which the improvements shall be done, shall cause to be prepared accurate plans and specifications therefor, and shall determine the cost of the improvements. Thereupon, the city engineer or other person acting in his capacity shall prepare a plat of the street, or part thereof, showing the name of each owner of property abutting thereon, with the location of the property of each, and shall prepare an assessment roll, showing the amount to be assessed against each particular piece or parcel of property abutting on the proposed improvement in proportion to the frontage of such property on the street; provided, however, that the assessments so made shall not exceed, in the aggregate, one-half of the total cost of the improvement. The assessment roll so prepared shall be filed with the city clerk, whose duty it shall be, upon receipt of such assessment roll, to give notice by publication in a newspaper published in the city, to all parties interested that the assessment roll is in his office and will there remain for a period of one week from the date of the publication of the notice. All persons concerned, during such period of one week, may file in writing with the city clerk such exceptions or objections to the assessment as they may desire. 
(Code 1980, § 20-57)  
Sec. 36-92. - Rejection or ratification of assessment roll by council. 
At the expiration of one week from the date of the notice of the completion of the assessment roll, the city clerk shall refer the assessment roll to the city council, together with such exceptions or objections as may have been filed thereto, and the city council, at its next regular meeting or at an adjourned or called meeting, shall review the assessment roll, together with any exceptions, and shall have authority to make any correction therein deemed proper, and, in its discretion, to reject or ratify the assessment roll. Upon the ratification of the assessment roll, the city council shall provide for the payment out of the city treasury of one-half of the cost of the proposed improvement. 
(Code 1980, § 20-58)  
Sec. 36-93. - Lien. 
(a)  Upon the ratification of the assessment roll by the city council, the amount, as shown in the assessment roll, assessed against each piece or parcel of property shall constitute a lien thereon from the time of the ratification by the city council, and the payment thereof may be enforced by the city in the same manner as is the payment of city taxes; provided, that such assessment shall be entered in a book to be kept for that purpose by the city clerk, to be entitled "Assessment Liens," stating the name of the owner, the location of the property, the amount of the assessment and the time of payment. Such lien shall continue from the date of the entry of the lien on such assessment lien book until the expiration of five years from the date when the final payment is due and payable, unless sooner paid. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk, when full payment is made by the owners of the abutting property of the assessments provided for in this article, to make entry of satisfaction on the assessment lien book, and thereupon such lien shall be extinguished. 
(Code 1980, § 20-59)  
Sec. 36-94. - Terms of payment; interest. 
(a)  When the assessment roll has been ratified in the manner prescribed by section 36-92, each owner of property so assessed may, within 30 days after such ratification, pay into the city treasury the full amount of the assessment, or shall have the right to have such assessment divided into five equal payments, the first installment thereof to be due 30 days after the date of the ratification of the assessment roll by the city council, and the remaining installments to be due in equal amounts, respectively in one, two, three and four years from the date of the first installment, with interest on unpaid installments at the rate of six percent per annum, payable annually from date until paid in full. 
(b)  Where the permanent improvement of any of the streets in the city is of the type commonly known as "surface treatment," the property owner shall have the right to have such assessment divided into four equal payments, the first installment of which shall be due and payable 30 days after the date of the ratification of the assessment roll by the city council and the remaining installments to be due in equal amounts, one, two and three years from the date of the first installment, with interest on unpaid installments at the rate of six percent per annum, payable annually from date until paid. 
(Code 1980, § 20-60)  
Sec. 36-95. - Application of payments. 
All appropriations made by the city for permanent improvements under the authority of this article, together with the amounts of such assessment as may be paid in cash by the owners of abutting property within the time provided for in this article for the payment of assessments in full, shall be applied to the payment of the contractor or other person making the improvements, under contract with the city, on monthly estimates to be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 20-61)  
Sec. 36-96. - Assessment certificates. 
(a)  For assessments made in compliance with this article, remaining unpaid at the expiration of the time limit for the payment of assessments in full, the mayor and city clerk are authorized and required to issue assessment certificates, in the name of the city council, in the amount of such assessments unpaid. Such certificates shall be known as "Paving Assessment Certificates of the City of Aiken," and shall be substantially the following form: 
"PAVING ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE OF THE CITY OF AIKEN, S.C. 
"All requirements of an Act of the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina having been complied with, the City of Aiken, S.C., agrees to collect from the property owners abutting on the improvement of _______ Street, which property is, for value received, bound unto the holder of this certificate in the sum of _______ Dollars with interest thereon at the rate of six percent per annum, payable annually from this date until paid, payable at the city clerk's office in the City of Aiken, S.C., with exchange and collection charges on the ________ day of ________, 20___. 
"This certifies that the improvements for which this assessment was levied has been ordered by the City Council of Aiken, S.C., the same being in compliance with the law and all ordinances pertaining thereto, and owners of the property abutting improvements have acknowledged their indebtedness to the city by payment in cash of one-fifth of the total assessment against their property, as required by law, and will accept from the City Council of Aiken, S.C., as provided by an Act of the Legislature of said state, the privilege of paying the amount still due in four equal annual installments, with interest at the rate of six percent per annum from _______ payable annually to the City of Aiken, S.C., in accordance with the assessment made and approved on the ________ day of ________, 20___, fully described and set forth in a record kept by the city clerk, entitled "Assessment Liens," stating the name of the owner, the location of the property, and the time of payments. 
"The City of Aiken agrees to collect the annual installment which this certificate represents, and to pay, when collected, the amount to the holder thereof." 
(b)  There shall be four assessment certificates issued for each separate piece of permanent street improvement, each covering the assessment for one of the years in which the assessment may be due and payable, each for one-fourth of the total amount of the assessment remaining unpaid at the time limited for the payment of assessments in full or in cash, as prescribed by this article, or in such a manner and in such amounts as may be prescribed by the city council, and the certificates may be sold at or above par or may be delivered to the contractor on account of the contract price of the work. 
(Code 1980, § 20-62)  
Sec. 36-97. - Segregation of assessment funds. 
The amount raised by the assessments provided for by this article, together with the appropriation added thereto out of the city treasury, shall be kept as a separate fund, to be used only for the purpose for which it was contributed and appropriated. 
(Code 1980, § 20-63)  
Sec. 36-98. - Authority to borrow and loan funds. 
The city council shall have the right to borrow the amount of money necessary to make the improvements provided for in this article and to loan to the party owning the abutting property on the improved streets an amount not exceeding one-half the cost of the improvement, such loan to be secured according to law, and to be a lien on the abutting property. 
(Code 1980, § 20-64)  
Secs. 36-99—36-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLES AND OTHER PROPERTY ABANDONED ON STREETS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 42. 
 
Sec. 36-121. - When vehicle or property considered abandoned. 
Any vehicle or other personal property which is left on any right-of-way of any street, avenue, road or other public way in the city for a period of over 48 hours, is hereby declared to be abandoned property. 
(Code 1980, § 20-75)  
Sec. 36-122. - Impoundment generally. 
It shall be the duty of the director of public safety and public safety officers designated by him, having knowledge of any abandoned property referred to in section 36-121 to seize it and have it removed for safekeeping to such place as may be designated by the director of public safety, who shall thereupon be charged with its custody and disposition as provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 20-76)  
Sec. 36-123. - Notice of impoundment. 
The officer having custody of any abandoned property under this article shall forthwith: 
(1)  Post, in three public places within the city, a notice, setting forth the fact of his possession, a full description of such property, the place at which it was found, the place at which it is being held, the amount of any charges connected with his possession of it, and that, unless the property shall be reclaimed within 30 days after the posting of such notice, it will be advertised for sale and sold as provided in this article; and 
(2)  Mail such notice by certified mail to the owner of such abandoned property, and to the holder or holders of any liens upon the property, if the names and addresses of such owner and lien holders can be ascertained by reasonable inquiry. 
(Code 1980, § 20-77)  
Sec. 36-124. - Notice of proposed sale. 
If 30 days shall elapse after notice by mail or posting, as required in section 36-123, is given, and the property has not been reclaimed, the director of public safety shall advertise such property for sale for cash at public auction, giving such information as is required in subsection 36-123(1) for a posted notice, along with the time, date and place of proposed sale. Such advertisement shall be published at least once a week for three succeeding weeks prior to the proposed sale, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 20-78)  
Sec. 36-125. - Reclamation of property before sale. 
Any owner or lien holder having an interest in property seized under this article may reclaim the property at any time before its public sale, by presenting evidence of right to possession, satisfactory to the director of public safety and tendering payment of all charges and fees incurred by the latter or the city while in possession of such property. 
(Code 1980, § 20-79)  
Sec. 36-126. - Lien for towing or storage charges. 
Any person authorized by the director of public safety to tow, haul or store any abandoned property shall have a lien against such property for the reasonable value of such services, which shall be prior to all other liens. 
(Code 1980, § 20-80)  
Sec. 36-127. - Sale of unreclaimed property. 
If abandoned property is not reclaimed prior to the time of any advertised sale thereof, the director of public safety shall sell it and pay from the proceeds all costs and charges incurred in handling, in advertising the sale of, and in selling such property, and any balance remaining shall be paid to the city treasurer for credit to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 20-81)  
Sec. 36-128. - Payment of claims of owners and lien holders after sale. 
For a period of not in excess of two years after the payment of any sum into the general fund of the city, on account of the sale of any abandoned property pursuant to this article, the city council shall hear and allow claims of any persons claiming to be damaged by the sale of such property, and make awards to owners or lien holders as their interest may appear, but in no event shall such award be in excess of the amount received by the city on account of the sale of the property which is the subject of any such claim. The decision of the council in connection with any such claim shall be final. 
(Code 1980, § 20-82)  
Secs. 36-129—36-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ROAD AND DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06202016 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 20, 2016, added provisions designated as Art. V, §§ 36-1—36-4. Inasmuch as such designations already existed in the Code, the new provisions have been redesignated, at the discretion of the editor, as Art. VI, §§ 36-141—36-144. 
 
Sec. 36-141. - Effective date; purpose; exemption. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2017, a mandatory road maintenance fee as established in the annual City Operating Budget Ordinance on each motorized vehicle licensed in the city is to be included on motor vehicle tax notices with the proceeds going into a separate fund for accounting purposes specifically to be used for maintenance and improvements of the city road system, to include road signs and correction of drainage problems impacting the city road system. 
(b)  Motor vehicles registered with the state as antique cars are exempt from payment of the road maintenance fee. 
(c)  A wartime disabled veteran who is entitled to compensation for the loss, or loss of use of one or both legs or arms, or the permanent impairment of vision in both eyes to a degree as to constitute virtual blindness and is also entitled to a special monthly statutory award by reason thereof or any South Carolina veteran classified as totally and permanently disabled due to service-connected disabilities as determined from medical records on file with the veterans administration certifying the disability may present such documentation and certification to the city finance department for review. Upon review and approval by the city finance department, the road maintenance fee then in effect as established by the most recent city operating budget, shall be waived on not more than two vehicles qualified for the exemption from registration fees as defined in section 56-3-1110 of the South Carolina Code of Laws. A veteran who is issued an exemption from the road maintenance fee under the provisions of this section must provide a new certification as prescribed by this subsection at the time a new license plate is issued. A surviving spouse of such a veteran is also eligible to obtain such plate so long as the surviving spouse does not remarry. When a new license plate is issued to a surviving spouse, the spouse must certify on a form prescribed by the department that the spouse has not remarried. 
(Ord. No. 06202016 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-20-2016)  
Sec. 36-142. - Penalty for nonpayment. 
In the event an individual does not pay the assessed road user fee and operates his vehicle on any city road, the individual shall pay a fine of up to $200.00 and/or serve a sentence of 30 days in jail, which offense shall be tried in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 06202016 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-20-2016)  
Sec. 36-143. - Road and drainage improvement projects. 
(a)  General provisions. Roads in the city road system and drainage projects impacting city roads may qualify for improvement under this program. Roads and drainage projects for consideration for inclusion in the project list may be nominated by members of city council, city staff, other governmental units and/or citizens of the city. 
(b)  Roads. 
(1)  Nominated roads must adhere to the following criteria to qualify for consideration: 
a.  The road must be a public road maintained by the city. 
b.  The road must be connected to an existing state or city maintained road. 
c.  The city must possess right-of-way easements from all property owners bordering the nominated road. 
(2)  Upon receipt of roads nominated for improvement, the director of public works and engineering shall complete an evaluation and prioritized ranking of nominated roads according to a procedure approved by the council. This listing shall be reviewed by the city manager and submitted annually to the council for approval and appropriations of required funding. 
(c)  Drainage projects. 
(1)  Nominated drainage project must adhere to the following criteria to qualify for consideration: 
a.  The project must arise from or be related to a drainage problem associated with a city road or significantly impact upon the general welfare of citizens. 
b.  The city must be able to obtain drainage easements from all property owners bordering the drainage project. 
(2)  Upon receipt of drainage projects nominated for project work, the director of public works and engineering shall complete an evaluation and prioritized ranking of nominated drainage projects according to a procedure approved by the council. This listing shall be reviewed by the city manager and submitted annually to the council for approval and appropriation of required funding. 
(Ord. No. 06202016 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-20-2016) 
Editor's note— The city road and drainage procedures and project evaluation and ranking list referenced in this section are not set out herein. Such provisions shall be prepared as part of the annual city operating budget by the director of public works and engineering and shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the director of public works and engineering.  
Sec. 36-144. - Annual review. 
An annual review will be made by the city council during a month selected by council. This review will include the following items: 
(1)  An estimate of the total funds available for road and drainage projects during the coming year. 
(2)  A prioritized listing of recommended road and drainage projects with estimated costs and recommendations from city council following a review of those projects. Council shall approve from the recommended list, subject to the availability of funds, the city road and drainage project list to be completed during the next fiscal year. The approved list shall include an additional number of roads and drainage projects totaling ten percent of the estimated available funds in the event higher priority selections cannot be accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 06202016 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-20-2016)  
Chapter 38 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-5(1); any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget saved from repeal, § 1-5(3); any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement saved from repeal, § 1-5(6); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-311 et seq.; businesses, ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Taxation, S.C. Code 1976, title 12; property subject to municipal taxes, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-110; authority to collect taxes in, installments, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-120. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Council as investigating board for tax matters. 
The city council shall constitute a board for investigating all matters relating to the assessment and listing of property for taxation or for the relief of taxpayers, and it shall be the duty of the city council to see that no property in the city escapes proper assessment and taxation. In case it shall be discovered by the city council that there is real or personal property within the city which has not been returned, assessed or listed for taxation, or is listed on the county auditor's books as being outside of the city, or is improperly assessed, or is listed in the name of the wrong person or is a double entry, or is listed through error as being in the city, or in case any other irregularity appears or exists, it shall be the duty of the city council to forthwith report, or cause to be reported, the error or irregularity to the county auditor, or other county or state officials, to the end that no property properly liable for city taxes shall escape taxation by the city, or its proper assessment or listing, or shall be improperly taxed. 
(Code 1980, § 21-1)  
Sec. 38-2. - Annual levy. 
The city council shall impose, by ordinance, an annual tax at such rate, in its discretion, as will yield an amount necessary for the general purposes of the city, not exceeding the limit permitted by law. Such tax shall be levied by the city council on the property within the corporate limits as assessed for taxation for county and state purposes as provided in this chapter. Such tax rate shall remain the same from year to year unless changed by ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 21-2)  
Sec. 38-3. - Use of proceeds of annual levy. 
The proceeds of the annual property tax levy, together with other income of the city, shall be used for general municipal purposes, to pay all current indebtedness and to pay the principal and interest on outstanding bonds or coupons of the city which may become due and payable during the fiscal year. 
(Code 1980, § 21-3) 
State Law reference— Limitation on use of proceeds of tax levied for specific purpose, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-130.  
Sec. 38-4. - Basis of property value; amount of assessment. 
The basis of value for taxation of real estate, personal property, stock in trade or other taxable property within the city shall be taken from the books of the auditor of the county and such assessment shall be the same as levied by the county auditor in any particular calendar year. 
(Code 1980, § 21-4)  
Sec. 38-5. - Assessed valuation to be entered on tax books; alterations as directed by county auditor. 
The city treasurer shall enter the assessed valuation, fixed as provided in section 38-4, upon his tax books and thereafter shall make only such alterations on his books as may be directed by a supplemental tax return issued by the county auditor. 
(Code 1980, § 21-5)  
Sec. 38-6. - Duty of treasurer to collect taxes. 
All taxes for the year shall be collected by the city treasurer. 
(Code 1980, § 21-6)  
Sec. 38-7. - Appointment, bond and general duties of tax collector. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a tax collector whose duty it shall be to check places of business in the city with reference to the payment of license taxes and to collect all delinquent taxes for which executions have been delivered to him by the city treasurer. Before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office, the tax collector shall enter into a bond payable to the city, in such amount as shall be fixed or approved by the council, and in a bonding company duly authorized and licensed to do business within the state, for the faithful performance of his duties. The city shall pay the premium of such bond. 
(b)  The tax collector shall render daily, to the city treasurer, a complete account of all moneys collected during the preceding day and shall at that time turn over all such moneys to the treasurer. 
(Code 1980, § 21-7)  
Sec. 38-8. - Special real property tax assessments for rehabilitated historic properties. 
A special tax assessment is created for eligible rehabilitated historic properties for ten years equal to the appraised value of the property at the time of preliminary certification. Where there is a conflict between provisions of this section and the enabling state code, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to: 
a.  Encourage the restoration of historic properties; 
b.  Promote community development and redevelopment; 
c.  Encourage sound community planning; and 
d.  Promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(2)  Eligible properties. 
a.  Certification. In order to be eligible for the special tax assessment, historic properties must receive preliminary and final certification. 
1.  To receive preliminary certification a property must meet the following conditions: 
(i)  The property has received historic designation. 
(ii)  The proposed rehabilitation work receives approval from the design review board (DRB). 
(iii)  Be a project that commenced by or after August 17, 2004 to the date of the adoption of this section and work was permitted to have begun prior to receiving preliminary certification; or 
(iv)  Be a project that commences on or after the date of the adoption of this section. Preliminary certification must be received prior to beginning work. 
2.  To receive final certification, a property must have met the following conditions: 
(i)  The property has received preliminary certification. 
(ii)  The minimum expenditures for rehabilitation were incurred and paid. 
(iii)  The completed rehabilitation receives approval from the DRB as being consistent with the plans approved by DRB as part of preliminary certification. 
b.  Historic designation. As used in this section, "historic designation" means the property maintains one or more of the following: 
1.  The property is listed on the National Register of Historic Places either individually or as a contributing property in a district. 
2.  The property is at least 50 years old and is an individual landmark or a contributing property in a local district as designated by city council and listed as so designated in the city Code. 
(3)  Eligible rehabilitation. 
a.  Standards for rehabilitation work. To be eligible for the special tax assessment, historic rehabilitations must be appropriate for the historic building and the historic district in which it is located. This is achieved through adherence to the following standards: 
1.  The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved; the removal of historic materials or alterations of features that characterize each property shall be avoided. 
2.  Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place and use; changes that create a false sense of historical development shall not be undertaken. 
3.  Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved. 
4.  Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property should be preserved. 
5.  Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced; where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new should match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials; replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence. 
6.  Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used; the surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. 
7.  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property; the new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the historic property and its environment. 
8.  New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
b.  Work to be reviewed for preliminary and final certification. The following work will be reviewed according to the standards set forth above: 
1.  Repairs to the exterior of the designated building. 
2.  Alterations to the exterior of the designated building. 
3.  New construction on the property on which the building is located. 
4.  Any remaining work, including interior work, where the expenditures for such work are being used to satisfy the minimum expenditures for rehabilitation. 
c.  Minimum expenditures for rehabilitation means the owner or the owner's estate rehabilitates the building, with expenditures for rehabilitation exceeding 20 percent of the fair market value of the building. Fair market value means the appraised value as certified to the DRB by a real estate appraiser licensed by the state, the sales price as delineated in a bona fide contract of sale within 12 months of the time it is submitted, or the most recent appraised value published by the county tax assessor. 
d.  Expenditures for rehabilitation means the actual cost of rehabilitation relating to one or more of the following: 
1.  Improvements located on or within the historic building as designated. 
2.  Improvements outside of but directly attached to the historic building which make possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the building(s) that are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values. Costs associated with new structures, or the addition of rentable/habitable floor space not attributed to efficient contemporary use of space within an existing historic structure shall not be included in the calculation of eligible costs. 
3.  Architectural and engineering services attributable to the design of the improvements. 
4.  Costs necessary to maintain the historic character or integrity of the building. 
e.  Scope. The special tax assessment may apply to the following: 
1.  Structure(s) rehabilitated. 
2.  Real property on which the building is located. 
f.  Time limits. To be eligible for the special tax assessment, rehabilitation must be completed within two years of the preliminary certification date. If the project is not complete after two years, but the minimum expenditures for rehabilitation have been incurred, the property continues to receive the special assessment until the project is completed or until the end of the special assessment period, whichever shall first occur. 
(4)  Process. 
a.  Fee required. There is a fee of $150.00 required for final certification for each application for review of rehabilitation work of single-family and/or duplex structures and $300.00 for all other structures. Fees are payable to the city, and final certification will not be given without payment of this fee. 
b.  Plan required. Owners of property seeking to receive the special tax assessment must submit an application, provided by the planning department, with all supporting documentation and application fee in order to be considered for preliminary certification. This should be submitted before work is begun. However, work completed within the preceding 12 months may be considered at the discretion of the board. 
c.  Preliminary certification. Upon receipt of the completed application, the proposal shall be placed on the next available agenda of the DRB to determine if the project is consistent with the standards for rehabilitation in subsection 38-8(3)a. above. After the DRB makes its determination, the owner shall be notified in writing. Upon receipt of this determination the owner may: 
1.  If the application is approved, begin rehabilitation; 
2.  If the application is not approved, he may revise such application in accordance with comments provided by the DRB; 
d.  Substantive changes. Once preliminary certification is granted to an application, substantive changes must be approved by the DRB. Unapproved substantive changes are conducted at the risk of the property owner and may disqualify the project from eligibility. Additional expenditures will not qualify the project for an extension on the special assessment. 
e.  Final certification. Upon completion of the project, the project must receive final certification in order to be eligible for the special assessment. The DRB will inspect completed projects to determine if the work is consistent with the approval granted by the DRB pursuant to section 38-8. Final certification will be granted when the completed work meets the standards and verification is made that expenditures have been made in accordance with subsection 38-8(3)c and d. above. Upon receiving final certification, the property will be assessed for the remainder of the special assessment period on the fair market value of the property at the time the preliminary certification was made or the final certification was made, whichever occurred earlier. 
f.  Additional work. Subsection 1 below shall apply to all properties receiving final certification after (date of city council adoption). Properties receiving final certification before this date shall be subject to subsection 2 below. 
1.  All additional work on the exterior of the property shall be subject to design review via the established certificate of appropriateness process and approval matrix. Furthermore, at the time of final certification, the design review board may establish a "preservation zone" to identify critical architectural and historically significant elements that should be preserved. This preservation zone may include interior rooms and elements, as well as exterior elements that would not otherwise be subject to design review through the certificate of appropriateness process. For the remainder of the special assessment period after final certification, any additional work (repair, replacement, modification) to the preservation zone elements identified shall be subject to review by the design review board through the certificate of appropriateness process to ensure that all work is consistent with relevant design and preservation guidelines as adopted per section 5.2.3.J of the zoning ordinance, and the standards for rehabilitation work provided in this section. If the additional work is found to be inconsistent with these guidelines, the property owner may withdraw his request and cancel or revise the proposed additional work. The design review board may designate review and approval authority to the planning director and design review board chair. 
2.  Current owners of participating properties receiving final certification before September 23, 2019 shall, upon adoption of this ordinance by city council, be given by staff the following implementation options applicable for the remainder of their assessment period: 
(i)  For the remainder of the special assessment period after final certification, the property owner shall notify the DRB of any additional work, other than ordinary maintenance. The DRB will review the work at a regularly scheduled hearing and determine whether the overall project is consistent with the standards for rehabilitation. If the additional work is found to be inconsistent the property owner may withdraw his request and cancel or revise the proposed additional work. 
(ii)  Participating properties shall be subject to the policy established in subsection 1 after a site visit and hearing by the board to establish a "preservation zone" for the property. 
g.  Decertification. When the property has received final certification and has been assessed as rehabilitated historic property, it remains so certified and must be granted the special assessment until the property becomes disqualified by any one of the following: 
1.  Written notice from the owner to the DRB and the auditor requesting removal of the preferential assessment; 
2.  Removal of the historic designation by the city council; or 
3.  Rescission of the approval of rehabilitation by the DRB because of alterations or renovation by the owner or the owner's estate which causes the property to no longer possess the qualities and features which made it eligible for final certification. 
Notification of any change affecting eligibility must be given immediately to the county assessor, auditor, and treasurer. Under no circumstances shall the sale or transfer of ownership of real property certified and assessed in accordance with this section and any ordinance in effect at the time disqualify the property from receiving the special property tax assessment under this section. This provision shall be applicable and given full force and effect to any special property tax assessment granted prior to the effective date of this paragraph notwithstanding any ordinance in effect from time to time to the contrary. 
h.  Notification. The city shall, upon final certification of a property, notify the county assessor, auditor and treasurer that such property has been duly certified and is eligible for the special tax assessment. 
i.  Date effective. If an application for preliminary or final certification is filed by May 1 or the preliminary or final certification is approved by August 1, the special assessment authorized herein is effective for that year. Otherwise, it is effective beginning with the following year. 
The special assessment only begins in the current or future tax years as provided for in this section. In no instance may the special assessment be applied retroactively. 
j.  Application. Once the DRB has granted the special property tax assessments authorized herein, the owner of the property shall make application to the county auditor and other appropriate county offices at the directive of county officials for the special assessment provided for herein. 
(Code 1980, § 21-22; Ord. No. 11132000D, § 1, 11-13-2000; Ord. No. 04242017 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-24-2017; Ord. No. 04092018A , § 1(Exh. A), 4-9-2018; Ord. No. 10142019C , § 1(Exh. A), 10-14-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04242017 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 24, 2017, amended § 38-8 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Special real property tax assessments for rehabilitated historic properties" to "Special tax assessment created," as set out herein.  
Sec. 38-9. - Special real property tax assessments for qualifying low and moderate income rental properties. 
(a)  Real property within the city which meets the requirements in this section for low or moderate income rental property shall be assessed for property tax purposes as follows: An initial assessment for two years equal to six percent of the appraised value of the property at the time the certification was made, and thereafter an assessment for eight years equal to the greater of 40 percent of six percent of the appraised value of the property after rehabilitation or the original assessment of the uncertified property. 
(b)  The city council hereby designates the city community development committee to perform all functions and duties for the special property tax assessment program for low and moderate income rental property expressly delegated to it by the provisions of this section. 
(c)  To be eligible for the special tax assessment provided by this section, real property must be certified by the community development committee as meeting the requirements set forth in S.C. Code 1976, §§ 4-9-195(C) and 5-21-140, this section, and any successor provisions thereto. To apply for the special tax assessment, an owner of real property must submit an application to the community development committee on such forms as it shall promulgate for that purpose and shall pay such application fee as the community development committee shall establish. The application fee shall be no higher in amount than the actual estimated cost to the city for reviewing such applications. 
(d)  A real property may be disqualified from receiving the special tax assessment provided by this section for any of the reasons set forth in S.C. Code 1976, § 4-9-195(E). 
(e)  Any real property owner aggrieved by a decision of the community development committee with respect to certifying or disqualifying a real property from the special tax assessment provided by this section may request a review of the decision thereon by submitting a written request therefor to the community development committee. Upon receipt of the request, the community development committee shall schedule a hearing thereon and notify the property owner in writing of the date, time and location of the hearing. At such hearing, the property owner may present information concerning whether the community development committee's decision should be reversed or otherwise modified. The community development committee shall advise the property owner in writing of its decision on the review within ten days of the hearing thereon. Any real property owner aggrieved by a final decision of the community development committee with respect to certifying or disqualifying a real property may appeal that decision to city council by filing a letter with the city manager setting forth the grounds of appeal within ten days of the date of the community development committee's decision. Council shall consider that appeal at the next available meeting of council based upon the record of the hearing before the community development committee. Council may affirm, reverse, or otherwise modify the final decision of the community development committee. 
(f)  The community development committee or its designee shall notify the appropriate city and county taxing and assessing authorities of the certification or disqualification of any properties for special tax assessment pursuant to this section. To be eligible for special tax assessment for any year, a property must be certified for such special tax treatment before April 1 of that year. The owner shall annually make an application to the city treasurer and county auditor for special tax assessment. 
(g)  The special tax assessment program authorized by this section shall be administered in conformity with the provisions of this section, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 4-9-195 and 5-21-140, and any successor provisions thereto, and in the event of a conflict between the provisions of this section and the provisions of those state laws, the latter provisions shall control. 
(Code 1980, § 21-23)  
Sec. 38-10. - Local accommodations tax. 
(a)  Authority. This tax is enacted pursuant to the S.C. Code 1976, as amended, §§ 6-1-500—6-1-570, which provides in part that a local governing body may impose, by ordinance, a local accommodations tax, not to exceed three percent. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. This local accommodations tax is enacted to preserve the general health, safety, and welfare of the general public within the city, and to specifically improve and increase tourism-related activities and facilities and to enhance the quality of life in the city for its citizens and its visitors. The revenue generated by the local accommodations tax must be used exclusively for the following purposes: (1) tourism-related buildings, including, but not limited to, civic centers, coliseums, and aquariums; (2) cultural, recreational, or historic facilities; (3) highways, roads, streets, and bridges providing access to tourist destinations; (4) advertisements and promotions related to tourism development; or (5) water and sewer infrastructure to serve tourism-related demand. 
(c)  Imposition of local accommodations tax. A uniform tax equal to three percent is hereby imposed on the gross proceeds derived from the rental or charges for accommodations furnished to transients as provided in S.C. Code 1976, § 12-36-920(A) and is imposed on every person engaged in the business of furnishing accommodations to transients for consideration within the city. Included are gross proceeds derived from the rental or charges for any rooms, campground spaces, lodgings, or sleeping accommodations furnished to transients by any hotel, inn, tourist court, tourist camp, motel, campground, residence, or any place in which rooms, lodgings, or sleeping accommodations are furnished to transients for a consideration. This tax does not apply where the facilities consist of less than six sleeping rooms, contained on the same premises, which is used as the individual's place of abode. The gross proceeds derived from the lease or rental of sleeping accommodations supplied by the same person for a period of ninety continuous days are not considered proceeds from transients. This tax does not apply to additional guest charges as defined in S.C. Code 1976, § 12-36-920(B) as amended. 
(d)  Accounting for local accommodations tax. All proceeds derived from the local accommodations tax must be kept in a separate fund segregated from the city general fund. This fund shall be known as the "capital development fund." All interest generated by the local accommodations tax fund must be credited to the capital development fund. 
(e)  Payment of local accommodations tax. Payment of the local accommodations tax shall be the responsibility of the consumer of the services described in subsection (c). This tax shall be paid at the time of the delivery of the services or items to which the tax applies and shall be collected by the provider or seller of the service(s), or item(s). 
(f)  Remittance to the city. The taxes collected by the seller or provider of the services or items as required in subsection (e) shall be remitted to the city business license administrator as set forth herein along with such return or form as may be established by the business license administrator for such purpose. When the estimated amount of average tax is more than $50.00 per month, that seller or provider shall remit the amount due on a monthly basis. When the estimated amount of average tax is $25.00 to $50.00 per month, that seller or provider shall remit on a quarterly basis. When the estimated amount is less than $25.00 per month, that seller or provider shall remit on an annual basis. 
(g)  Payment due dates. Taxes and required reports shall be submitted to the business license administrator by the 20 th day of the month following the due date of the tax payment and shall cover sales of the previous month, quarter, and/or year depending on the seller's monthly average tax. Any taxes not timely remitted shall be subject to a penalty of five percent of the unpaid tax for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. The failure to collect from patrons the tax imposed by this section shall not relieve any establishment subject to this section from making the required remittance. 
(h)  Penalties for violations. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to punishment under section 1-13 of this Code upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties, and costs provided for herein. 
(i)  Expenditure of proceeds. The expenditure of the proceeds generated by this tax shall be approved by city council during its annual budget consideration process. 
(Code 1980, § 21-24; Ord. No. 02122001, § 1, 2-12-2001)  
Sec. 38-11. - Local hospitality tax. 
(a)  Authority. This tax is enacted pursuant to the S.C. Code 1976, as amended, §§ 6-1-700—6-1-770, which provides in part that a local governing body may impose, by ordinance, a local hospitality tax, not to exceed two percent of the charges for food and beverages sold in establishments with the city. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. This local hospitality tax is enacted to preserve the general health, safety, and welfare of the general public within the City of Aiken, South Carolina, and to specifically improve and increase tourism-related activities and facilities and to enhance the quality of life in the city for its citizens and its visitors. The revenue generated by the local accommodations tax must be used exclusively for the following purposes: (1) tourism-related buildings, including, but not limited to, civic centers, coliseums, and aquariums; (2) cultural, recreational, or historic facilities; (3) highways, roads, streets, and bridges providing access to tourist destinations; (4) advertisements and promotions related to tourism development; or (5) water and sewer infrastructure to serve tourism-related demand. Further, an amount not to exceed 50 percent of the revenue in the preceding fiscal year of the local hospitality tax may be used for the operation and maintenance of items (1) through (5) including police, fire protection, emergency medical services, and emergency-preparedness operations directly attendant to those facilities. City council will approve the expenditure of these funds as a part of its annual budget process. 
(c)  Imposition of local hospitality tax. A uniform tax equal to one percent is hereby imposed on the gross proceeds derived from the sale of prepared meals and beverages sold in establishments or sales of prepared meals and beverages sold in establishments licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, and is imposed on every person engaged in the business of furnishing food and beverage services, whether dine in or take out, within the city. In addition, the local hospitality tax shall be imposed on all food and beverages prepared or modified by convenience stores, fast food service outlets, or grocery stores within the city. 
(d)  Accounting for local hospitality tax. All proceeds derived from the local hospitality tax must be kept in a separate fund segregated from the city general fund. This fund shall be known as the "Hospitality Fund (014)." 
(e)  Payment of local hospitality tax. Payment of the local hospitality tax shall be the responsibility of the consumer of the services described in section 38-11(c). This tax shall be paid at the time of the delivery of the services or items to which the tax applies and shall be collected by the provider or seller of the service(s), or item(s). 
(f)  Remittance to the City of Aiken. The taxes collected by the seller or provider of the services or items as required in section 38-11(e) shall be remitted to the city business license administrator as set forth herein along with such return or form as may be established by the city business license administrator for such purpose. When the estimated amount of average tax is more than $50.00 per month, that seller or provider shall remit the amount due on a monthly basis. When the estimated amount of average tax is $25.00 to $50.00 per month, that seller or provider shall remit on a quarterly basis. When the estimated amount is less than $25.00 per month, that seller or provider shall remit on an annual basis. 
(g)  Payment due dates. Taxes and required reports shall be submitted to the city business license administrator by the 20th day of the month following the due date of the tax payment and shall cover sales of the previous month, quarter, and/ or year depending on the seller's monthly average tax. Any taxes not timely remitted shall be subject to a penalty of five percent of the unpaid tax for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. The failure to collect from patrons the tax imposed by this section shall not relieve any establishment subject to this section from making the required remittance. 
(h)  Penalties for violations. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to punishment under section 1-13 of this Code upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties, and costs provided for herein. 
(i)  Expenditure of proceeds. As part of the annual budget process, the city manager shall report to city council regarding the annual revenue received from this tax and the annual expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 05112015 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-11-2015) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 38-11 by Ord. No. 05112015 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 11, 2015, said section was repealed by Ord. No. 02122001, § 1, adopted Feb. 12, 2001. The former § 38-11 pertained to the local hospitality tax and derived from Code 1980, § 21-25.  
Secs. 38-12—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DELINQUENT TAXES 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Officers invested with powers and duties to collect delinquent taxes. 
The director of public safety, the city finance director, the revenue administrator/tax collector, or their designee, are hereby invested with all the rights, powers and privileges, and they are, as needed, hereby charged with all the duties of the officers designated for the enforcement and collection of delinquent taxes by the Constitution and laws of the state and all amendments thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 21-8; Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 38-32. - Due date; penalty for late payments; when unpaid taxes go into execution. 
(a)  All taxes for the year shall normally be due and payable during the month of October without discourse unless otherwise directed by the city finance director and the city manager for a particular year, as set forth in subsection (b) below. In years where the city's tax books open [i.e. Tax files are loaded into the city tax system, reviewed and balanced and processing of payments is able to begin] before September 15, the following penalties will be applicable: Taxes paid during the month of November shall be subject to a penalty of five percent for late payment; taxes paid during the month of December shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent for late payment; and taxes not paid until on or after January 1 will be subject to a penalty of 15 percent for late payment. On February 15 of each year, all unpaid taxes shall go into execution, subject to a cost of 2½ percent additional charge. 
(b)  In years where the city's tax books open after September 15 [ie. Tax files are loaded into the city tax system, reviewed and balanced and processing of payments is able to begin], the city finance director and the city manager shall establish the tax book open date for the city taxes whereby city residents shall have a minimum of 45 days from the date of the tax book open date to pay their city taxes without penalty. Thereafter, the following penalties shall be applicable: (1) Taxes paid more than 45 days from the date of the tax book open date and less than 75 days late shall be subject to a penalty of five percent for late payment; taxes paid more than 75 days from the date of the tax book open date and less than 105 days late shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent for late payment; and taxes paid more than 105 days from the date of the tax book open date will be subject to a penalty of 15 percent for late payment. If the city taxes are not paid within 135 days from the date of the tax book open date, all unpaid taxes shall go into execution, subject to a cost of 2½ percent additional charge. 
(Code 1980, § 21-9; Ord. No. 10282002, § 1, 10-28-2002)  
Sec. 38-33. - Issuance and contents and form of executions against defaulting taxpayers. 
(a)  Immediately after May 1 of each year, the city finance department director, or a designee, shall issue, in the name of the city, an execution against any defaulting taxpayer. Such warrant or execution shall be signed by the city finance department director, or a designee, directed to the revenue administrator/tax collector, or a designee, requiring and commanding levy of the taxes or assessments by distress and sale of so much of the defaulting taxpayer's estate, real, personal, or both, as may be sufficient to satisfy the taxes or assessments due by such defaulter, and specifying the aggregate amount of all taxes or assessments due the city. 
(b)  Tax executions shall be in substantially the same form as that provided in S.C. Code Annotated §§ 12-51-40 et seq. (and as amended) for the collection of delinquent taxes owed to the state or county. 
(Code 1980, § 21-10; Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 38-34. - Tax liens. 
(a)  The taxes, assessments, license taxes and penalties legally assessed by the city shall constitute a lien on the property upon which the taxes, assessments, license taxes, and penalties were made until paid in full, which lien shall be paramount to all other liens, except liens for county and state taxes. 
(b)  As soon as any property within the city is listed with the auditor of the county for taxation, such tax assessment shall immediately become a lien on such property. 
(Code 1980, § 21-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Feb. 13, 2006, deleted § 38-34 and renumbered former § 38-36 as § 38-34 as set out herein. Former § 38-34 pertained to execution lists and derived from Code 1980, § 21-11.  
Sec. 38-35. - Seizure and sale of property for delinquent taxes generally. 
(a)  Under and by virtue of the execution provided for in this chapter, the revenue administrator/tax collector shall seize, take exclusive possession of, and sell so much of the defaulting taxpayer's estate, real, personal, or both, as may be necessary to raise the sums of money named, and the charges thereon, in the manner provided for in S.C. Code Annotated §§ 12-51-40 et seq. (and as amended). 
(b)  All real property returned delinquent by the city finance department director, or a designee, upon which the taxes shall not be paid by distress or sale of personal property or otherwise, shall be seized and sold as provided by law. The distress and sale of personal property shall not be a condition precedent to seizure and sale of any real property under this article. 
(c)  Whenever any real estate is levied upon for taxes by the revenue administrator/tax collector, or a designee, it shall be a duty, before proceeding to advertise the real estate for sale, to give 20 days' written notice of such levy to the owner of each mortgage contained on the list filed at the city in the manner provided for under S.C. Code Annotated §§ 12-49-220 et seq. (and as amended) and the revenue administrator/tax collector shall follow the procedure set forth in those sections. 
(Code 1980, § 21-14; Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Feb. 13, 2006, deleted § 38-35 and renumbered former § 38-37 as § 38-35 as set out herein. Former § 38-35 pertained to the return of uncollectible executions and derived from Code 1980, § 21-12.  
Sec. 38-36. - Payment by purchase at tax sale; execution and form of title. 
(a)  Purchasers at any tax sale shall pay the amount bid to the revenue administrator/tax collector, or a designee, immediately after the closing of the sale and they shall give to such purchaser a receipt for the purchase money. Title deeds shall not be made until the expiration of at least 12 months from the date of such sale and then only if the property sold is not redeemed as provided in S.C. Code §§ 12-51-40 et seq. (and as amended). 
(b)  The form of the title to real estate given to purchasers at a tax sale shall be substantially the same form as the title deed given to purchasers at tax sales for state or county taxes. 
(Code 1980, § 21-15; Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 38-37. - Purchase of land by city at tax sale. 
In case there is no bid at a tax sale equal in amount to the delinquent taxes, together with all penalties, costs, or charges, named in the execution against the property, the city shall buy the land for the city, as the actual purchaser, for the amount of such taxes, penalties, costs, and charges. The revenue administrator/tax collector shall execute title to the city in the same manner as to any other purchaser, and he shall put the city, or its authorized officers or agents, in possession of the premise s as provided by law. The land so sold to the city shall be treated as an asset of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 21-16; Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 38-38. - Settlement with city after tax sale. 
The revenue administrator/tax collector shall make immediate settlement with the city and pay over all funds collected from the sale of property for taxes due to the city and take the receipt therefor. 
(Code 1980, § 21-17; Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 38-39. - Tax deeds as evidence of title, etc. 
All deeds of conveyance made by the revenue administrator/tax collector under the authority of this chapter, whether executed to the city or to any other person, shall be held and taken as prima facie evidence of a good title in the holder, that all proceedings have been legally conducted, and that all requirements of law have been met. 
(Code 1980, § 21-18; Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 38-40. - Collection of taxes on property about to be moved from city. 
In case any property within the city listed with the county auditor for taxation is about to be taken or removed from the jurisdiction of the city before taxes are due and payable for any year, the revenue administrator/tax collector shall immediately issue an execution on the property and shall proceed to collect the taxes due on the property. 
(Code 1980, § 21-19; Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 38-41. - Ownership or operation of vehicles on which personal property taxes are delinquent. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any resident of the city to own or operate within the corporate limits of the city, or upon the public streets or ways of the city, any motor vehicle on which personal property taxes due to the city are delinquent and unpaid. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, personal property taxes assessed against any motor vehicle owned by any resident of the city shall be delinquent when the personal property taxes assessed against such motor vehicle are past due and unpaid and have gone into execution. 
(Code 1980, § 21-20; Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 38-42. - Location of tax sales. 
All tax sales under the provisions of this chapter must be conducted at such location as shall be set by the city revenue administrator/tax collector, in consultation with the finance department director, as authorized by South Carolina law; provided, however, that the location must be a place duly advertised prior to the date of this tax sale. 
(Code 1980, § 21-21; Ord. No. 02132006D, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-13-2006)  
Chapter 40 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, ch. 36; utilities, ch. 44. 
State Law reference— Authority to grant franchises for the use of public streets, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; requirement to grant, renew or extend franchises by ordinance, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-260(4); Cable System Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 58-12-10 et seq.; franchising cable television systems by municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 58-12-30. 
 
Sec. 40-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the cable communications ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-1)  
Sec. 40-2. - Intent and authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (codified at 47 USC, 521—559); the applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; S.C. Code 1976, §§ 58-12-10—58-12-130; S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; and other applicable laws of the United States and the state to promote public convenience, safety, health and welfare; protect consumers; protect and regulate public rights-of-way and property; and further the public interest. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-2)  
Sec. 40-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. 
Agency means the city manager. 
Auxiliary services means any communications service in addition to regular subscriber services, including, but not limited to, services for which a per-program or per-channel charge is made, pay TV, burglar alarm services, data or other electronic transmission services, facsimile reproduction services, meter reading services, interactive two-way services, and any other service utilizing any facility or equipment of a cable communications system operating pursuant to a franchise under this chapter. 
Cable communications system, cable system, cable television system or CATV system mean any facility that in whole or in part receives, directly or indirectly, over the air, and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals of television or radio stations and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services. This also includes any such system's auxiliary services. However, this does not include any portion of any system the primary business of which is to provide telephonic, telegraphic or similar services, except that such system shall be considered a cable system to the extent that such faculty is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers. 
Channel means a band of frequencies six megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum capable of carrying either one audio visual television signal and few nonvideo signals or a large number of nonvideo signals. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC mean the present federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, or any successor agency created by federal laws. 
Franchise means a nonexclusive authorization granted by the franchise authority which permits the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable communications system within the franchise area pursuant to this chapter. 
Franchise area means that portion of the franchise entity for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter. The franchise area may or may not be coterminous with the franchise entity. 
Franchise authority means the city council. 
Franchise entity means all areas within the corporate limits of the city, including any area henceforth added thereto during the terms of any franchise granted hereunder, or the city, a municipal corporation and political subdivision of the state, whichever is applicable to the context in which the term is used. 
Grantee means a holder of a franchise issued by the franchise entity pursuant to this chapter. 
Gross revenues means all cash, credits, compensation, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration directly or indirectly received by a grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, and any other person or entity in which the grantee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in the grantee, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Revenue from all charges for regular subscriber services, premium services, auxiliary services, or other cable services provided to subscribers in the franchise area (including leased access fees), less refunds but including the full amount recovered by any collection agency; 
(2)  Revenue from all charges for programming or the insertion of commercial advertisements upon a cable television system in the franchise area; 
(3)  Revenue from all charges for the leased use of studios or equipment; 
(4)  Revenue from all charges for the sale, installation, connection, and reinstatement of equipment and services for utilization of the cable communications system and the provision of subscriber and other services in the franchise area; 
(5)  The sale, exchange or use or cablecast of any programming developed for community use or institutional users in the franchise area; 
(6)  The value of any goods, services, or other remuneration in nonmonetary form values at retail price levels received by a grantee in consideration for performance by grantee of any advertising, programming or other service in connection with the cable television system; 
(7)  Revenues from any television programming or any other services offered in the franchise area by any means of delivery whatsoever where such programming or services are provided by means of the system or any part thereof; and 
(8)  Revenues from all cable services, cable operations, and cable-related activities within the city, including any and all ancillary and nonsubscriber services, operations or activities related to the cable system. 
The phrase "financial interest" as used in this definition shall include but not be limited to the following, to the extent derived from the operation of the cable system: 
(1)  Any contract in which a grantee or any named owner thereof is to receive a percentage of the gross revenues and/or a percentage of the net or other income of the other party to the transaction by reason of the activities encompassed by such contract; 
(2)  Any debt relationship in which a grantee or any named owner thereof as debtor borrows funds at a rate more advantageous than that generally available to similarly situated entities of similar credit worthiness; 
(3)  Any debt relationship in which a grantee or any named owner thereof as creditor receives a rate of interest exceeding that which would otherwise be paid by a similarly situated debtor of similar credit worthiness; or 
(4)  Any debt relationship which has conversion privileges to a form of equity of the nature described in the preceding subsection. 
Major stockholder means a beneficial owner, directly or indirectly, of ten percent or more of the issues and outstanding voting stock of any corporation. 
Regular subscriber service is that service regularly provided to all subscribers. It includes all broadcast signal carriage and all FCC required access channel carriage, including origination programming. It does not include specialized programming for which a per-program or per-channel charge is made. 
Street means the surface of and space above and below any public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, alley, right-of-way, public utility easement, or any other public ground or water now or hereafter within or located in the franchise entity. 
Subscriber means any person receiving regular subscriber service. 
Usable activated channels means channels engineered at the headend of the cable television system for the provision of services generally available to subscribers of the cable television system, regardless of whether services actually are provided, including any channel designated for public, educational, or governmental use, but excluding channels whose use for the distribution of signals would not meet the technical and safety standards of FCC rules, 47 CFR, 76.601 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 40-4. - Franchise to operate necessary. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commence or engage in the construction, operation or maintenance of a cable communications system without a franchise issued under this chapter. The franchise authority may, by ordinance, award a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system within all or any portion of the franchise entity to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who makes application for authority to furnish a cable communications system which complies with the terms and conditions of this chapter and applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. Provided that no franchise shall be awarded to an applicant if the proposed franchise service area is drawn in such a way as to deny access to cable service to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. Provided further, that this section and chapter shall not be deemed to require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or to prohibit the franchise authority from restricting the number of grantees should it determine such action or restriction would be in the public interest. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section, and upon conviction therefor, any such person shall be punished as provided by section 1-13. Each day that any such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-4)  
Sec. 40-5. - Term of franchise; revocation. 
(a)  Any franchise granted by the franchise authority shall be for a term of up to seven years following the date such franchise is accepted by the grantee, and, upon application of the grantee and review of the performance of the grantee in a public proceeding undertaken pursuant to the provisions of section 40-23, the franchise authority may renew the franchise for successive seven-year periods, with such modification of terms as the franchise authority may determine to be necessary to meet the present and future needs and interests of the franchise entity and its citizens. Provided, however, that the franchise authority may grant franchises or franchise renewals exceeding seven years but not exceeding 15 years pursuant to the provisions of section 40-30. 
(b)  The franchise authority may revoke any franchise granted under this chapter in the event the grantee shall refuse or neglect to comply with any material requirement or limitation contained in this chapter or applicable laws, regulations or ordinances. 
(c)  Should the franchise authority or agency determine that the grantee of a franchise issued under this chapter is in violation of any requirement or limitation of either this chapter or the franchise issued thereunder, it shall so notify the grantee, and the grantee shall, within 30 days, bring the franchise system into compliance, reporting any corrective action taken to the franchise authority in writing. 
(d)  If the franchise authority or agency finds that compliance has not been achieved within 30 days of the notice of violation and that no substantial good faith progress is being made toward compliance, it may schedule a public hearing to determine whether the franchise should be revoked. The grantee and the public shall be given at least 30 days notice of such a hearing, and all interested persons shall be heard in open hearing. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the franchise authority shall determine whether the franchise should be revoked and shall put forth, in writing, the facts and reasons upon which its decision is based. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-5)  
Sec. 40-6. - Cable television system agency. 
The franchise authority hereby designates and empowers the city manager or his designee to act for it in administrative matters relating to cable communications, cable communications systems, this chapter, and any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. This is cumulative to the other powers granted to the agency pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-6)  
Sec. 40-7. - Limitations of franchise. 
(a)  A grantee shall, at all times during the term of its franchise, be subject to the lawful exercise of the franchise entity's police power and such reasonable regulations as the franchise authority may subsequently promulgate thereunder. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit in any way the right of the franchise entity to levy nondiscriminatory charges, assessments fees, or taxes on any activity conducted by a grantee. 
(b)  All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets, and the franchise authority reserves the right reasonably to designate where a grantee's facilities are to be placed within the streets. 
(c)  A franchise shall be a privilege which is personal to the original grantee. It shall not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned, or disposed of, in all or in part, either by sale, merger, consolidation, sale of stock, transfer of control or otherwise, without the prior consent of the franchise authority expressed by ordinance, and then only under such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed therein and pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, which shall include an acceptance of all terms and conditions of the franchise by the person acquiring the franchise or control thereof, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed with the agency within 30 days after any such proposed transfer or assignment is executed. Any written request for transfer or assignment shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $3,500.00. 
(2)  Consent of the franchise authority shall not be granted until the franchise authority, in its discretion, has examined the legal, financial, technical, character and other qualifications of the person proposing to acquire the franchise or control thereof to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system in the franchise entity and has afforded all interested persons notice and an opportunity to be heard. The person proposing to acquire the franchise shall promptly provide all information and documents requested by the franchise authority. 
(3)  Consent of the franchise authority shall not be arbitrarily refused provided that the person proposing to acquire the franchise or control thereof possesses the requisite qualifications and agrees, in writing, to comply with all provisions of the franchise, any reasonable conditions prescribed by the franchise authority, and this chapter. 
(4)  The transfer of 20 percent or more of the voting securities of a corporate grantee to a person not presently a stockholder or a group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own 20 percent or more of the voting stock, singly or collectively, shall be deemed to be a transfer of control subject to this section. 
(5)  A change in the identity of the sole general partner or in the membership of a majority of the general partners of a limited partnership shall be deemed to be a transfer of control subject to this section. 
(6)  No such consent shall be required for a transfer: 
a.  In trust, of system assets by mortgage or by other hypothecation, to secure an indebtedness related to operations under the franchise. 
b.  To a parent or subsidiary of a corporate grantee. 
c.  To a corporation whose stock is held by the same stockholder as grantee. 
d.  Of less than 20 percent of the voting securities of a corporate grantee unless such transfer also results in a transfer of voting control. 
e.  Of stock from one present stockholder to another present stockholder unless such transfer also results in a transfer of voting control. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to in any way impair or affect the right of the franchise entity to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the franchise entity's power of eminent domain, at a price reflective of its fair market value as an ongoing concern, and nothing in this section shall be construed to constitute a waiver of, or bar to, the exercise of any governmental power of the franchise entity. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-7)  
Sec. 40-8. - Indemnification; defense of litigation; insurance. 
(a)  Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the franchise entity, its officers, boards, commission, agents, and employees, against and from, regardless of the merits, any and all claims, demands, causes of actions, actions, suits, proceedings, fines, damages (including, but not limited to, damages to franchise entity property, damages arising out of copyright infringements, and damages arising out of any failure by grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or licensors of programs to be delivered by grantee's cable television system), and costs or liabilities (including costs or liabilities of the franchise entity with respect to its employees) of every kind and nature whatsoever, including, but not limited to, damages for bodily injury or death or damage to person or property; against and from all liability to others; and against and from any loss, cost, or expense resulting or arising out of any of the foregoing, including, but not limited to any attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witnesses or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expense, traveling and transportation expense, or other costs or expense, arising out of or pertaining in any way to the exercise or enjoyment of any franchise under this chapter by any grantee or the granting thereof by the franchise entity. 
(b)  Grantee shall at the sole risk and expense of grantee, upon demand of the franchise entity, made by and through the franchise entity's attorney, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions, or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative, or otherwise, brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities against or affecting the franchise entity, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees, and arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or enjoyment of such franchise or the granting thereof by the franchise entity. 
(c)  Grantee shall pay and satisfy and shall cause to be paid and satisfied any judgment, decree, order, directive, fine, or demand rendered, made or issued against grantee, the franchise entity, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, or employees in any of these matters; and such indemnity shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other assurance required hereunder, or otherwise; provided, that neither grantee, nor the franchise entity shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause of action, action, suit, or other proceeding asserted against both grantee and the franchise entity or to which grantee and the franchise entity are both parties, without first obtaining the written consent of the other, which written consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(d)  Upon acceptance of the franchise the grantee shall file with the agency and shall thereafter during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect: 
(1)  Workers' compensation insurance as provided by the laws of the state. 
(2)  Comprehensive liability insurance with limits of not less than: 
a.  For personal injury, bodily injury, or death to any person, $1,000,000.00; 
b.  For personal injury, bodily injury, death or other liability resulting from any one accident or occurrence, $1,000,000.00; and 
c.  For property damage resulting from any one accident, $1,000,000.00. 
The insurance policies obtained by a grantee in compliance with this section shall be issued by a company or companies licensed to do business in this state and are subject to approval by the franchise entity's attorney, and a current certificate or certificates of insurance, along with written evidence or payment of all required premiums, shall be filed by the grantee with the agency and maintained with the agency during the term of the franchise. The policies shall name the franchise entity as an additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered to the agency 30 days in advance of the effective date thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-8)  
Sec. 40-9. - Technical requirements; channel capacity. 
(a)  The cable communications system to be constructed by grantee shall be, at a minimum, installed, maintained, and operated at all times in full compliance with the technical and channel capacity standards of the FCC, as they exist on the effective date of this chapter, or as they may hereafter be amended to be more stringent, and all other applicable laws, ordinances, codes and regulations. Signal quality for all cable channels, including broadcast, encoded and noncoded cablecast, and two-way transmission channels, shall comply with the technical standards of the FCC for broadcast channels, presently codified at 47 CFR, 76.605, or successor provisions thereto, as they exist on the effective date of this chapter, or as they may hereafter be amended or recodified under a different section or sections. The results of annual performance tests conducted in accordance with 47 CFR, 76.601(c) of the FCC's rules (or such other section of the rules as shall incorporate its substance) or successor provisions thereto shall be retained for at least five years by a grantee and shall be available during business hours at the grantee's local business office for inspection by the franchise entity. 
(b)  Additionally, the cable communications system to be constructed or operated by the grantee shall have the capacity for return communication on at least a digital basis, distribution of color television signals, at least 21 usable activated channels, and a minimum of 40 channels of capacity. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-9)  
Sec. 40-10. - Safety requirements. 
A grantee shall at all times: 
(1)  Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the franchise entity's building codes and safety ordinances and all other applicable laws, codes, regulations and standards, and in such a manner that will not interfere with any installations or operations of the franchise entity. 
(2)  Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, and substantial condition, and in good order and repair, all structures, lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon the streets and other public places of the franchise entity, wherever situated or located. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-10)  
Sec. 40-11. - Service standards; business office; resolution of complaints. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection 40-14(a)(5), no person within the franchise area of a grantee shall be refused service; provided, however, that a grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or service charges. 
(b)  Throughout the term of its franchise, a grantee shall at a minimum: 
(1)  Maintain all parts of its system in good condition and in accordance with standards generally observed by the cable television industry so as to provide reliable quality services to subscribers. Sufficient employees shall be retained to provide safe, adequate and prompt service for all grantee's facilities. 
(2)  Maintain a local business office and service center which subscribers may reach by telephone without incurring long distance charges. The franchise authority may require the office to be located in the corporate limits of the franchise entity. The office shall be open to the public during regular business hours, Monday through Friday, except national holidays. Office hours shall be posted at the office location, and notice of such hours of operation shall be given to the agency. In addition, a grantee's local business office and service center shall have the capability of receiving service calls 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(3)  Provide service response 24 hours a day, seven days a week, for all complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments. Calls involving loss of reception on all channels shall be responded to immediately. Calls concerning degraded reception, including channel outages, shall be responded to within 24 hours on weekdays, and 48 hours on weekends, and shall be resolved as promptly as possible. 
(4)  Maintain a daily record or log listing the date and time of customer complaints or requests for service, describing the nature of the complaint or request for service, and when and what action was taken by the grantee in response thereto, including the time it was resolved. Such records shall be kept in the grantee's local business office for a period of at least three years, and shall be available for inspection and copying by the franchise entity during regular business hours without special or advance notice or demand. 
(5)  Specify a four-hour time period for all installation or service appointments. If a grantee's service technician is unable to keep an appointment concerning installation or for other service, the grantee shall call and advise the subscriber in advance and reschedule the appointment for a specific time. 
(c)  In the event that a subscriber complaint or service problem is not resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the subscriber and the grantee, either the subscriber or the grantee may request, through the agency, that the matter be presented to an arbitration panel which shall meet in the franchise entity for hearing and resolution. The panel shall consist of three individuals, one selected by the franchise authority, one by the grantee, and one neutral individual selected by the other two arbitrators acting jointly. Notice regarding the hearing shall be given to all interested persons by the franchise authority. All costs of the arbitration shall be borne by the grantee unless the arbitration panel finds the subscriber's complaint to be groundless, frivolous or meritless, in which case the subscriber shall bear the costs of the arbitration. The decision of the arbitration panel, which shall be by majority vote of the three arbitrators, shall be final and binding on all parties. 
(d)  When, in the exercise of a reasonable judgment and discretion, and on the basis of subscriber complaints, service problems or other substantial evidence casting doubt on the reliability or quality of the cable service being provided, the franchise authority or agency finds there are reasonable grounds to believe that a grantee is providing substandard cable service, the franchise authority or agency shall have the authority to compel the grantee to test, review, analyze and report on the performance of the parts of the system, including customer service, which appear to be involved in the problems or the source of the complaints. The agency shall notify the grantee in writing of the need to test the system. Such tests may be conducted by the grantee, but the franchise entity reserves the right to direct that such tests be made by an independent consultant retained by the franchise entity, but paid for by the grantee. Tests shall be conducted consistent with the standards set forth in the franchise agreement and this chapter. The investigation of the problems shall be completed within 30 days of the date of formal notification. Reports on the investigation shall be delivered to the agency no later than 15 days after completion of testing. The reports shall include at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  Nature of the complaints or service problems which precipitated the special tests or review; 
(2)  System components or services tested; 
(3)  Equipment used and procedures employed in such testing or review; 
(4)  Test or review results; 
(5)  Method by which complaints or service problems were resolved; and 
(6)  Any other information pertinent to the special testing or review also shall be recorded. 
The franchise authority's rights under this provision shall be limited to requiring reviews, tests, analysis and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based on complaints, service problems, or other evidence which provide the franchise entity with reasonable grounds to believe testing is necessary to protect the public against substandard service. 
(e)  Planned interruptions of service, excluding routine repair work, shall be only for good cause. Insofar as possible, planned interruptions of service shall be preceded by notice given to subscribers at least 24 hours in advance and shall occur during minimum viewing hours. 
(f)  The following remedies for inadequate service or for interruption of service are hereby established: 
(1)  In the event that service to any subscriber is interrupted, except for natural disasters, and except in circumstances for which approval of the interruption is obtained from the agency, a grantee shall provide credit on or reimbursement of the monthly fees (basic, special, or premium service) to the subscriber on a pro rata basis for any interruption in cable services if the subscriber has made a complaint to the grantee or requested credit or reimbursement. If the service interruption continues for more than 12 hours and less than 24 hours on any day or portion of a day, then the customer shall be entitled to a full day credit for each such 12- to 24-hour period. 
(2)  In the event that degraded reception, i.e. poor quality reception, is the result of technical deficiency of the system and not caused by the equipment of the subscriber or user, or abuse of the grantee's equipment by the subscriber or user, the grantee shall credit the subscriber for the monthly fees (basic, special, or premium service) on a pro rata basis for any degraded reception quality if the subscriber has made a complaint to the grantee or requested a credit. If degraded reception quality continues for more than 12 hours and less than 24 hours on any day or portion of a day, then the customer shall be entitled to a full day credit for each such 12- to 24-hour period. 
(3)  In the event that the grantee's system fails to meet one or more of the operational standards detailed in the franchise agreement of this chapter, and for which a performance test has been requested pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, for a full three-month period, grantee shall reduce fees to all subscribers by 25 percent until all operational standards are met. The agency's notification to conduct performance tests pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be the date upon which the three-month period commences. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-11)  
Sec. 40-12. - Inspection of property and records. 
(a)  Grantee shall at all reasonable times, and to the extent necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter, permit any duly authorized agent or representative of the franchise entity to examine all franchise property of grantee, together with any appurtenant property of grantee situated within or without the franchise entity, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by grantee or under the control or direction or at the request of grantee which pertain in any way to the franchise operations, affairs, transactions, or property of grantee. 
(b)  Any of such map or other records which are not situated within the franchise entity and which are not made available in the franchise entity within a reasonable time after written request therefor by the agency or the franchise entity's attorney, shall be produced for examination wherever the map or other records shall be situated, and grantee shall pay all travel and other expenses necessarily or reasonably incurred by the franchise entity, its agents, and representatives in making such examination. 
(c)  Grantee shall prepare and furnish to the agency, at such times and in such form as prescribed by the agency, references, and materials relating to the operations, affairs, transactions, or property of grantee as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the duties of the agency or franchise authority. All annual financial reports submitted by the grantee to any state or federal regulatory agency shall be simultaneously submitted to the agency. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-12)  
Sec. 40-13. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(a)  Any pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other area taken up or disturbed or any excavations made by a grantee shall be done under the supervision or direction of the authority responsible for the maintenance of the street or public place or facilities involved and shall be done in such a manner the least inconvenient to the inhabitants of the franchise entity, users of the streets, places, and facilities and adjoining property owners. A grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the agency or other authority, replace, repair, and restore any such pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved areas in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done, and shall also make and keep full and complete plats, maps, and records showing the exact locations of its facilities located within the streets, public places, and easements of the franchise entity. These maps shall be available for inspection at any time during business hours by the agency. 
(b)  A grantee shall at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove, any of its property located in, under, on or over the streets and other public places or facilities of the franchise entity when required by the franchise authority or agency by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, road construction, change of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of municipal improvements or operations; provided, however, that the grantee shall, in all cases, have the privilege of abandoning any property in place. 
(c)  A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the franchise entity, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 96 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(d)  Grantee shall make use of existing poles and other facilities available to it to the maximum extent feasible. 
(e)  Subject to prior approval by the city horticulturist, a grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, but only to the minimum extent feasible to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee, except that, at the option of the city horticulturist, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee. In case of an emergency, prior approval of the city horticulturist is not required. 
(f)  In all sections of the franchise area where cable, wires or other similar facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities, whether existing or not, underground to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the grantee to do so. To the extent existing technology does not permit underground placement, the facilities may be placed above ground but must be of such size, design and location as not to be unsightly or unsafe. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the grant to use streets, no street shall be used by grantee if the franchise authority determines that such use is inconsistent with the terms, conditions or provisions by which such street was created, or dedicated, is inconsistent with how the street is properly used by the franchise entity or public, or creates a public safety hazard. 
(h)  Nothing in a franchise agreement or this chapter shall be deemed to compel the franchise entity to maintain or retain any of its property any longer than or in any fashion other than, in its discretion, its own operations or needs may require. 
(i)  The franchise entity shall not be required to assume any responsibility for securing any rights-of-way or easements for grantee, nor shall it be responsible for securing for grantee any permits or agreements with other persons or utilities. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-13) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 40-14. - Construction. 
(a)  A grantee shall extend the installation of cables, amplifiers, and related equipment and facilities throughout the area covered by its franchise as rapidly as practicable, but, in any event, shall: 
(1)  Begin engineering studies within 30 days after accepting its franchise. 
(2)  Begin awarding contracts within 90 days after receiving certification from the FCC. 
(3)  Begin construction of its proposed system within six months after receiving certification from the FCC. 
(4)  Begin rendering service to subscribers within one year of franchise award from the franchise entity. 
(5)  Complete construction of 50 percent of its proposed system (measured in terms of total linear strand miles) within two years after receiving certification from the FCC and complete an additional 25 percent each year thereafter so that after four years the entire system shall be constructed and the grantee capable of providing service no more than 60 days after receiving an application for service to every household within the franchise area. 
(6)  File a map and progress report with the agency at the close of each calendar year showing the exact areas of the franchise entity being services by the cable television system and lines. 
(b)  Failure on the part of a grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the requirements of this section and to complete each of the matters set forth in this section shall be grounds for revocation of its franchise pursuant to the terms of section 40-5, provided, however, that the franchise authority may in its discretion extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods in the event that grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reasons of circumstances beyond its control. 
(c)  In the event the operation of any part of a cable television system is discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event a system has been installed in any public street without complying with requirements of the grantee's franchise, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given ten days' notice by the franchise authority or agency, remove from the streets or public places at its own expense all such property and poles of such system. Any property which the grantee allows to remain in place 60 days after having been notified by the franchise authority or agency that it must be removed shall be considered permanently abandoned and shall become the property of the franchise entity subject to the provisions of any utility joint use attachment agreement. 
(d)  Upon the failure of grantee to satisfactorily complete any work upon the public streets as may be required by this chapter or the terms of its franchise agreement within the time prescribed, the franchise authority or agency, at its option, may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay the franchise entity the cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of any itemized statement therefor. 
(e)  In the case of a franchise renewal, the franchise agreement or other document containing the terms of the renewal shall set forth the obligations of the grantee to extend, improve, or upgrade its services, equipment, and facilities. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-14) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10.  
Sec. 40-15. - Performance and construction bond. 
(a)  Concurrently with the acceptance of its franchise, a grantee shall file with the agency a permanent payment and performance bond, with surety acceptable to the franchise authority, in an amount determined by section 40-16 to indemnify the franchise entity against any losses it may suffer if the grantee fails to comply with one or more of the provisions of this chapter or its franchise. The bond shall be obtained at the sole expense of the grantee and shall be upgraded in the event the number of subscribers increase such that it would place the cable television system in a higher subscriber range and would therefore increase the amount of the bond. A bond set as prescribed in this section shall remain in effect for the full term of the franchise or any renewal thereof plus an additional six months thereafter. For an existing cable television system operating satisfactorily under a current franchise within the franchise entity for a period of three or more years, the franchise authority may modify or waive the performance bond in its discretion by resolution. The grantee and its surety shall be jointly and severally liable under the terms of the bond for any damage or loss suffered by the franchise entity as a result of the grantee's nonperformance, including default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. The bond shall provide for 30 days prior written notice to the agency of any intention on the part of the grantee or surety to cancel, fail to renew, or otherwise materially alter its terms. Neither the filing of an indemnity bond with the agency, nor the receipt of any damages recovered by the franchise authority thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under the terms of this chapter or its franchise for damages either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(b)  Within 30 days after the award of a franchise, grantee shall file with the agency a construction bond with a surety acceptable to the franchise authority or agency, or cash in lieu of a bond, in an amount equal to 110 percent of the estimated system construction cost, to indemnify the franchise entity against any losses it may suffer in the event the grantee fails to complete on time each construction phase of the system. The bond shall be obtained at the sole expense of the grantee and remain in effect for the time of construction. The bond shall be reduced by the franchise authority or agency in increments to be based upon the timely completion of each phase of system following approval by the agency. A grantee that has completed primary construction and is extending the system into new service areas of the franchise entity shall provide a construction bond each year in an amount equal to 110 percent of the estimated cost of all proposed cable system construction by the grantee during such year. The grantee shall provide a certificate to the agency by January 1 of each year estimating the costs of all projected construction during such year and shall provide the construction bond within 30 days after submitting the certificate. The franchise authority agrees to sign any documentation required by the grantee in order to release any construction bond, provided that an appropriate replacement bond, if required, will be provided to the franchise entity. The grantee and its surety shall be jointly and severally liable under the terms of the bond for any damages suffered by the franchise entity as a result of the grantee's nonperformance, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost to cure, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. The bond shall provide for 30 days' prior written notice to the agency of any intention on the part of the grantee or surety to cancel, fail to renew, or otherwise materially alter its terms. Neither the filing of any indemnity bond with the agency, nor the receipt of any damages by the franchise authority thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful performance and timely construction by the grantee, or limit the liability of the grantee under the terms of this chapter or its franchise for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-15)  
Sec. 40-16. - Performance and payment bond schedule. 
The performance and payment bond schedule for franchise owners shall be as follows: 
Number of Subscribers 	Amount for Performance 
and Payment Bond 
0 to 1,000 ..... 	$ 10,000.00 
1,001 to 5,000 ..... 	  50,000.00 
5,001 to 10,000 ..... 	 100,000.00 
10,001 to 20,000 ..... 	 200,000.00 
 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-16)  
Sec. 40-17. - Franchise fee payments. 
(a)  Any person awarded a franchise under this chapter shall pay the franchise entity each year during the term of the franchise a franchise fee in a percentage amount, which shall not exceed the maximum permitted by applicable federal and state laws and which shall be specified in the franchise agreement between the franchise entity and the grantee, of its annual gross revenues derived from its operation of the cable communications system within the franchise area. The fee shall be paid to the franchise entity on a quarterly basis by the grantee pursuant to terms specified in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  A grantee shall file with the agency, within 90 days after expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which its franchise is in force, a financial statement certified by a responsible officer of the grantee, reporting in detail the gross revenues, as defined in this chapter, of the grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay the franchise entity within 15 days after the time for filing such statement any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar year covered by such statement. If an overpayment has been made, it shall be credited against the franchise fee for the succeeding year. 
(c)  The franchise entity shall have the right to inspect the grantee's records showing the gross revenues from which its franchise payments are computed and shall also have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid or due under this chapter or the franchise agreement. No acceptance of payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the franchise entity may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation under this chapter. However, an accounting rendered to the franchise entity and to which no exception is made within three years after receipt by the franchise entity shall be deemed to be accurate and shall not thereafter be subject to question or made the basis of any claim by the franchise entity against grantee. 
(d)  Interest to be charged the grantee for late payment of franchise fees shall be specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-17)  
Sec. 40-18. - Rates charged to subscribers. 
(a)  A grantee's rate structure must be uniform throughout the franchise area. No rate established by a grantee shall afford any undue preference or advantage among subscribers. 
(b)  Grantee shall, at all times, keep on file and maintain with the agency and in its local business office a complete information tariff containing schedules of all charges, rates, and fees charged by grantee to all classes of its subscribers, together with any amendments thereto. 
(c)  No rate shall be increased unless a grantee provides notice thereof to subscribers 45 days prior to the effective date of the increase. 
(d)  The franchise authority expressly reserves the right at its discretion to review, regulate and/or approve the rates which a grantee charges its subscribers for such services as it may be permitted to regulate by existing or subsequent federal or state laws or regulations; provided, however, that such right of the franchise authority may be exercised only by affirmative action of the franchise authority after a duly noticed public hearing. A grantee shall not deny, delay, interrupt, or terminate cable service or the use of community communications facilities to subscribers because the franchise authority denies a request for a rate increase; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit a grantee's right to seek judicial review of the reasonableness of any such action. 
(e)  No rate, fee or charge of any kind, which is within the approval authority of the franchise entity as set forth in subsection (d) of this section, shall be charged or collected from subscribers by the grantee without authorization by the franchise authority. 
(f)  A grantee may request rate increases or decreases at any time in accordance with this section; provided, however, that initial rates to be charged and collected by a new grantee from subscribers shall be established in the agreement granting a franchise; provided further, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the first renewal of a franchise in existence on the effective date of this chapter. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a grantee from reducing or waiving charges in conjunction with bona fide promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers or users. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-18)  
Sec. 40-19. - Termination of service. 
(a)  Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the subscriber's premises upon the subscriber's request. 
(b)  If a grantee terminates services to a subscriber of less than the three years without good cause or because the grantee ceases to operate a system authorized hereunder for any reason, except expiration of a franchise granted hereunder, the grantee shall refund to such subscriber that portion of the initial tap-in and connection charge paid by the subscriber representing the unused remainder of the three-year period, determined by prorating the date of notice of terminate on a month-unit basis. 
(c)  No subscriber's service may be terminated for nonpayment of charges unless the subscriber is provided ten days' written notice prior to such termination. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-19)  
Sec. 40-20. - Public service requirements. 
A grantee shall: 
(1)  Provide at least one service outlet to all franchise entity facilities and all public schools within its franchise area which are located within 300 feet of grantee's lines at no cost to the franchise entity or school involved, and shall charge only its time and material costs for any other service outlets to such facilities. There shall be no charge for basic cable service for one outlet for each such location. 
(2)  Provide at least one channel, without charges or restrictions, for use by the franchise entity. 
(3)  Provide at least one channel for educational and public access uses. 
(4)  Make its facilities immediately available to the franchise entity upon request during the course of any emergency or disaster. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-20)  
Sec. 40-21. - Amendment of any franchise. 
The franchise authority may amend this chapter, and any franchise issued hereunder, upon its own motion or the application of a grantee whenever amendment is necessary to enable the grantee to utilize new development in television or radio signal transmission which would improve and update cable television service in the franchise area. No amendment shall be adopted except after a public hearing, and no amendment substantially amending the existing rights and obligations of the grantee or franchise entity shall be adopted without its consent, unless otherwise required by federal or state laws or regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-21)  
Sec. 40-22. - Application procedures. 
(a)  This chapter itself grants no authority to operate a cable television system to any person. Such grants are only made by the adoption of separate ordinances awarding a specific franchise to an applicant who has complied with the provisions of this chapter and accepted a franchise agreement. 
(b)  Any person interested in obtaining a franchise to operate a cable communication system in the franchise area shall submit a written application to the franchise authority, together with a nonrefundable application fee of $3,500.00, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and form of business of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, it shall also state the names, addresses and occupation of its officers, directors and major stockholders, and the names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary companies. If the applicant is a corporation controlled by another corporation, the names, addresses and occupations of the officers, directors and major stockholders of the controlling corporation also shall be stated. If the applicant is a partnership or other unincorporated association, the name and address of each member, whether active or inactive, shall be set forth, and if one or more partners are corporations, the names, addresses and occupations of such corporations' officers, directors and major stockholders also shall be stated. 
(2)  A list of all other cable television systems, if any, in which the applicant (or any partner or major stockholder of applicant) has a substantial interest, stating the location, approximate number of homes served, and the name and address of the franchising body. 
(3)  A thorough description of the proposed cable communications system to be installed and operated; the manner in which the applicant purposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the cable communications system; and the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of public utility companies will be used in the proposed system, together with a legible map or maps delineating proposed service areas if the applicant proposes to serve less than the entire franchise entity. 
(4)  A schedule of all proposed rates and charges to all classes of subscribers for both installation and monthly service, and a copy of the proposed service agreement between the applicant and its proposed subscribers. 
(5)  A copy of each existing or proposed contracts between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of such utility's facilities, such as poles, lines, or conduits. 
(6)  A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral, or implied, between the applicant and any other person with respect to the proposed cable communication system or operation. If a franchise shall be granted to a person posing as a front or representative of another person, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever. 
(7)  An estimate of the cost of constructing the applicant's proposed system and a financial statement prepared in form satisfactory to the franchise authority or agency showing applicant's financial status and its financial ability to meet those proposed costs. 
(8)  A sworn statement acknowledging the applicant's familiarity with and eligibility under the provisions of this chapter and FCC regulations and rules and its intention to abide by such provisions and regulations. 
(9)  Any supplementary information as the franchise authority or agency shall at any time demand in order reasonably to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. 
(c)  No application for a new franchise shall be accepted by the franchise authority until it has announced its intention to award such a franchise or franchises. Written comments shall then be accepted from all interested persons for a period of 30 days. 
(d)  The franchise entity shall then: 
(1)  Specify a date, not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days following receipt of a complete application with all required information, for a public hearing before the franchise authority. 
(2)  Specify a public place where interested persons may inspect the applications and accompanying information. 
(e)  Prior to the hearing, the applicant and franchise entity shall develop a proposed franchise agreement. 
(f)  After hearing the presentations of all interested persons, including members of the public, the franchise authority shall render a decision on awarding the franchise based upon its findings, among other things, on whether the application demonstrates the applicant's compliance with this chapter and applicable state and federal laws and regulations and adequate financial, technical and legal qualifications to provide satisfactory cable service. The franchise authority's decision on all applications shall be final and conclusive. 
(g)  The public hearing also shall serve as the public hearing on the proposed ordinance adopting the franchise agreement between the applicant and franchise entity. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-22)  
Sec. 40-23. - Renewal procedure. 
Renewals of franchises granted pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of 47 USC, 546, as amended, and any successor provisions thereto, all of which are incorporated in this section by reference, mutatis mutandis. The franchise authority may require a renewal application fee not to exceed that for a new franchise. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-23)  
Sec. 40-24. - Grantee may promulgate rules. 
A grantee may promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its services under this chapter, its franchise agreement, federal and state laws, and the regulations and rules of the FCC, and to assure uninterrupted service to its subscribers. Such rules and regulations shall not be deemed to have the force of law. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-24)  
Sec. 40-25. - Notice. 
Every direction, notice, or order to be served upon a grantee shall be sent to the local office described in subsection 40-11(b)(2). Every notice to be served upon the franchise entity or authority shall be delivered or sent by certified mail to the agency to the attention of the city manager, 214 Park Avenue S.W., Aiken, South Carolina, 29801. The delivery of such notice shall be deemed to have been at the time of receipt. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-25)  
Sec. 40-26. - Rights and remedies are cumulative. 
The rights and remedies reserved to the franchise entity, a grantee or any other person by this chapter are cumulative and shall not subtract from any other rights or remedies which they may have with respect to the subject matter of this chapter, and a waiver thereof at any time shall not affect their assertion at any other time. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-26)  
Sec. 40-27. - Right of franchise entity to intervene. 
The franchise entity reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action, or proceeding involving any provision of this chapter or any franchise agreement granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-27)  
Sec. 40-28. - Right of first refusal. 
If a grantee enters into a bona fide agreement to sell its cable system to another person, it shall notify the agency of the agreement within ten days of reaching the agreement and provide the agency with a copy of the agreement. The franchise entity shall treat the agreement as a nonpublic document to the extent permitted by law. The franchise authority shall have 30 days from receipt of the agreement to notify the grantee in writing that it will purchase the system on the same terms. If it does not so notify the grantee, the first right of refusal shall terminate. This section does not apply to a transfer or sale of the cable system to a subsidiary of the grantee or to a partnership which has the same general partner as the grantee. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-28)  
Sec. 40-29. - Municipal ownership. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall or shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the franchise entity from constructing, purchasing or operating a cable communications system within any franchise area or anywhere else. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-29)  
Sec. 40-30. - Variances. 
The franchise authority in its discretion may be resolution vary or modify the application of a provision of this chapter to a grantee where it determines, in its sole discretion, one of the following: 
(1)  The matter is pre-empted by federal or state laws or regulations; 
(2)  The grantee has a policy that is comparable to or exceeds the requirements of this chapter; 
(3)  Enforcement would jeopardize the financial solvency of the grantee; or 
(4)  To do so would be beneficial to the public, subscribers and the grantee. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-30)  
Sec. 40-31. - Annexed areas. 
(a)  If the franchise authority annexes an area, and if a grantee has an existing franchise for the entire corporate limits of the franchise entity, the grantee on its own initiative may submit, or after receiving a written request from the franchise authority 60 days prior thereto shall submit a plan and schedule for providing cable communications service to the annexed area as soon as practical. Upon approval by the franchise authority, the grantee shall implement the plan. 
(b)  If the franchise authority annexes an area, and if a grantee does not have a franchise to serve the entire corporate limits of the franchise entity, the grantee may apply to the franchise authority for its franchise to be amended to add any such annexed area to its franchise area. The franchise authority shall review the request to determine if the grantee meets the criteria in subsection 40-22(f) for providing service to the annexed area. 
(c)  If a grantee already is serving an area annexed by the franchise authority, it may continue to serve the area after annexation subject to approval by the franchise authority and amendment of the franchise agreement to include the annexed area, if necessary. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-32)  
Sec. 40-32. - Liquidated damages. 
The franchise agreement may contain provisions requiring the payment of liquidated damages to the franchise authority for a grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5-33)  
Chapter 42 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Use of vehicle for advertising purposes, § 4-3; municipal court, ch. 20; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 22; noise from vehicles, § 22-36; use of vehicle horn in quiet zone, § 22-37; racing vehicle motor, § 22-38; driving vehicle through parade, § 24-10; parking vehicle on parade route, § 24-11; riding, driving or parking vehicles or animals in parks, § 26-3; solicitations from occupants of vehicles, § 28-3; throwing litter from vehicles, § 32-38; vehicle or vehicle loads causing litter, § 32-39; parking requirements for garage sales, § 34-33; streets and sidewalks, ch. 36; vehicles and other property abandoned on streets, § 36-121 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Uniform Traffic Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-10 et seq.; general authority of city to regulate traffic, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 56-5-30, 56-5-710. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - State law adopted. 
(a)  All of the provisions and requirements of S.C. Code 1976, § 56-1-10 et seq., S.C. Code 1976, § 56-3-10 et seq., S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-10 et seq. and S.C. Code 1976, § 56-9-10 et seq., as now in force or as hereafter amended, insofar as such provisions can have application within the city, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set out at length in this section. All persons within the city shall strictly comply with all regulations imposed thereby, when so applicable. 
(b)  Words and phrases defined in the state law adopted by this section when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by such state law. 
(c)  Whenever the words "public highways of the state" are used in the state law adopted by this section, they shall be construed to mean and include the streets and other public ways of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 22-1)  
Sec. 42-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
lt shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to perform any act required, in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 22-2)  
Sec. 42-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any section of this chapter in which a penalty is not specified shall be punished as provided in section 1-13; provided that, in cases where the state, by statute, provides a lesser penalty for a similar offense, the penalty imposed by the state shall govern. 
(Code 1980, § 22-3)  
Sec. 42-4. - Disposition of fines and forfeitures. 
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 22-4)  
Sec. 42-5. - General powers and duties of director of public safety relative to traffic. 
The director of public safety, upon approval of his recommendations therefor by resolution of the city council, shall have power to designate, lay off and indicate, by appropriate signs and markings: parking spaces and zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, loading zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, no passing zones, traffic zones other than the above, pedestrian crosswalks, through streets, stop streets, one-way streets, three- and four-lane streets, play streets, bus stops and taxicab stands, and shall erect and install such traffic control devices, signs and markings as he may deem necessary. It shall be unlawful for any person to disregard or fail to obey the directions of any such device, sign or marking. 
(Code 1980, § 22-5)  
Sec. 42-6. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1980, § 22-6)  
Sec. 42-7. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1980, § 22-7)  
Sec. 42-8. - Use of skates, coasters, etc., on roadway. 
No person upon roller skates, in-line skates or other wheeled device or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play streets. 
(Code 1980, § 22-8)  
Sec. 42-9. - Towing coasters, sleds, etc. 
The operator of a vehicle shall not tow or draw any coaster, sled, person on roller skates, in-line skate, skis, toy vehicle or other similar vehicle on a roadway. 
(Code 1980, § 22-9)  
Sec. 42-10. - Required use of crosswalks by pedestrians. 
(a)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, and between intersections or at locations where appropriate authorized traffic control signs have been erected so requiring, pedestrians shall not cross any roadway at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and shall give warning, by sounding the horn, when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1980, § 22-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-3120.  
Sec. 42-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05092011, § 3, adopted May 9, 2011, repealed § 42-11, which pertained to rules and regulations for rotation list wreckers and derived from Ord. No. 09082003, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 2003; Ord. No. 06132005, § 1, adopted June 13, 2005; Ord. No. 12102007A, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 2007 and Ord. No. 09082008E, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 8, 2008.  
Sec. 42-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05092011, § 3, adopted May 9, 2011, repealed § 42-12, which pertained to rules and regulations for rotation list wreckers (for larger vehicles) and derived from Ord. No. 09082003, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 2003 and Ord. No. 10102005B, § 1, adopted Oct. 10, 2005.  
Secs. 42-13—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform Act regulating traffic on highways, South Carolina Code 1976, § 56-5-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Obstructing intersections or crosswalks. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1980, § 22-21)  
Sec. 42-32. - "U" turns generally. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the business district of the city and shall not, upon any other street, so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 22-22) 
State Law reference— Limitation on "U" turns, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-2140.  
Sec. 42-33. - Obedience to signs, markers, etc., regulating turning. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or "U" turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such signs, and when authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1980, § 22-23) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate or prohibit turning at intersections, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(9).  
Sec. 42-34. - Driving in processions. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1980, § 22-24) 
Cross reference— Parades and other assemblies, ch. 24.  
Sec. 42-35. - Driving through processions. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion, except as otherwise directed by police officers. 
(Code 1980, § 22-25) 
Cross reference— Parades and other assemblies, ch. 24.  
Sec. 42-36. - Driving on one-way streets. 
Upon those streets and parts of streets as designated by official signs, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 22-26) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(4).  
Sec. 42-37. - Driving on play streets. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon such street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 22-27) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 42-38. - Driving on sidewalk. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area, except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1980, § 22-28) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 42-39. - Driving through or across private driveway, etc., to avoid traffic control device. 
No person shall drive any vehicle through or across any private driveway or filling station premises for the purpose of avoiding any traffic control device. 
(Code 1980, § 22-29)  
Sec. 42-40. - Careless driving. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in a careless manner in disregard of the safety of persons or property upon any street, sidewalk, alley or parking area, public or private, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 22-30)  
Sec. 42-41. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Any trucks, tractor-trailer units or similar vehicles entering the city and not taking on or delivering any goods, wares or merchandise within the city shall be driven exclusively on the truck routes established in subsection (c) of this section or on the portions of such truck routes as shall constitute the most direct route from the point of entrance into the city to the point of departure from the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, tractor-trailer unit or similar vehicle transporting freight, goods, wares or merchandise or used for such purposes when neither its origin nor its destination is within the city, on or over any street within the city not designated as a truck route or on or over any street where prohibited by signs erected by the city or state. 
(c)  The truck routes which may be lawfully traveled pursuant to this section are as follows: Along South Carolina Highway 118 (also known along portions thereof as Rutland Drive or Beaufort Street) from S.C. Highway 19 North to U.S. Highway 1 North and from U.S. Highway 1 North to U.S. Highway 78 East; along U.S. Highway 78 East to S.C. Highway 302; along S.C. Highway 302 (also known as Pine Log Road) from U.S. Highway 78 East to S.C. Highway 19 South (also known as Whiskey Road); along S.C. Highway 478 (also known as Hitchcock Parkway) from S.C. Highway 19 South to U.S. 1 South; and along S.C. Highway 118 (also known along portions thereof as the Robert M. Bell Parkway or University Parkway) from U.S. Highway 1 South to S.C. Highway 19 North. The foregoing routes shall include any streets constructed to replace or succeed the foregoing routes as bypasses around the city. 
(Code 1980, § 22-31)  
Sec. 42-42. - Speed limits upon unpaved roadways. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any unpaved roadway within the city limits at speeds in excess of 15 miles per hour, or as may be otherwise posted. 
(b)  Violations of this section shall be unlawful and subject to the penalties set forth under section 1-13, Code of the City of Aiken. 
(Ord. No. 03282005D, § 1, Exh. A, 3-28-2005)  
Secs. 42-43—42-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(1); stopping, standing and parking generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-2510 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-61. - Prohibited between curblines and adjacent property lines. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines. 
(Code 1980, § 22-42)  
Sec. 42-62. - Prohibited for certain purposes. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1980, § 22-43)  
Sec. 42-63. - Width of roadway available for traffic. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a public safety officer. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 22-44)  
Sec. 42-64. - Regulations for specific streets. 
When a sign is in place giving notice that the parking, stopping or standing of vehicles is prohibited, limited or restricted on any street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the directions of such sign. 
(Code 1980, § 22-45) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 42-65. - Method of parking. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, except that, upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such mark or signs. 
(Code 1980, § 22-46) 
State Law reference— Authority to permit angle parking, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-2550.  
Sec. 42-66. - Parking of vehicles exceeding twenty feet in length restricted to certain hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any truck, van, bus or other vehicle exceeding 20 feet in length to park on any street in the city which has been officially marked or indicated by the city for angle or parallel parking, except from 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1980, § 22-47)  
Sec. 42-67. - Backing to curb to load or unload. 
In places where and at hours when stopping for the loading or unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise or materials may be backed to the curb to take on or discharge loads, when the owner of such vehicle holds a special permit issued in the discretion of the director of public safety granting him such privilege, and such permit shall be either in the possession of the driver or on the vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed to the curb to take on or discharge a load. It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver to violate any of the terms or conditions of any such special permit. 
(Code 1980, § 22-48)  
Sec. 42-68. - Loading and unloading at rear or side of certain business houses required. 
All persons loading or unloading goods at any business house or establishment in a business district having accessible back or side entrances shall use such back or side entrances for the purpose of loading or unloading goods, and in all cases where there exists an accessible back or side entrance, it shall be unlawful to load or unload goods across any sidewalk of the principal business streets of the city, unless otherwise authorized by a special permit issued in the discretion of the director of public safety. 
(Code 1980, § 22-49)  
Sec. 42-69. - Restrictions on loading or unloading on Laurens Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading on Laurens Street, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any day, except in a designated loading and unloading zone indicated by official signs or markings. 
(Code 1980, § 22-50)  
Sec. 42-70. - General restrictions on use of passenger zones and loading zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time, other than for the expeditious loading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger zone, during hours when the regulations applicable to such passenger zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading or delivery or pick-up and loading of materials, in any place marked as a loading zone, during hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1980, § 22-51)  
Sec. 42-71. - Restrictions on parking or standing of buses and taxicabs and use of bus stops and taxicab stands. 
The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any taxicab from temporarily stopping, in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations, at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a bus, in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab, in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1980, § 22-52)  
Sec. 42-72. - Owner of vehicle not to permit parking violations. 
(a)  No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to be parked or left standing in any street in the city in violation of any provision of this article or any other ordinance regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(b)  The person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be absolutely responsible for violations of state law or city ordinances. It shall be no defense that the vehicle was illegally parked by someone other than the registered owner unless it is shown that at the time of the violation the vehicle was stolen and was not in possession of the registered owner. 
(c)  An owner of a vehicle who is engaged in the business of renting or leasing vehicles under written rental or leasing agreements shall not be liable for parking fines and penalties imposed under this section on such rented or leased vehicles, if, within 15 days after receiving notice of the parking violation, the lessor provides to the department of public safety the true name, address, and driver's license number of the person in possession of the vehicle at the time of the issuance of the citation. A lessor who fails to comply shall be treated as any other owner. Upon provision of this information, the department of public safety, in its discretion, may issue a parking citation against the lessee of the vehicle as established by the lessor under this section. 
(Code 1980, § 22-53; Ord. No. 10222001A, § 1, 10-22-2001)  
Sec. 42-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01122009A, § 2(Exh. B), adopted Jan. 12, 2009, repealed § 42-73, which pertained to removal of illegally stopped vehicles. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 42-74. - Handicapped parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in a parking place clearly designated for handicapped persons as defined by S.C. Code 1976, § 56-3-1950, or any successor provisions thereto, unless the vehicle bears a handicapped designated license plate or handicapped placard as provided by S.C. Code 1976, § 56-3-1960, or any successor provisions thereto. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person who is not handicapped or who is not transporting a handicapped person to park any vehicle in a parking place clearly designated for handicapped persons whether or not the motor vehicle has the license or placard described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days for each separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 22-55)  
Sec. 42-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01122009A, § 2(Exh. B), adopted Jan. 12, 2009, repealed § 42-75, which pertained to parking of vehicles in excess of 72 hours prohibited. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 42-76. - Unlawful to park vehicle so as to block refuse containers. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any manner so as to block a refuse container. The refuse containers referred to in this section are those provided for in section 32-6. Any vehicle found in violation of this section may be towed or otherwise removed by or at the direction of the department of public safety, and the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing, removal and storage costs arising therefrom. 
(Code 1980, § 22-57)  
Sec. 42-77. - City parking ticket. 
The director of the department of public safety, with the approval of the city manager, shall develop a uniform parking ticket for the purpose of vesting the municipal court with jurisdiction to hear and to dispose of violations of ordinances regulating parking within the city. The director shall design the ticket so that all of the necessary information concerning the identification of the motor vehicle involved and its owner are contained on the ticket as well as information concerning the location and date of the violation. All public safety officers and other authorized enforcement officers shall use only the uniform parking ticket authorized by this section in charging the persons with violations of parking ordinances in the city. The uniform parking ticket may not be used for and does not authorize the arrest of persons for any offense. 
(Code 1980, § 22-58)  
Sec. 42-78. - Parking of certain commercial vehicles in residential districts prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall park or leave standing between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., on any street, portion of a street, or on a public right-of-way in city residential districts, as defined by the city zoning ordinance, any truck, trailer, truck and trailer, or other commercial vehicle exceeding 10,000 pounds gross weight, or 20 feet in length. 
(b)  Additionally, no person shall park or leave standing, regardless of the time of day, for more than two continuous hours, on any street, portion of a street, or on a public right-of-way in city residential districts, as defined by the city zoning ordinance, any truck, trailer, truck and trailer, or other commercial vehicle exceeding 10,000 pounds gross weight, or 20 feet in length. 
(c)  These prohibitions shall not apply to trucks or commercial vehicles being used for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise, from or to any building or structure located within city residential districts, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any such building or structure for which a building permit has been obtained, or when such vehicle has an emergency breakdown. In the event of such an emergency breakdown, the vehicle must be moved within 14 hours. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall be unlawful and subject to the penalties set forth under section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, § 22-59; Ord. No. 11122001, § 1, Exh. A, 11-12-2001)  
Sec. 42-79. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicles means motor vehicles required to be registered in the state if operated on a public highway in the state that are left unattended on a right-of-way for more than 48 hours, or vehicles that have remained on private or other public property for a period of more than seven days without the consent of the owners or persons in control of the property. 
Derelict vehicles mean motor vehicles required to be registered in the state if operated on a public highway in the state: 
(1)  Whose motor or other major parts are in a state of disrepair, are partially dismantled, discarded, wrecked, or have been removed so as either to render the vehicle inoperable or incapable of operation in the manner for which it was originally intended, or if they were operated they would violate S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-4410 et seq.; or 
(2)  Whose manufacturer's serial plates, motor vehicle identification number, or any other means of identification have been removed so as to nullify efforts to locate or identify the registered owners; or 
(3)  Whose registered owners disclaim ownership or release all ownership rights; or 
(4)  That are left on property owned, or operated by, the City of Aiken for more than 48 hours; or 
(5)  That are left on private property for more than 48 hours without the property owner's, or person's in control, consent; or 
(6)  That are left on any public right-of-way in the city limits of Aiken for more than 48 hours; or 
(7)  That are incapable of self-propulsion or being moved in the manner for which they were originally intended, or their condition is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative or discarded, or which cannot safely or legally be operated. Junk motor vehicles do not include those vehicles completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner or completely covered by a car sized tarp or covered by a vehicle-sized tarp where they are not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent private properties. 
Motor vehicles means self-propelled land, water, or air vehicles which can be used for towing or transporting people or materials, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motor homes, motorized campers, boats, airplanes, motorcycles, motor scooters, mopeds, golf carts, four wheelers, motorized transport vehicles, tractors, snowmobiles, dune buggies, hot rods, or other on the road, or off the road, vehicles. 
Motor vehicle accessories means any part or parts of any motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 01122009A, § 1(Exh. A), 1-12-2009)  
Sec. 42-80. - Abandonment prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon motor vehicles, including derelict motor vehicles, on any private or public right-of-way, private or public street, or private or public real estate. It shall also be unlawful for any person, including owners or occupants controlling publicly or privately owned property, to abandon, or to permit the abandonment of, motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 01122009A, § 1(Exh. A), 1-12-2009)  
Sec. 42-81. - Removal of abandoned vehicles. 
The persons responsible, or the registered owners of any such vehicles, if such can be determined after a reasonable search, or the owners of the premises on which such vehicles are located, or as many of them as may be as reasonably as possible, should be given notice to remove and dispose of abandoned vehicles, or they shall be in violation of the City Code. 
(1)  Vehicles on public property. If such persons, or owners, cannot be determined, or have not complied within the time prescribed by the notice, these vehicles, if located on public property, and in the discretion of the city, may be removed to a storage area for safekeeping at the direction of the city. Written notice of such removal should be promptly given to the registered owners of the vehicle and to any holders of any lien on record in the office of the state department of motor vehicles, as set forth below, if they can be determined after a reasonable search. The city may remove these vehicles without prior notice when these vehicles constitute a safety hazard or other public nuisance. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to park vehicles, or cause to allow vehicles to be parked, left, or to remain in public parking areas, streets, or public rights-of-way for a period of time exceeding 48 consecutive hours. When a vehicle has been so parked for a period of 24 consecutive hours, the department of public safety, or other city employee authorized to issue ordinance summonses, shall cause a colored tag to be placed upon these vehicles, notifying the owner of the provisions of this subsection. 
b.  The fact that vehicles found in violation of this section are registered in the name of a person shall be prima facie proof that such person was in control of the vehicle at the time of the violation. 
c.  Any vehicles found in violation of this section may be towed, or otherwise removed, by order of either the director of the department of public safety or a city official authorized to issue ordinance summonses. When any of them authorize the towing or removal of a vehicle under this section, the owner shall be responsible for all towing, removal, and storage costs. When a vehicle has been taken into custody pursuant to this section, they should notify, within seven days of the tow, by registered mail, return receipt requested, the last known registered owner of the vehicle that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall describe the vehicle, set forth its location, and advise the owner how to reclaim the vehicle upon payment of all towing, removal, and storage costs. 
(2)  Motor vehicles on private property. If located on private property, no such motor vehicles should be so removed from the premises by the city without the written authorization of the owners of the vehicle, if known, or the owners, lessees, or occupants of the premises, unless the vehicle has been declared by order of any authorized official, after due notice and opportunity for a hearing, to be a safety hazard or other public nuisance. Upon the issuance of such order, the costs of removal and disposal may be assessed against the persons responsible for the nuisance and such costs may be placed as a lien against their properties, and such lien shall be collectible in the same manner as municipal taxes. Vehicles on private property does not include those vehicles, regardless of condition, that are completely enclosed in a building or covered by an appropriate vehicle-sized tarp and not visible from the right-of-way or any adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 01122009A, § 1(Exh. A), 1-12-2009)  
Sec. 42-82. - Payment of costs of removal and storage; disposition of unclaimed motor vehicles. 
(a)  The owners of any vehicles removed pursuant to this division, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the city all reasonable costs incidental to its removal or storage or the locating of the owners. 
(b)  Should the owners fail or refuse to pay these costs within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or should their identities or whereabouts be unknown or unascertainable after a reasonable search and after notice as prescribed in section 42-81, the stored vehicle may be sold after 30 days' notice has been given to the state department of motor vehicles before the date of the sale and after the vehicle has been held for not less than 30 days; provided that section 42-83 shall govern disposition of any junk motor vehicles. 
(c)  These vehicles may be sold by public sale, after one public notice published in a newspaper of general circulation, but no vehicles may be sold or disposed of until their value has been determined in writing. 
(d)  Vehicles appraised at a value of less than $50.00 may be disposed of by any means in the discretion of the city or a storing agent of the city. 
(e)  The proceeds of any sale shall be forwarded to the finance director, who shall pay from the proceeds the costs of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and sale and other liens, in that order. If after the sale the ownership at the time of removal is established satisfactorily to the finance director, the owners may be paid so much of the proceeds as remains after payment of the costs and liens described in this subsection; otherwise, any remaining proceeds shall be deposited after 30 days in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01122009A, § 1(Exh. A), 1-12-2009)  
Sec. 42-83. - Removal of derelict motor vehicles and parts. 
(a)  The persons responsible, or the owners of the premises on which vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories are located, or the registered owners of any such vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories if they can be determined after reasonable search, or as many as possible, shall be given notice as prescribed in this division to remove and dispose of derelict motor vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories at their own expense, or they shall be in violation of this division. If such persons or owners cannot be determined or have not complied within the time prescribed by the notice, any such vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories, at the discretion of the city, may be removed from public property to a storage area for safekeeping at the direction of the city. None of these vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories shall be so removed from privately owned premises without the written authorization of the registered owners of the vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories, if known, or the owners, lessees, or occupants of the premises, unless the vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories have been declared by order of the authorized official, after due notice and hearing, to be a safety hazard or other public nuisance. Upon the issuance of such order, the costs of its removal and disposal may be assessed against the persons responsible for the nuisance, and such costs may be placed as a lien against their properties and collectible in the same manner as municipal taxes. 
(b)  Derelict motor vehicles and/or vehicle accessories may be removed to a designated place, and their owners may reclaim it by exhibiting reasonable proof of ownership and paying all reasonable costs incident to its removal and storage and administrative expenses. Unclaimed junk motor vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories may be destroyed, or otherwise disposed of, in summary manner after 30 days following possession of these vehicles and/or accessories under the provisions of this division. Notice should be promptly given after final disposition to the state department of motor vehicles, on such forms as it supplies, that they were deemed junk motor vehicles and have been disposed under this Code. This notice should fully and accurately describe these vehicles. Any proceeds derived from such disposition of motor vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any persons, after notifications have been given, to remove any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories from any private property to any other private property upon which such storage is not permitted or onto any public highway or other public property for purposes of storage. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to motor vehicles or motor vehicle accessories either completely covered by a car sized tarp or completely screened by legally installed and maintained buildings. No vehicles or accessories shall be visible from any public places, rights-of-way, or from any surrounding private property. 
(Ord. No. 01122009A, § 1(Exh. A), 1-12-2009)  
Sec. 42-84. - Disposition with owner's consent. 
With motor vehicles owners' written consent, the city at its own discretion may remove and immediately dispose of these vehicles as derelict motor vehicles regardless of value or condition of these vehicles, and without waiting the periods required by this division. 
As an incentive for voluntary removal of these motor vehicles, the owners of them will be paid $75.00 as an incentive deemed appropriate by city council. 
(Ord. No. 01122009A, § 1(Exh. A), 1-12-2009)  
Sec. 42-85. - Entry upon private property for abatement or removal is authorized. 
Any public safety, code enforcement, or other city officer, or official, designated as able to issue ordinance summonses by the city manager, is authorized to enter upon private property for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful to interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow a city officer or official to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this, or any related, chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01122009A, § 1(Exh. A), 1-12-2009)  
Sec. 42-86. - Appeal. 
Appeal of any administrative decision under the terms of this article shall be made to the building code board of appeals pursuant to any applicable provisions of the most recent version of the International Property Maintenance Code adopted by the Aiken City Council, the provisions of this article, or the South Carolina Administrative Procedures Act, whichever provision provides the most meaningful opportunity for an interested party under this section to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 01122009A, § 1(Exh. A), 1-12-2009)  
Secs. 42-87—42-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate operation of bicycles, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(8); provisions of state law adopted by section 42-1 regulating bicyclists, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-3410 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-101. - Tires. 
Every bicycle used on the streets and other public places of the city shall have a sufficient tread upon its tires to prevent unnecessary skidding and assist in control of the bicycle when stopping and turning. 
(Code 1980, § 22-65)  
Sec. 42-102. - Riding on certain sidewalks prohibited. 
No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard or similar device or use roller skates on any sidewalk within the city, except where the posted speed limit is in excess of 25 miles per hour on the adjacent street. In no event, shall any person ride a bicycle, skateboard or similar device or use roller skates on any sidewalk located within the following districts as designated upon the comprehensive zoning map of the city: Central business district (CBD); planned shopping center (PSC); and shopping centers located in neighborhood business districts (NB). 
(Code 1980, § 22-66) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 36.  
Sec. 42-103. - Parking. 
Bicycles shall be parked in a position which least obstructs pedestrian traffic between the curbing and the sidewalk. In locations where bicycle racks are provided, they shall be utilized. Where there is no curbing or no sidewalk, bicycles shall be parked off any roadway, street or path in a manner that will not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. In the downtown area and where there is no space between the curbing and the sidewalk, bicycles shall be parked on the sidewalk and as close to the curb as possible. 
(Code 1980, § 22-67)  
Secs. 42-104—42-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate licensing of bicycles, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(8). 
 
Sec. 42-121. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city, except a transient, to ride or propel a bicycle on any street or other public way, unless the bicycle is currently licensed pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 22-73)  
Sec. 42-122. - Application. 
Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be made to the director of public safety. 
(Code 1980, § 22-74)  
Sec. 42-123. - Inspection prerequisite to issuance. 
The director of public safety, or a public safety officer assigned such responsibility by such director, shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the bicycle and shall refuse a license for any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Code 1980, § 22-75)  
Sec. 42-124. - Fee. 
A fee, in such amount as is prescribed by ordinance, shall be paid to the city before a bicycle license or renewal thereof is granted. Any ordinance prescribing such fee is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 22-76)  
Sec. 42-125. - Issuance; display of plate. 
The director of public safety, upon receiving proper application therefor and subject to the other provisions of this division, is authorized to issue a bicycle license and license plate. It shall be unlawful for any person, except a transient, to ride a bicycle on any street in the city, unless such license plate is displayed thereon in a manner prescribed by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1980, § 22-77)  
Sec. 42-126. - Removal of plate generally. 
No person shall remove a license plate from a bicycle during the period for which issued except upon a transfer of ownership, or in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 22-78)  
Sec. 42-127. - Removal of plate upon transfer of ownership. 
Upon the sale or other transfer of ownership of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license plate and shall notify the director of public safety. 
(Code 1980, § 22-79)  
Sec. 42-128. - Expiration and renewal. 
A bicycle license shall expire on July 1 of the third year following its issuance. Upon the expiration of such license, the license may be renewed upon application and payment of the same fee as for an original application. 
(Code 1980, § 22-80)  
Sec. 42-129. - Records to be kept. 
The director of public safety shall keep a record of the number of each bicycle license issued, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a record of all bicycle license fees collected by him. 
(Code 1980, § 22-81)  
Secs. 42-130—42-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RAILROADS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Railroads generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 58-17-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-151. - Speed of trains restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to operate or run any railroad train at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles per hour, between the eastern boundary of Williamsburg Street and the eastern boundary of Union Street, and between the northern boundary of the city limits and the northern boundary of Park Avenue, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 17-1)  
Sec. 42-152. - Trains blocking street. 
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the railroad train in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion, other than those engaged in switching. It shall be unlawful for any such person to stop a railroad train within an intersection or on a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1980, § 17-2)  
Secs. 42-153—42-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10252004A, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 11-1—11-6. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 42-176—42-181. 
 
Sec. 42-176. - Purpose and administration. 
(a)  The purpose of this article shall be to maintain at least a level of service D at roadway intersections or to maintain operations at a level of service and delay better than or equivalent to current conditions if the intersection operates at level of service E or F today, by requiring the preparation of a traffic impact analysis study to determine the impact and improvements necessary to the transportation system in conjunction with certain development requests. Where required by section 42-178, a traffic impact analysis study shall be submitted as part of any request for approval of a site plan change, an annexation, a rezoning to a category that allows more intense uses than currently allowed on the site, a major subdivision, a concept plan for a tract zoned commercial or planned unit development, or a request for city services except where the subject property is already developed and no redevelopment is proposed. This article shall apply to any new development or change to an existing site. 
(b)  The planning director shall administer this article. 
(Ord. No. 10252004A, § 1, Exh. A, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 02102020 B, § 1(Exh. A), 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 42-177. - Standards. 
(a)  For the purpose of monitoring the operations of the significant intersections of the transportation network, the planning director shall prepare and update at least every two years by November 1 an official AM and PM peak hour transportation analysis and associated map listing current intersection levels of service. The significant intersections in the city limits and in the utility service area outside of the city limits will be determined prior to the commencement of the traffic analysis. 
(b)  Except as stated below, the level of service for a particular intersection shall be determined using a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic volumes and capacity analysis methodologies based on the Transportation Research Board's 2010 Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) or latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 10252004A, § 1, Exh. A, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 11122007A, § 1, 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 02102020 B, § 1(Exh. A), 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 42-178. - Criteria for determining when a traffic impact analysis study is required. 
(a)  A traffic impact analysis study will be required for new developments when the proposed development is projected to generate 100 or more trips during the peak hour of the traffic generator or the peak hour of the adjacent street traffic (7:00—9:00 a.m. or 4:00—6:00 p.m.). Proposed developments that do not meet this threshold may also be required to complete a traffic study as determined by the planning director. 
(b)  A study will be required for a change or expansion at an existing site that results in an expected increase of 100 or more trips during the peak hour of the traffic generator or the peak hour of the adjacent street traffic (7:00—9:00 a.m. or 4:00—6:00 p.m.), or if the planning director determines that the change or expansion of the existing site will have significant impact at the existing access points, proposed access points, or surrounding intersections. 
(c)  The estimate of the number of trips generated by proposed developments will be based on the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation, 10 th Edition, or latest edition. Other trip generation data collected locally may be used where approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 10252004, § 1, Exh. A, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 11122007A, § 1, 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 02102020 B, § 1(Exh. A), 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 42-179. - Traffic impact analysis study requirements. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  A traffic impact analysis study must be prepared, signed, and sealed by a qualified traffic engineering consultant registered in the State of South Carolina. The planning director shall maintain a list of consultants preapproved to prepare a study and shall develop, publish, and maintain a policy for the selection of firms to be on the list. A qualified firm may be added to the list of approved consultants by submitting a qualifications package for approval by the planning director. 
(2)  The planning director will establish the scope of the traffic impact analysis study based on the intensity of the proposed use and the location of the project. At a minimum, the proposed site access points will be studied, and signalized intersection(s) adjacent to the proposed site driveways should be given consideration for inclusion in the study area. The study area shall be confirmed with planning director prior to commencement of the study. 
(3)  A traffic impact analysis study shall be prepared in accordance with SCDOT standards. 
(4)  A methodology memo shall be submitted prior to commencement of the traffic impact analysis study for approval by the planning director. 
(5)  Trip generation estimates shall be based upon methods provided in the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation, 10 th Edition, or latest revision. Other trip generation data collected locally may be used where approved by the planning director. 
(6)  Capacity and level of service analysis methodologies shall be based upon the Transportation Research Board's 2010 HCM, or its most recent revision. 
(7)  Intersection capacity analysis should be performed using Synchro, Version 10 or SIDRA, Version 8 or similar, as appropriate. 
(8)  The traffic impact analysis study shall assess the a.m. and p.m. peak hours and other hours, where deemed necessary by the planning director, for land uses that may generate high traffic volumes on weekends or at midday or nighttime periods. 
(9)  A study prepared in conjunction with a request for annexation or rezoning shall be based on the most intense development allowed by the proposed zoning, unless the owner of the property voluntarily agrees to limit the intensity of development on the entire tract of property. The owner must file a valid restrictive covenant with the Aiken County RMC Office which will forever limit the intensity of development on the property in a manner that is satisfactory to the planning director and/or the city attorney and must provide proof of filing to the planning director before the annexation or rezoning is complete. If as a result of the voluntary restriction, the net new trips shall be less than noted in section 42-178(a), a study may not be required; however a study of any access points for the proposed development shall be required. 
If the subsequent development on the property is less intense than the current use or the use on which an initial study was based, a revised study may be submitted to show expected net new trips are below the threshold noted in section 42-178(a). 
(10)  The planning director shall establish, publish and update, as needed, guidelines for applicants explaining requirements for the content, format and presentation of a study and the number of copies to be submitted. 
(11)  The city shall provide any relevant publicly available traffic count data in its possession within five business days of a request by the applicant. 
(12)  Traffic counts may be used if collected within 12 months of submittal of the study. Counts shall be collected when K-12 schools are in session unless otherwise approved by the planning director. 
(13)  If a traffic signal is being proposed, a signal warrant analysis shall be included in the study. The approval of a traffic signal on projected volumes may be deferred until volumes meet warrants given in the most recent version of the FHWA's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
(b)  Study area and contents. 
(1)  The study area for the traffic impact analysis shall include the proposed site access points, signalized intersections immediately adjacent to the development, and additional intersections identified by the planning director. If intersections impacted by the development are within a coordinated traffic system, at least the two adjacent signalized intersections on the coordinated system should be analyzed, and analysis of the whole coordinated system should be considered by the planning director for inclusion in the study. Existing signal timings should be used for all signalized intersections in the existing conditions analysis. 
(2)  Contents of study. 
a.  Study area descriptions, roadway classifications, other projected transportation improvements and other approved developments in the study area shall be included in the study. 
b.  Assessment of existing conditions, future no build conditions, and future conditions at full buildout shall be provided. Phasing of future build conditions may be performed. If project is planned to be phased, no build conditions should be included for each phase. 
c.  Assessment of a.m. and p.m. peak hour conditions plus any other hours specified by the planning director shall be provided. 
d.  A mitigation plan for intersection and roadway segment improvements should be developed where analysis shows level of service is E or F during any study hour, to ensure level of service D or better for all study hours at signalized intersections. If an intersection currently operates at LOS E or F, a mitigation plan should be developed to ensure that the future LOS and delay are equivalent to or better than existing conditions. Mitigation plans for unsignalized intersections where analysis shows level of service is E or F for any study hour may be required. 
e.  Discussion of access point coordination with SCDOT for access points on SCDOT roadways will be required. 
f.  A vicinity map at a scale sufficient to identify the location of the project shall be provided. 
g.  A site plan with development plans at a scale of not less than 1 inch = 100 feet shall be provided. 
h.  Study shall note intensities for all project phases along with the buildout year with trip generation and distribution displayed in tabular or graphic format. 
i.  Existing, future no build and full buildout levels of service for access points and study area intersections should be summarized in tabular format (including phases as appropriate.) 
j.  Traffic flow diagrams showing existing, background and total future trips (including phases as appropriate) shall be provided. 
k.  All recommended improvements shall be presented in tabular and/or graphic format. 
(Ord. No. 10252004A, § 1, Exh. A, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 11122007A, § 1, 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 02102020 B, § 1(Exh. A), 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 42-180. - Use of the traffic impact analysis study. 
(a)  The city will notify the applicant within ten business days of submission if any required components of a study have been omitted or provide technical comments to applicant. Once comments have been received and addressed applicant can resubmit study for rereview. The city will notify the applicant within 15 business days of a complete submission as to additional comments, approval or disapproval of a study. 
(b)  The planning director shall only grant approval if the level of service at all studied signalized intersections is D or better; or, for intersections currently operating at LOS E or F, if the level of service and delay are equivalent to or better than existing conditions. Any such application for which the traffic impact analysis study shows a level of service worse than a D at a signalized intersection or not operating better than current level of service E or F conditions shall be referred to the planning director for a final determination. Unsignalized intersections performing at a level of service worse than a D may be approved, denied, or deferred at the discretion of the planning director. 
(c)  The applicant will pay for all of the cost of any necessary roadway, traffic control, or access improvements as a result of the project. The applicant must construct the improvements or changes or post a performance guarantee with the city to cover the cost of their construction prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Any posted performance guarantee shall be in an amount of 150 percent of the estimated construction cost of the project for a term of one year and may be in the form of cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, or a bond acceptable to the city. Such improvements may include, but are not limited to, installation of travel lanes, installation of turn lanes, installation of or modifications to traffic signals, and relocation or consolidation of driveways. 
(d)  All improvements on state roadways shall be coordinated with SCDOT. SCDOT may require additional improvements beyond those required by the city. A SCDOT encroachment permit will be required as part of the building permit process. 
(e)  Approval of a study will expire after two years unless a building permit is obtained for the project and construction begins. 
(Ord. No. 10252004A, § 1, Exh. A, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 04252005A, § 1, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 11122007A, § 1, 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 02102020 B, § 1(Exh. A), 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 42-181. - Definitions. 
Applicant means an individual or corporation, partnership, or other entity undertaking development. 
Development means construction, expansion, or installation of a new building or structure, or a change in use of a building or structure or redevelopment of existing parcel. 
Level of service is defined as the operations of a study area intersection or roadway segment as it relates to the average delay per vehicle experienced. Level of service ranges from level of service A (low level of traffic congestion) to level of service F (high level of traffic and congestion). 
Project means a particular development on an identified parcel of land. 
Service area means the area within which the city may provide water and sanitary sewer service including areas outside of the city limits. 
Vehicle trip is as defined by the Trip Generation Handbook, 3 rd Edition, an ITE Recommended Practice, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, 2017, or subsequent updates. 
(Ord. No. 10252004A, § 1, Exh. A, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 02102020 B, § 1(Exh. A), 2-10-2020)  
Chapter 44 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; posting advertising matter to utility poles, trees or public buildings, § 4-1; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 12; solid waste, ch. 32; streets and sidewalks, ch. 36; use of public streets, alleys, ways and places by utilities, § 36-10; telecommunications, ch. 40. 
State Law reference— Municipal water and sewerage systems, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-10 et seq. See also S.C. Code 1976, § 6-15-10 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 44-1. - Systems combined. 
The waterworks system and the sewer system, together with all improvements, extensions and betterments thereto, shall be combined into one system, to be known as the utilities division of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 25-1)  
Sec. 44-2. - Fiscal year of system. 
The water and sewer system shall be operated on a fiscal year basis, which shall commence on July 1 of each year and shall end on the June 30 of the following year. 
(Code 1980, § 25-2)  
Sec. 44-3. - Adoption of cross connection, backflow and back-siphonage control regulations. 
(a)  For the protection of the water supply of the city against possible contamination arising from problems involving cross connections, backflow and back-siphonage, the provisions of Appendix D of the Standard Plumbing Code, 1999 edition (published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc.), entitled "Cross Connection, Backflow and Back-Siphonage Control" are adopted. 
(b)  Section F entitled "Cross-Connection Control" of Regulation 61-58.7 issued by the state department of health and environmental control (published in Vol. 24A of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, as amended, found at page 156-157 of chapter 61 of the state department of health and environmental control regulations adopted May 22, 1981) is adopted by reference and made applicable to the water supply system of the city and all connections thereto. 
(c)  The city plumbing official (which official also serves as the city building inspector) is hereby given the primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this section and for maintaining all records pertaining thereto. 
(d)  The regulations and provisions of this section shall apply to the entire water supply system of the city, to all water customers of the city, and to all connections with the water supply system of the city, whether located inside or outside the city limits. 
(e)  The functions, duties, powers and responsibilities of the cross connection, backflow and back-siphonage control board referred to in Appendix D of the Standard Plumbing Code, 1982 edition, are delegated to the city building code appeals committee-board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Code 1980, § 25-2.1)  
Sec. 44-4. - Permit for connections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to the city's water and sewer system, without a permit so to do issued by the director of public works. It shall be unlawful for any developer, contractor, or any other person to make any connection to the city water or sewer system prior to approval by the state department of health and environmental control, and each day that such unauthorized connection exists prior to approval by the state department of health and environmental control shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable by a fine of $200.00 per day. 
(b)  Such fine shall be a lien upon the property affected thereby until the fine be paid in full. 
(c)  When any such unauthorized connection is discovered, it shall be presumed prima facie that such unauthorized connection was made by the developer. 
(Code 1980, § 25-3)  
Sec. 44-5. - Charges for connections and facilities. 
(a)  The charges for water connections, water taps, water meters sewer connections, and related services shall be as prescribed by ordinance, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out verbatim in this section. All such charges for services for properties outside the city limits shall be double the charges for properties located inside the city limits unless the ordinances establishing the charges expressly provided otherwise. 
(b)  In addition to the charges provided for in subsection (a) of this section, a sewer facilities charge shall be assessed on each new residential, commercial or other development, which, alone or in combination with other developments or areas, requires, contributes to, or contributed to, in the discretion of the city, the installation, expansion, upgrading or modification of sewer facilities by the city to provide adequate sanitary sewer service to the development or area. The charges paid on a development shall be placed in a separate account for sewer facilities construction and shall be expended only to defray bonded indebtedness, other obligations, or costs incurred or to be incurred by the city to install, expand, upgrade or modify facilities that receive or will receive sewage from the development. The charge must be paid by the developer, builder or owner prior to the sewer connection being made on the development, or where a development is comprised of individual lots, prior to the sewer connection being made on the individual lot on which the charge is assessed. The amount of the sewer facilities charge shall be as follows: Single-family residential: $400.00 per single-family residential lot. Commercial, multifamily residential and other developments: $400.00 times the equivalent number of single-family residential units, based upon a flow of 1,200 cubic feet per month. The sewer facilities charges set forth in this subsection shall be reviewed, and if appropriate, revised by the city no less than every two years. 
(c)  In addition to the charges provided for above, a water facilities impact fee shall be assessed on each new residential, commercial or other development, which, alone or in combination with other developments or areas, requires, contributes to, or contributed to, in the discretion of the city, the installation, expansion, upgrading or modification of water facilities by the city to provide adequate water service to the development or area. The charges paid shall be placed in a separate account for water facilities construction and shall be expended only to defray bonded indebtedness, other obligations, or costs incurred or to be incurred by the city to install, expand, upgrade or modify water facilities that will provide water service to the development. The charge must be paid by the developer, builder or owner prior to the water connection being made on the development, or where a development is comprised of individual lots, prior to the water connection being made on the individual lot on which the charge is assessed. The amount of the water facilities impact fee shall be as follows: Single-family residential: $750.00 per single-family residential lot. Commercial, multifamily residential and other developments: $750.00 times the equivalent number of single-family residential units, based upon a flow of 800 cubic feet per month. The water facilities impact fee set forth in this subsection shall be reviewed, and if appropriate, revised by the city no less than every two years. 
(Code 1980, § 25-4; Ord. No. 06242002B, § 1, 6-24-2002)  
Sec. 44-6. - Service charges and deposit to be fixed by ordinance. 
The charges for water and sewer service rendered by the city and the amount of deposit required to assure payment thereof shall be as prescribed by ordinance and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 25-5; Ord. No. 06092003C, § 1, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 06112007B, § 1, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 06162008A, § 1, 6-16-2008; Ord. No. 04092012, § 1(Exh. A), 4-9-2012; Ord. No. 03242014 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 04112016A , § 1, 4-11-2016; Ord. No. 05132019D , § 1, 5-13-2019)  
Sec. 44-7. - Annual notification of sewer user charge components. 
The city shall publish annually on a regular monthly billing a notice listing the monthly sewer rate user charges and the components thereof, including the portion thereof attributable to operation, maintenance and replacement of wastewater treatment facilities. Where the notice required by this section cannot be contained on such a billing, the city may provide the notice through a direct mailing to each customer. 
(Code 1980, § 25-5.1)  
Sec. 44-8. - No free service; charges to be paid by city. 
No water or sewer service shall be furnished or rendered free of charge to any person or to the city. The city shall pay the reasonable cost and value of all services furnished to it from current funds or from the proceeds of taxes. The city shall pay as hydrant rental the sum of $2.00 annually for each hydrant within the corporate limits of the city, the hydrant rental to be payable on or before June 30 of each fiscal year. 
(Code 1980, § 25-6)  
Sec. 44-9. - Applicability of charges for sewer service. 
Every customer receiving metered water service from the city shall be subject to the city's sewer service charge, whether he utilizes such sewer service or not. 
(Code 1980, § 25-7)  
Sec. 44-10. - Billing of service charges. 
Bills for water and sewer service shall be rendered every month. Monthly charges for water service shall begin to accrue immediately upon connection of such service. The director of the city department of finance shall promulgate, subject to review and approval by the city manager, written policies for the commencement of monthly charges and billings for sewer service and garbage and refuse service. The director of the department of finance also shall promulgate, subject to review and approval by the city manager, written policies for billing apartments, office buildings and similar multiunit structures and developments for monthly charges for water, sewer, garbage and refuse service. 
(Code 1980, § 25-8)  
Sec. 44-11. - When and where bills due and payable; late payment charge. 
Bills for water, sewer, garbage and similar services shall be due and payable at the city department of finance office, or such other places as the director of the department of finance shall designate, on or before the 20th day of the month in which the bill is issued. A late payment charge of $1.00 shall be added to unpaid bills of less than $40.00 after the 20th day of the month in which the bill is issued, and a late payment charge of ten percent of the amount of the bill due shall be added to unpaid monthly bills of $40.00 or more after the 20th day of the month in which the bill is issued. For purposes of this section, all charges for water, sewer, garbage and similar services appearing on one monthly billing statement shall be considered one bill. 
(Code 1980, § 25-9)  
Sec. 44-12. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  If any bill for water service, sewer service, or any other service the city council has authorized to be billed monthly remains unpaid for 20 days after the bill is rendered, any or all services to the customer may be immediately discontinued until the customer has paid the past due bill and any applicable reconnection charge. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect service when it has been discontinued under this section until all past due charges have been paid in full, including the reconnection charges. Any such reconnection must be effected by the city. 
(c)  Water or sewer service to customers located outside the city also may be terminated for the failure of a customer or property owner to comply with any terms or conditions established by the city council for the receipt of such service. Written notice of the discontinuance of service under this subsection shall be sent by the city by regular United States mail to the service address and to the billing address, if it is different from the service address, at least five days prior to the actual discontinuation of service. 
(d)  Water service to customers located outside the city who are furnished sewer service by a retail sewer provided who is supplied wholesale sewer capacity by the city may be terminated by the city for the failure of the customer to pay sewer charges to the sewer provider according to the terms of sewer service. Provided, however, that this provision shall not be applicable unless the city and sewer provider have entered into a written agreement allowing such terminations, including a term whereby the sewer provider agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from all liability for any such termination of service, the sewer provider has given the customer and the city at least 20 days written notice of such termination, and the sewer provider has given its customers and the city at least 30 days prior notice of the existence or implementation of a policy providing for such terminations. The city may decline to terminate water service to a customer when it determines the termination would not be appropriate. The city may require as a condition for implementation of this provision that the sewer provider enter into an agreement for the city to collect sewer charges from the provider's customers on the city's water system. 
(Code 1980, § 25-10)  
Sec. 44-13. - Metering of water; charge when meter fails to register. 
All water service shall be rendered upon a metered basis, except to private hydrants and automatic sprinkler systems, which shall be on a flat rate of rental prescribed by ordinance pursuant to section 44-6, and a separate meter shall be installed for each dwelling, business establishment or property served with water. The meters shall be read every month. In a case where a meter fails to register, the charge will be determined by an average of the most recent consumptions. 
(Code 1980, § 25-11)  
Sec. 44-14. - Tampering with water meter, operating cut-off or curb cocks located in water meter box; charges. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized representatives of the city utilities division or persons with appropriate authorization therefrom, to (i) tamper with any water meter; (ii) cut or remove any lock therefrom; or (iii) operate a cut-off or curb cock located in a water meter box which has been turned off by the city for nonpayment of billings or other reasons. The city manager or his designee may assess a charge based upon the actual current costs of the water meter or other apparatus and the installation thereof against any person or persons committing those acts or against the customer account designated for such water meter or apparatus in addition to any other charges assessed by the city therefor or any sentence judicially imposed therefor. The charges authorized by this section may be assessed whether or not the water meter or other apparatus is replaced. 
(Code 1980, § 25-12)  
Sec. 44-15. - Use of wells to provide water for domestic or commercial purposes prohibited; exception. 
(a)  The use of wells to provide water for commercial purposes or domestic purposes within the city limits is hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful. 
(b)  The director of public works and his designated representatives are hereby given full authority to enforce this section by all appropriate measures. 
(c)  The prohibition on the use of wells set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the use of wells for irrigation and outdoor sprinkler systems, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The well must be installed by a well driller certified by the state department of health and environmental control or the state board of certification of environmental systems operators, except that a property owner may personally install a well on property he or she owns when such installation is allowed by the state department of health and environmental control. All installations must comply with the applicable laws and regulations of the state and the well shall not be used as a source for drinking water. 
(2)  All permits required by the regulations and ordinances of the city relating to installation and inspection, including an electrical permit, must be timely obtained. 
(3)  The well shall be inspected at least annually by the building inspection section of the department of public safety and at the time of such inspection each user of the well shall pay an annual inspection fee of $15.00. Each well system shall be made available for immediate inspection by the city at any time and without prior notice. 
(4)  The well shall not be connected to any public water system or public sanitary sewerage system. 
(5)  An approved backflow preventor shall be installed at the water meter on the owners/user's side. 
(6)  Such wells shall be considered an accessory use as defined by the comprehensive zoning ordinance and shall meet all applicable requirements thereof. 
(7)  Any well found to be in violation of the conditions of subsections (c)(1) through (7) of this section shall be turned off or otherwise disconnected by the city until the user or owner thereof brings it into compliance with such conditions. 
(Code 1980, § 25-13)  
Sec. 44-16. - Emergency drought and water shortage policy—Declaration; purpose and intent. 
(a)  This ordinance is hereby declared necessary for the preservation of public health, safety, and welfare and shall take effect upon its adoption by the City of Aiken. 
(b)  Whenever, in the judgment of the governing body of the city, or when required by the Drought Response Act of 2000, or by the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center, it becomes necessary to conserve water in the service area, due to drought or other reasons, the city is authorized to issue a proclamation that existing drought or other conditions prevent fulfillment of usual water-use demands. The proclamation is an attempt to prevent depleting the water supply to the extent that water use for human consumption, sanitation, fire protection, or other essential needs becomes endangered. 
(c)  Immediately upon the issuance of a proclamation, the provisions, regulations, and restrictions set forth under this Ordinance [sections 44-16 through 44-25] shall become effective, and remain in effect, until the water shortage is terminated and the proclamation is rescinded. 
(d)  Water uses regulated, or prohibited, under this ordinance are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage are deemed to constitute a waste of water, subjecting offenders to potential penalties contained in this ordinance, and section 1-13 of this Code. 
(e)  The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to customers using water supplied by the city's utilities division. 
(Ord. No. 06232003E, § 1, Exh. A, 6-23-2003)  
Sec. 44-17. - Same—Definitions. 
For the purposes of this ordinance [sections 44-16 through 44-25], the following definitions shall apply: 
Aesthetic water use means water use for ornamental or decorative purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls. 
Commercial and industrial water use means water use integral to the production of goods and/or services by an establishment having financial profit as their primary aim. 
Conservation means reduction in water use to prevent depletion or waste of the resource. 
Customer means any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city's utilities division. 
Domestic water use means water use for personal needs or for household purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution. 
Drought response committee means a committee composed of state and local representatives, created for the purpose of coordinating responses to water shortages within drought management areas and making recommendations for action to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center. 
Drought emergency exists and [shall be] declared by the South Carolina Governor when the safety, security, health or welfare of the state or any portion of the state is threatened. 
Equivalent residential unit means a lot, one-third acre, containing a single-family residential structure with reasonable general adjustments being made for, but not limited to, the following factors: 
(1)  Commercial and land uses other than single-family residential; 
(2)  Open and/or forested land; 
(3)  Lot or tract size; 
(4)  Other generally accepted factors determined by the city engineer to be relevant to any calculations based upon the provisions of this article. 
Essential water use means water used strictly for fire-fighting purposes, health and medical purposes, maintaining minimum stream flow requirements, and minimum water levels in potable drinking water supplies and the above and below ground water tables, or the use of water to satisfy federal, state, or local public health and safety requirements is considered essential water use. 
Non-essential water use means categories of water use, other than essential water use, which may be curtailed during severe or extreme drought. 
Even-numbered address means street addresses, box numbers, or rural route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or letters A-M; or any locations without addresses. 
Institutional water use means water used by government, public and private educational institutions, public medians and rights-of-way, churches and places of worship, water utilities, and other lands, buildings, and organizations within the public domain. 
Landscape water use means water used to maintain gardens, trees, lawns, shrubs, flowers, athletic fields, rights-of-way and medians. 
Odd-numbered address means street addresses, box numbers, or rural route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, or letters N-Z. 
Palmer index means a measure of the severity of a drought, or a wet spell, in an area. Dry conditions are associated with negative values, wet conditions with positive values, and normal conditions have a value of zero. 
Water shortage means [the] lack of adequate available water to meet normal demands due to lower than normal precipitation, reduced stream flows or soil moisture, or lowering of the potentiometric surface in wells which causes water supplies to be less than usual, or due to failure of the city's water processing, pumping, or distribution systems. 
(Ord. No. 06232003E, § 1, Exh. A, 6-23-2003)  
Sec. 44-18. - Same—Nonessential water use. 
Nonessential water use categories, other than essential water use, may be curtailed as determined by city manager during severe or extreme drought or during periods of local problems creating water shortage problems. Some examples of non-essential water uses include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Residential and institutional. 
a.  Washing down sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard surfaced areas. 
b.  Washing down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection. 
c.  Flushing house gutters, or permitting water to run, or accumulate in, any curb or street. 
d.  Washing any motor bike, motor vehicle, boat, trailer, airplane, or other vehicle in public or private garages or elsewhere. 
e.  Maintaining fountains, reflection ponds, and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where necessary to support any aquatic life in them. 
f.  Filling or maintaining public, or private, swimming pools. 
g.  Sprinkling lawns, plants, trees, and other flora on private or public property, except as may be provided elsewhere in this ordinance. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial. 
a.  Serving water routinely in restaurants. 
b.  Increasing water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for maintaining a minimum amount required to support fish and wildlife. 
c.  Irrigating golf courses and any portion of its grounds, except as otherwise provide under this ordinance. 
d.  Obtaining water from hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills, or for any purpose other than fire fighting. 
e.  Serving customers who have been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks, but have failed to make repairs or comply with conditions contained in the notice. 
f.  Expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural land in production, or planting or landscaping required by the site-design review process. 
(Ord. No. 06232003E, § 1, Exh. A, 6-23-2003)  
Sec. 44-19. - Responses to moderate, severe, and extreme drought alert phases and local water shortages. 
Levels of drought, as set forth in the South Carolina Drought Response Act of 2000, are incipient, moderate, severe, and extreme. Proclamations issued by the city shall coordinate an appropriate response to the level of drought which exists. Proclamations setting forth responses to the various drought alert phases may be made by the city. They should be based upon drought monitoring data, recommendations, declarations, or notifications supplied by the regional drought response committee, or the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources. 
(1)  Incipient drought alert phase. Upon notification of incipient drought conditions by the drought response committee, the city may notify all its personnel who maintain irrigation systems that the incipient drought conditions exists. The city may institute a comprehensive review of all city maintained irrigation systems to repair malfunctioning heads or timers. 
(2)  Moderate drought phase. Upon notification by the drought response committee that a moderate drought condition is present, and is expected to persist, or upon determination by the city that a moderate water supply shortage exists based on trigger levels, the city may seek voluntary reductions from its customers in the use of water for all purposes and voluntary reductions on using water during certain peak water demand periods. 
a.  Goal. 
1.  A 20-percent reduction in residential use. 
2.  A 15-percent reduction in remaining water uses, including, but not limited to, commercial, industrial, institutional, and irrigation. 
3.  A 15-percent reduction in overall water use. 
b.  General responses. 
1.  Issue a proclamation to be released to local media, city customers and to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center that moderate drought conditions are present. 
2.  Provide written notification to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish, in a newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system, the voluntary conservation measures that the customers are requested to follow during moderate drought conditions, including: 
(i)  Reduce residential water use to 75 gallons per person per day and a maximum of 300 gallons per household, or equivalent residential unit, per day; 
(ii)  Eliminate washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas; 
(iii)  Eliminate washing down of buildings for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(iv)  Eliminate flushing of gutters; 
(v)  Eliminate domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars, etc.; 
(vi)  Eliminate using water to maintain fountains, reflection ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where a minimum amount is necessary to support aquatic life; 
(vii)  Reduce watering lawn, plants, trees, gardens, shrubbery and flora on private or public property to the minimum amount necessary. Encourage outdoor watering to be done during off-peak hours; 
(viii)  Reduce the amount of water obtained from fire hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills or for any purpose other than firefighting or flushing necessary to maintain water quality; and 
(ix)  Limit normal water use by commercial and individual customers including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life; 
(b)  Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so. 
3.  Continue encouraging and educating customers to comply with voluntary water conservation. 
4.  Intensify maintenance efforts identifying and correcting water leaks in the distribution system. 
(3)  Severe drought phase. Upon drought response committee notification that a severe drought conditions is present, and is expected to persist, or upon determination by the city that a severe water supply shortage exists, the city may seek voluntary reduction in water use for all purposes; mandatory restrictions on all non-essential usage; and restrictions on times when certain water usage is allowed. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of 25 percent in residential water use, 20 percent in all other water use categories, and a 20-percent reduction in overall water use. To accomplish these goals, the city may take any of the following actions: 
a.  General responses. 
1.  Issue a public notice of drought conditions on water supply and demand in a newspaper of general circulation within the affected community and region. 
This statement shall include a list of voluntary water use curtailment measures. 
2.  Request customers of the city's utilities division to voluntarily comply with the listed water-use restrictions in all categories while severe drought conditions exist. 
3.  Issue a proclamation to be released to the local media, city customers and to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center that severe drought conditions are present. 
4.  Provide written notification to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish, in a newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system, the voluntary conservation measures and mandatory restrictions to be placed on the use of water supplied by the utility, including: 
(i)  Voluntary reduction of residential water use by utility customers to 65 gallons per person per day and a maximum of 250 gallons per household or equivalent residential unit per day. 
(ii)  Control utility customers landscape irrigation by staggering watering times. 
(iii)  Mandatory restrictions on the use of water supplied by the utility for activities including: 
(a)  Eliminate washing down sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas; 
(b)  Eliminate washing down buildings for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(c)  Eliminate flushing gutters; 
(d)  Eliminate domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars, etc.; 
(e)  Eliminate water use to maintain fountains, reflection ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where a minimum amount is necessary to support aquatic life; 
(f)  Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills, or any purpose other than fire-fighting or flushing necessary to maintain water quality; and 
(iv)  Limit water use by commercial and individual customers including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life; 
(b)  Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion of its grounds; 
(c)  Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks but have failed to do so; and 
(d)  Limit expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural land in production, or planting or landscaping when required by the site design review process. 
(v)  Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in the distribution system. 
(vi)  Cease installation of new irrigation taps on the water system. 
(vii)  Publicize the penalties that could be imposed for violations of mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a restrictions variance is requested. 
(viii)  Expand the use of education and public relations efforts and emphasize the penalties associated with violating the mandatory restrictions. 
(ix)  Provide the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center written monthly notification regarding voluntary and mandatory restrictions success. 
(4)  Extreme drought phase. Upon notification by the drought response committee that an extreme drought condition is present, and is expected to persist, or upon determination by the city that an extreme water supply shortage exists based on the trigger levels, the city may impose mandatory restrictions in the use of water for all purpose and on the times when certain water usage is allowed. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of 30 percent in residential water use, 25 percent in all other categories of water uses and a reduction in overall water use of 25 percent. To accomplish these goals, the city may take the following actions: 
a.  General responses. 
1.  Issue a public notice of drought conditions on water supply and demand in a newspaper of general circulation within the affected community and region. 
This statement shall include a list of voluntary water use curtailment measures. 
2.  Require customers of the city's utilities division to voluntarily comply with the listed water use restrictions in all categories while extreme drought conditions exist. 
3.  Issue a proclamation to be released to the local media, the city customers and to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center that extreme drought conditions are present. 
4.  Provide the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center written notification and routinely publish, in a newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system, the mandatory restrictions to be placed on the use of water supplied by the utility, including: 
(i)  Limiting residential water use to 55 gallons per person per day and a maximum of 225 gallons per household, or equivalent residential unit, per day. 
(ii)  Control landscape irrigation by the utility's customers by staggering watering times. 
(iii)  Mandatory restrictions on water use supplied by the utility for activities including: 
(a)  Eliminate washing down sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas; 
(b)  Eliminate washing down building for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(c)  Eliminate flushing gutters; 
(d)  No domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars, etc.; 
(e)  Eliminate water use to maintain fountains, reflection ponds, and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where a minimum amount is necessary to support aquatic life; 
(f)  Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills, or any purpose other than firefighting or any flushing necessary to maintain water quality; and 
(iv)  Limit normal commercial and individual customer water use, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support fish and wildlife; 
(b)  Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion of their grounds; 
(c)  Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks, but have failed to do so; and 
(d)  Limit expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural land in production, or planting or landscaping when required by site design review process. 
(v)  Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in the distribution system. 
(vi)  Cease installation of new irrigation taps on the water system. 
(vii)  Outline other conservation measures as follows: 
(a)  Place a moratorium on contracts for all new water main extensions. As part of the public information process, provide notice to developers of the moratorium; 
(b)  Impose a drought surcharge per thousand gallons of water that increases with higher usage. The drought surcharge is a temporary fee imposed during the current water supply shortage and is not a cost-based rate. The drought surcharge is temporary and will be terminated at such time as the city determines the water supply is above the trigger levels; 
(c)  If the conservation measures of the ordinance or plan prove inadequate to mitigate the effects of the drought conditions or water supply availability, the city may take additional actions including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Decreasing the gallon equivalent residential unit limits in the different tiers; and 
(2)  Reduction of water system pressure as needed. 
(viii)  Publicize the penalties that could be imposed for violations of mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a restrictions variance is requested. 
(ix)  Expand the use of education and public relations efforts as conducted under the moderate and severe drought phases and emphasize the penalties associated with violating these mandatory restrictions. 
(x)  Provide the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center written monthly notification regarding the success of the mandatory restrictions. 
(5)  Local water shortages due to local conditions (equipment or distribution system). Conditions can occur where the city may experience water shortages due to local conditions such as failure of water distribution systems, equipment failure or source contamination. When such a condition does occur, the city manager shall be authorized to take emergency action as necessary to protect the public water supply. Action may include any of the actions outlined in this section depending upon the severity of the shortage. Public notification may be by radio, TV, newspaper, individual, or other type of notification. 
(Ord. No. 06232003E, § 1, Exh. A, 6-23-2003)  
Sec. 44-20. - Water rates in the event of drought related water shortage. 
In the event of an extreme drought related water shortage, the City of Aiken Utilities Division is hereby authorized to monitor water use and limit households to 40 cubic feet per household per day. Domestic water use above this limit may be subject to a surcharge of $25.00 per 100 cubic feet (or any fraction thereof). Institutional, commercial, industrial, and recreational water users may be subject to water use surcharges of $25.00 per 100 cubic feet (or any fraction thereof) of water used if the city's utilities division deems that adequate conservation measures have not been implemented. 
(Ord. No. 06232003E, § 1, Exh. A, 6-23-2003)  
Sec. 44-21. - Water rationing in the event of drought. 
In the event that the city determines that a drought threatens the preservation of public health and safety, the city is authorized to ration water. 
(Ord. No. 06232003E, § 1, Exh. A, 6-23-2003)  
Sec. 44-22. - Fines and penalties for violation of drought and water shortage requirements. 
Except as otherwise stated herein, violators of any provision of this ordinance shall be penalized as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. The aforementioned fines and penalties may be in lieu of, or in addition to, any other penalty provided by state, federal, or local law. After issuing one warning, by certified mail, personal notification, by telephone, or other contact, the city's utilities division may disconnect the water service of any person or customer whenever it is determined that such person has failed to comply with the provisions of this ordinance [sections 44-16 through 44-25]. Services disconnected under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of the standard reconnection charge hereby established, plus any other costs incurred. Suitable assurances must be given to the city's utilities division that the same action shall not be repeated during the drought or water shortage. 
(Ord. No. 06232003E, § 1, Exh. A, 6-23-2003)  
Sec. 44-23. - Enforcement of policy. 
Officers of the public safety department shall, in addition to duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this ordinance [sections 44-16—44-25]. Designated city employees, or its utilities division, acting in conjunction with public safety department officers, have the duty, and are hereby authorized, to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and shall have the power and authority to issue ordinance summonses to persons to appear before the Aiken Municipal Court for a judicial proceeding, when there is probable cause to believe violations of this ordinance have occurred during any declared incipient, moderate, severe, or extreme drought or water shortage. 
(Ord. No. 06232003E, § 1, Exh. A, 6-23-2003)  
Sec. 44-24. - Variances from water use curtailment. 
Persons not capable of immediate water use reduction or curtailment because of equipment damage or other extreme circumstances shall commence gradual reduction of water use within 24 hours of the declaration of water use curtailment or reduction and shall apply for a variance from curtailment. Persons requesting exemption from the provisions of this ordinance [sections 44-16 through 44-25] shall file a petition for variance with the director of public works within ten days after such curtailment becomes effective. The director of public works shall respond to requests for variance within five days of receipt of information or within 20 days of declaration of the curtailment, whichever comes first. Petitions shall contain the following: 
(1)  Names and address of the petitioner(s). 
(2)  Purpose of water use. 
(3)  Specific provisions from which the petitioner is requesting relief. 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the curtailment declaration adversely affects the petitioner. 
(5)  Description of the relief desired. 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(7)  Economic value of the water use. 
(8)  Damage or harm to the petitioner, or others, if petitioner complies with ordinance. 
(9)  Restrictions with which the petitioner is expected to comply and the compliance date. 
(10)  Steps the petitioner is taking to meet the restrictions from which variance is sought and the expected date of compliance. 
(11)  Other pertinent information. 
In order for a variance to be granted, petitioner must show one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Compliance with the ordinance cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water shortage. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
The director of public works may, in writing, grant temporary variances for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under the ordinance if it is determined that failure to grant such variances would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the petitioner and if one or more of the aforementioned conditions is met. The governing body of the city shall ratify or revoke any such variance at their next scheduled meeting. Any such variance so ratified may be revoked by later action of the governing body of the city. 
No such variance shall be retroactive or otherwise excuse any violation of this ordinance occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
Variances granted by the public works director shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived, or modified, by the city manager. 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance. 
(2)  Variances granted shall expire when the water shortage no longer exists, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(Ord. No. 06232003E, § 1, Exh. A, 6-23-2003)  
Sec. 44-25. - Override by city manager. 
Any determination made by the public works director or city manager under the provisions of this ordinance [sections 44-16 through 44-25 herein] may be reviewed by the city council. Upon this review, a city manager decision may be affirmed, reversed, or the matter remanded for further review. A majority vote of council by those present and voting must be made for such a ruling. This vote must be taken with a quorum of council present. 
(Ord. No. 06232003E, § 1, Exh. A, 6-23-2003)  
Secs. 44-26—44-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-31. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this article shall be as set forth in this section. Words not defined in this section shall be construed as having the meaning defined in Glossary of Water and Sewage Control Engineering, published by the Water Pollution Control Federation, Washington, D.C., or by their general usage, if undefined. 
Authority means the county public service authority. 
BOD, denoting biochemical oxygen demand, means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Garbage means solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation or cooking and dispensing of food or from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial waste means the liquid waste from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation of cooking and dispensing food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of the devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewer surcharge means a charge for sewer service and treatment service for wastes having characteristics different from sanitary wastes and for which additional charges must be assessed in order for the waste to make compensation for additional expenses incurred. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration proposed during normal operation. 
Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Street means, and shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, drives, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the sanitary area. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Total solids means the sum of suspended matter, settleable matter and dissolved matter, both volatile and nonvolatile. 
Watercourse means a channel in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1980, § 25-25) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 44-32. - Article does not grant county or public service authority jurisdiction over systems owned by municipality or water or sewer district. 
Notwithstanding the terms and conditions of this article, nothing in this article shall be construed to grant the county or the county public service authority jurisdiction or authority over any portion of any water or sewer system currently owned or in the future owned or acquired by any municipality or water or sewer district, whether located within or without the corporate limits of such municipality or within or without the defined jurisdictional boundaries of such water or sewer district. 
(Code 1980, § 25-26)  
Sec. 44-33. - Right of entry to enforce article. 
(a)  The duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city and its representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewer or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this section, the employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. 
(c)  The duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1980, § 25-27)  
Sec. 44-34. - Unlawful disposal of sewage generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited, in any unsanitary manner, on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1980, § 25-29)  
Sec. 44-35. - Discharge of sewage to natural outlets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 25-30)  
Sec. 44-36. - Mandatory connection to public sewer. 
(a)  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there shall be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with provisions of this article, within 90 days after written notice from the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage, where public sewers are available. 
(Code 1980, § 25-31)  
Sec. 44-37. - Occupational Health and Safety Act. 
All applicable requirements set forth in the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) and regulations enacted pursuant thereto shall be complied with in construction, maintenance, operation and use of the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1980, § 25-32)  
Secs. 44-38—44-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS 
 
Sec. 44-56. - Permit. 
(a)  No person not authorized by the city shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits, one for residential and commercial services and one for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application for a permit on a special form furnished by the city. The application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit or an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1980, § 25-37)  
Sec. 44-57. - Owner to bear cost of installation and indemnify city. 
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer to the point where the city stub ends shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1980, § 25-38)  
Sec. 44-58. - Separate sewer required for each building; exception. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; provided that, where a building stands to the rear of another on a single lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the city may grant permission for the building sewer from the front building to he extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, upon a showing by the applicant that it is not feasible that the two buildings so connected will ultimately be on separate building lots. 
(Code 1980, § 25-39)  
Sec. 44-59. - Use of old sewers for new buildings. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 25-40)  
Sec. 44-60. - Size, slope, materials, etc. 
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the appropriate specifications of the ASTM or WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, all installations to be subject to the expressed written approval of the city and in no case shall the size of pipe installed be less than four inches in nominal diameter. 
(Code 1980, § 25-41)  
Sec. 44-61. - Elevation; proximity to bearing wall; etc. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building, at an elevation below the basement or first floor. No building, sewer shall be made parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from live loads (automobiles, etc.) which may be superimposed. The building sewer shall be made at uniform grade and in straight alignment, insofar as possible. The building sewer shall be constructed to such point as directed by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 25-42)  
Sec. 44-62. - Guarding of excavations; restoration of disturbed public property. 
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1980, § 25-43)  
Sec. 44-63. - Connection of downspouts, foundation drains, etc., prohibited. 
No person shall maintain or make a connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1980, § 25-44)  
Sec. 44-64. - Connection to public sewer. 
(a)  Before any underground portions thereof are covered, the applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection thereof shall be made to the public sewer only after inspection. The inspection thereof shall be made within two working days of receipt of notice by the city. 
(b)  The city shall keep a permanent and accurate record of the location, depth and direction of all new sewer connections, including such landmarks as may be necessary to make an adequate description. 
(Code 1980, § 25-45)  
Sec. 44-65. - Pumping facilities. 
When a building elevation is too low to permit connection to a public sewer, the owner shall install pumping facilities capable of lifting the sewage to the public sewer. Pumping facilities shall be inspected and approved by the plumbing official. 
(Code 1980, § 25-46)  
Secs. 44-66—44-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SEWER USE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 44-81. - Prohibited discharges generally. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage to any public sewer. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance or to create any hazard in the receiving waters in the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 11.0 or containing heavy concentrations of salts or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstructions in the flow of sewage or other interference to the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole or paunch manure, hair and fleshing or entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public sewer the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes, if it appears likely, in the opinion of the city, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment or have an adverse affect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 65 degrees Celsius. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit or zero degrees and 65 degrees Celsius. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder (excluding domestic), equipped with a motor of three-fourths horse power or greater, shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals in excess of the following: 
Chromium .....1.0 mg/l 
Either the + 3 valance or + 6 valance or a combination of both 
Lead .....2.0 mg/l 
Tin .....2.0 mg/l 
Zinc .....2.0 mg/l 
Copper .....0.5 mg/l 
Nickel .....1.0 mg/l 
Cyanide .....0.2 mg/l 
or a combination of the above in excess of 9.0 mg/l in the effluent, or which, when blended with the waste in the trunk line, will have a concentration in excess of 1.0 mg/l when it reaches the treatment plant, section 44-83 notwithstanding, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such material received in composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other waste or odor producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage to meet requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH outside of the range of 6.0 to 11.0. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
b.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
c.  Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting slugs. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1980, § 25-52)  
Sec. 44-82. - Discharge of scavenger wastes. 
Persons desiring to discharge scavenger wastes shall be required to obtain a permit from the authority, on forms furnished by the authority. Scavenger wastes shall mean putrid or offensive matter and the contents of all privies, septic tanks and cesspools. The discharge of such wastes shall be made only at a location in the sewage treatment plant designated on the permit by the authority. No scavenger wastes shall be discharged into the city sewer system. 
(Code 1980, § 25-53)  
Sec. 44-83. - Authority of city to reject, require pretreatment of, etc., certain wastes. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection 44-81(c), which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious affect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving water, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition with discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1980, § 25-54)  
Sec. 44-84. - Maintenance of pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his expense. 
(Code 1980, § 25-55)  
Sec. 44-85. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be a type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be supplied and properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his expense. 
(Code 1980, § 25-56)  
Sec. 44-86. - Surge tank for certain industries. 
Any industry whose hydraulic load is ten percent or more of the total hydraulic load to the system must provide pretreatment in the form of a surge tank to equalize the flow over a seven-day period. The surge tank must be approved by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 25-57)  
Sec. 44-87. - Control manholes and other facilities for observation; sampling and measurement of industrial waste. 
(a)  It shall be required by the city that the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes install a suitable control manhole. When deemed necessary, the city may require additional meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste. 
(b)  The manhole provided for in this section shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 25-58)  
Sec. 44-88. - Method of measuring, testing, etc., wastes; industrial waste questionnaire form. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the affect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. In order for the city to properly evaluate the affect of the waste on the system, an industry must submit, along with the plans and other required data, an industrial waste questionnaire form. These forms are available from the city. 
(Code 1980, § 25-59)  
Sec. 44-89. - Agreements for acceptance of industrial waste for pretreatment. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. The basis for sewer surcharges is set out in section 44-90. 
(Code 1980, § 25-60)  
Sec. 44-90. - Surcharges. 
In Table I, a schedule of surcharges has been established which takes into consideration the total costs for the treatment of waste. This schedule (Table I) can be amended from time to time by ordinance of the city council. In this schedule, a BOD 5 concentration of 0 to 600 ppm and a pH in the range of 6.0 through 11.0 pH units is considered to be standard sewage waste. Any sewage having a concentration in excess of 600 ppm BOD 5 , or having a pH of less than 6.0 units or greater than 11.0 units is subject to a surcharge in accordance with the schedule set forth in Table I. This surcharge schedule is based on the equitable recovery of waste treatment costs as required for those cities receiving federal assistance for the construction of wastewater treatment facilities and is in compliance with the regulations in 18 CFR 601.34. The issuance of this surcharge schedule does not in itself permit nor does it imply that any such waste will be received by the city for treatment. In each instance the actual acceptance of the waste for treatment is subject to review and evaluation by the city. In some instances, pretreatment may be required before acceptance of the waste for final treatment by the city. 
TABLE I 
TABLE OF SEWER SURCHARGE RATES 
		A 		B 
Rate 	BOD 5 	Cost Per 
Million Gallons 	pH 	Cost Per 
Million Gallons 
0 	0—600 	$0.00 	6.0—11.0 	$0.00 
1 	600—800 	9.50 	1.0—2.0 	3.00 
			2.0—3.0 	3.00 
2 	800—1,000 	28.50 	3.0—4.0 	2.00 
			4.0—5.0 	2.00 
3 	1,000—1,200 	47.00 	5.0—6.0 	2.00 
4 	1,200—1,400 	67.00 		
5 	1,400—1,600 	85.00 	11.0—12.0 	1.50 
6 	1,600—1,800 	104.00 	12.0—13.0 	3.00 
7 	1,800—2,000 	122.50 		
 
NOTES: 
(1)  Total charge = BOD surcharge + pH surcharge. 
(2)  The city will require independent engineers to conduct a 24-hour composite sampling and analysis of the wastewater it least once per three months. This analysis will be the basis for determining the surcharge. 
(3)  The cost per million gallons shown under columns A and B would be subject to yearly adjustments based on economic trends. 
(Code 1980, § 25-61)  
Sec. 44-91. - Discharges into storm sewer system. 
(a)  No person or activity shall discharge or cause to be discharged sanitary wastewater into any stormwater channel, conduit, ditch, or pipe or any other part of the storm sewer system. 
(b)  Uncontaminated cooling water may be discharged into the storm sewer system provided proper permits and authorizations are obtained, but may not be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1980, § 25-62)  
Secs. 44-92—44-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 44-111. - When required. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 44-36, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of the state department of health and environmental control. 
(Code 1980, § 25-67)  
Sec. 44-112. - Type, capacity, etc.; discharge to natural outlet prohibited. 
The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state board of health. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Code 1980, § 25-68)  
Sec. 44-113. - Permit to install. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewer disposal system, other than a septic tank, privy, privy vault or cesspool for a single-family dwelling, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the county health department. Application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the county health department, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the county health department. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application for permit is filed. 
(Code 1980, § 25-69)  
Sec. 44-114. - Inspection. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the county health department. The county health department shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the county health department when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two working days of the receipt of notice by the county health department. 
(Code 1980, § 25-70)  
Sec. 44-115. - Operation and maintenance. 
The owner shall operate and maintain private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1980, § 25-71)  
Sec. 44-116. - Abandonment when public sewer becomes available. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge and filled with clean, bankrun gravel or dirt, within 60 days of notification to do so by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 25-72)  
Sec. 44-117. - Division does not nullify requirements of state or county health officer. 
No provision of this division shall be construed to nullify any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state or county health officer. 
(Code 1980, § 25-73)  
Secs. 44-118—44-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - COMPLIANCE ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 44-136. - Failure to meet requirements. 
In the event that a user of the city sanitary sewer system fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the city may institute the compliance enforcement procedures set forth in this article or seek injunctive relief for noncompliance. The city shall also have authority to seek or assess civil penalties in at least the amount of $500.00 a day for each violation. It also shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision in this article, and any such violation shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 25-80)  
Sec. 44-137. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this chapter, its wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibitions, limitations or requirements contained in this chapter, the city may serve upon such user a written notice stating the nature of the violations. Within ten days of receipt of the notice, the user shall make a written reply to the notice. 
(Code 1980, § 25-81)  
Sec. 44-138. - User reply. 
The user's reply shall state whether it admits or denies the violation, how the violation occurred, the reasons for it, and the steps being taken to correct the violation and steps being taken to prevent its occurrence in the future. The user's reply shall include a schedule for completion of the corrective actions. 
(Code 1980, § 25-82)  
Sec. 44-139. - Failure to reply to notice of violation. 
If the user fails to reply to the notice of violation as provided in this division or if the reply is not satisfactory or the violation continues for 20 days after the date of the notice of violation the city shall cause to be scheduled a show cause hearing before the city to consider the violation and the consequences of continued violation. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of the hearing to be held by the city on the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city why the proposed enforcement should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation or other entity. 
(Code 1980, § 25-83)  
Sec. 44-140. - Show cause hearing. 
The city council may conduct the show cause hearing provided by section 44-139 and do the following or may designate any city official or other qualified person to serve as a hearing examiner to do the following: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the city notices of hearings, request the attendance and testimony of witnesses, and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing; 
(2)  Take evidence; 
(3)  Establish facts, receive data and develop a compliance schedule; 
(4)  If a hearing examiner is designated he shall prepare and transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with his recommendations to the city council for action thereon. 
(Code 1980, § 25-84)  
Sec. 44-141. - Hearing testimony. 
At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony must be taken under oath and recorded stenographically or electronically. 
(Code 1980, § 25-85)  
Sec. 44-142. - Remedies. 
If the city council determines that a user is in violation of any provision of this article after the hearing upon the rule to show cause and no further adjudicatory hearing is needed, the city may take the following actions in addition to any other actions authorized by this article or applicable state or federal laws or regulations: 
(1)  Prohibit the wastewater from entering the city's wastewater treatment system; 
(2)  Require pretreatment necessary to reduce or eliminate pollutants so that the discharge will not violate this article; 
(3)  Require wastewater storage or flow equalization facilities necessary to control the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added handling and treatment costs not covered by existing user charges. However, payment, other than for civil penalties, is not an alternative to pretreatment for prohibited wastes and/or for discharges which exceed maximum limitations defined in this article; 
(5)  Develop and apply a mandatory schedule requiring the user to be in full compliance within a specified period of time; 
(6)  Take other remedial action necessary to achieve the purpose of these regulations, including a civil penalty and assessment of costs or expenses as provided by this article; and/or 
(7)  Revoke or suspend the offending user's wastewater discharge permit or access to the system. 
(Code 1980, § 25-86)  
Sec. 44-143. - Determination of civil penalties, costs and expenses. 
(a)  Any user who is found to have violated any provision in this article or the orders, rules, regulations or permits of the city may be fined by the city not more than $500.00 for each day of violation as a civil penalty. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. This shall be considered a civil fine or penalty. 
(b)  In addition to the civil penalties provided in this section, the city may assess against the user reasonable attorneys' fees, hearing costs, reporters' fees and other expenses incurred by the city for any hearings or enforcement procedures. 
(c)  Net proceeds from collection of civil penalties and fines shall be deposited in the city utilities fund. 
(Code 1980, § 25-87)  
Sec. 44-144. - Service penalties. 
After the city determines a violation has occurred, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing as follows: 
(1)  Order the user to close his facility; 
(2)  Order the user to cease operation of the process of processes which are the source of the pollutant(s) interfering with the waste treatment; or 
(3)  Dig up and disconnect the users' sewage connection. 
(Code 1980, § 25-88)  
Sec. 44-145. - Termination of sewer service for nonpayment, right of entry. 
Any user who has failed to pay the charges imposed by the city shall be subject to termination of service by disconnection of sewer service. The city or its agents shall have the right of entry in and upon the user's premises and the right of ingress and egress to determine the location of the service line or to dig up or to uncover the service line for the purpose of disconnecting the line from the property, or sealing or plugging such line or any collection line, upon giving the user five days' written notice of such proposed action. 
(Code 1980, § 25-89)  
Sec. 44-146. - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article may be subject to a fine or imprisonment under applicable state or federal law. 
(Code 1980, § 25-90)  
Sec. 44-147. - Emergencies. 
The city shall have the authority, without prior notice to the user, immediately to halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants to its system which reasonably appears to the city to present an immediate danger to public safety or welfare or the environment or threatens to interfere significantly with the proper operation of the city sanitary sewer system. If the emergency is not resolved within a reasonable period of time, the city shall institute the service suspension procedures provided by section 44-148. 
(Code 1980, § 25-91)  
Sec. 44-148. - Service suspension. 
In the event of an emergency as described in section 44-147 and in addition to the powers granted therein, the city, after giving the user five days' written notice, may suspend sewer service pending a show cause hearing as provided by sections 44-139 through 44-145. 
(Code 1980, § 25-92)  
Secs. 44-149—44-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER QUANTITY AND QUALITY MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, adopted Apr. 28, 2008, amended the Code by renumbering the current Art. III, stormwater management utility, §§ 44-171—44-180 to Art, III, stormwater quantity and quality management requirements, §§ 44-207—44-216 and adding new §§ 44-171—44-191 as set out herein. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 44-171—44-173. - Reserved.  
Sec. 44-174. - Authority. 
These requirements are adopted pursuant to the authority conferred upon the City of Aiken by the South Carolina Constitution, Act No. 194 of the Acts and Joint Resolutions of 1971 enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina, approved April 23, 1971, in 1976 South Carolina Code of Laws Sections 4-9-30, 4-9-40 and Chapter 14, Title 48, as amended. This article is also promulgated to ensure compliance with the requirements imposed upon the City of Aiken by the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Permit SCR030000 issued in accordance with the federal Clean Water Act and regulations adopted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-175. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city. All lands under the jurisdiction of another entity with the power of eminent domain are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-176. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment, and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the city. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Comply with permit SCR030000; 
(2)  To require that post development water quantity and quality characteristics approximate predevelopment characteristics; 
(3)  To establish stormwater and sediment control plan submittal and permitting requirements to protect water quality on all new and redevelopment projects; 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article; 
(5)  Control the discharge to the city's storm drainage system of pollutants in such quantity that water quality standards are met or to otherwise address post-construction, long-term water quality. This includes all necessary means needed to comply with state and federal regulations regarding stormwater management for quantity and quality controls; 
(6)  Define procedures for addressing citizen complaints within the city; 
(7)  Ensure adequate long term operation and maintenance of best management practices (BMPs); and 
(8)  Develop, implement, and enforce action plans to address pollutant load reductions required in impaired watersheds and to comply with total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) established by EPA or SCDHEC and to otherwise meet water quality standards. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-177. - Rules of language and interpretation. 
(a)  The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
(b)  The particular shall control the general. 
(c)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(d)  All public officials, bodies and agencies to which reference is made are those of the city, unless otherwise indicated. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-178. - Severability. 
The provisions and sections of this article shall be deemed to be separable, and the invalidity of any portion of this article shall not affect the validity of the remainder. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-179. - Relationship with other laws, regulations and articles. 
Whenever the provisions of this article impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other law, regulation or article, the requirements contained in this article shall prevail. Whenever the provisions of any other law, regulation or article require more restrictive standards than are required in this article, the requirements of such law, regulation or article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-180. - Amendments. 
The city council, may, in its discretion and following procedures specified by state law, amend or change this article or adopt additional regulations or resolutions to implement this article, comply with permit SCR030000, implement the SWMP, or to otherwise further the goal of protecting the quality of the waters into which the city storm sewer system outfalls flow through the control of runoff volume and rate and pollutant concentrations and loads. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-181. - Definitions. 
Bioretention: A stormwater treatment practice that uses a combination of plants and pervious soils to treat water quality and, to a limited extent, may address water quantity. 
Clearing: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
Constructed wetland: A shallow water quality pond that mimics natural wetland functions using wetland plants. 
Drainage way: Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site. 
Erosion control: Measures that minimize or prevent erosion such as mulches, erosion control matting, and grassing. 
Erosion and sediment control plan: A set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer that indicates the specific measures and sequencing to be used in controlling sediment and erosion on a development site both before, during, and after construction. 
Forebay: A small pond at the head of a detention pond for the purpose of collecting sediment and facilitating simplified sediment removal. 
Grading: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
Perimeter control: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site either by filtering sediment-laden runoff, or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
Phasing: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next. 
Sediment control: Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
Silvicultural point source: Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance related to rock crushing, gravel washing, log sorting, or log storage facilities which are operated in connection with silvicultural activities and from which pollutants are discharged into waters of the state. The term does not include non-point source silvicultural activities such as nursery operations, site preparation, reforestation and subsequent cultural treatment, thinning, prescribed burning, pest and fire control, harvesting operations, surface drainage, or road construction and maintenance from which there is natural runoff. However, some of these activities (such as stream crossing for roads) may involve point source discharges of dredged or fill material which may require a CWA section 404 permit (See 33 CFR 209.120 and Part 233). 
Site: A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
Stabilization: The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding (usually grass, mulch, geotextile fabric, or rock). 
Start of construction: The first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
Stormwater treatment practice (STP): Any structural method of treating stormwater quantity or quality. 
Watershed: The land area which contributes to the flow of water into a receiving body of water. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, adopted Apr. 28, 2008, repealed the former Art. III, § 44-181, and enacted a new Art. III, § 44-181 as set out herein. The former Art. III, § 44-181 pertained to appeals. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 44-182. - Stormwater management permit required. 
The surface of land in the city shall not be disturbed or altered for any purpose whatsoever until a stormwater management permit is issued to the person responsible for such construction. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has submitted a plan for stormwater management and to control erosion and sedimentation and such plan has been approved by the city engineer or a designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-183. - Prohibitions and exemptions. 
No person shall (1) develop any land, (2) engage in any industry or enterprise, (3) construct, operate or maintain any landfill, hazardous waste treatment, disposal or recovery facility, or any other industrial or related facility, (4) dispose of any hazardous or toxic substance or other pollutant or (5) otherwise prevent the transport of sediment and other pollutants associates with stormwater runoff beyond property boundaries without having provided for compliance with this article. 
The following discharges do not require NPDES permits: 
Any introduction of pollutants from non point-source agricultural and silvicultural activities, including stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and forest lands, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined, discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined, discharges to aquaculture projects as defined, and discharges from silvicultural point sources as defined. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-184. - Application, review, and approval, and issuance of stormwater management permit. 
(a)  Application. All applications for stormwater management permits shall accompany plans and be submitted to planning for processing and permit issuance. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by three copies of the applicants stormwater and erosion control plan. Stormwater and erosion control plans shall conform to the requirements of section 44-185. 
(1)  Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm. 
(2)  Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan, and that an authorized representative shall inspect the site every seven days and after every one half-inch rain to ensure compliance with the plan. 
(b)  Fee. The application shall be accompanied by non-refundable fee to be set by the city council. 
(c)  Review and approval. The city engineer shall review each application for a stormwater management permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation. Within ten working days after receiving an application, the city engineer shall, in writing: 
(1)  Approve the permit application; 
(2)  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
(3)  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. Failure of the city engineer to act on original or revised applications within ten working days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the city engineer. 
Major amendments of the stormwater and erosion control plan shall be submitted to the city engineer and shall be processed and approved, or disapproved, in the same manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the city engineer by written authorization to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-185. - Stormwater and erosion control plans. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Stormwater and erosion control plans for land disturbance activities of more than one acre shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, registered landscape architect, or Tier B land surveyor licensed by the State of South Carolina. 
(2)  Applications shall include a set of preliminary development plans with all proposed improvements shown thereon. 
(3)  A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings, and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, the sequence of clearing, installation of temporary erosion, and sediment measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
(4)  For all sites less than one acre the owner shall file notification of construction with the building department. A copy of the permit shall be filed with the city engineer. The city engineer may require a stormwater management application be filed after a review of the building permit. 
(5)  Plans must address: 
a.  The control of waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. 
b.  Protection of fuel tanks with a lined containment berm. 
c.  Containment of spills and cleanup of contaminated soils. Spills and contaminated soils shall be cleaned up per SCDHEC and USEPA regulations. 
d.  Removal of construction debris which shall not be burned or buried. 
Note: Once a stormwater management permit has been issued, all plans must be strictly followed during the construction process in order for the permit to stay active. 
(b)  Water quantity design requirements. 
(1)  Stormwater management requirements for a specific project shall be based on the entire area to be developed, or if phased, the initial submittal shall control that area proposed in the initial phase and establish a procedure and obligation for total site control. 
(2)  The post-development peak discharge rate for the 25-year frequency 24-hour duration storm event shall not exceed the pre-development peak discharge rate for the two-year frequency 24-hour duration storm event. 
(3)  Discharge velocities shall be reduced to provide a non-erosive velocity flow from a structure, channel, or other control measure. 
(4)  Watersheds that have well documented water quantity problems may have more stringent, or modified, design criteria as determined by the city engineer. 
(5)  An emergency spillway shall safely pass the 100-year storm event. 
(6)  Dry ponds must dewater within 72 hours. 
(c)  Water quality design requirements. 
(1)  Clearing and grading. 
a.  Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and wetlands, shall not begin until all applicable local, state, and federal permits have been granted. 
b.  Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and retain natural drainage patterns should be used. 
c.  Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 20 acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the city engineer. 
d.  Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
(2)  Erosion control. Plans shall include all erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this regulation throughout all phases of construction and permanently, after completion of development of the site. 
a.  Soil must be stabilized within 14 days of clearing or inactivity in construction. 
b.  If vegetative erosion control methods, such as seeding, have not become established within 21 days, the city engineer may require that the site be reseeded, or that a non-vegetative option be employed. 
c.  On steep slopes or in drainage ways, special techniques shall be used to ensure stabilization. 
d.  Soil stockpiles shall be stabilized or covered within 21 days of inactivity. 
e.  Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site. 
f.  Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed. 
g.  Energy dissipation shall be provided at all outfalls. 
(3)  Sediment control. 
a.  Sediment controls shall be provided in the form of settling basins or sediment traps or tanks, and perimeter controls. 
b.  Where possible, settling basins shall be designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long-term stormwater management. 
c.  Adjacent properties shall be protected with perimeter controls. 
d.  A 50-foot long by six-inch deep stone construction exit shall be provided unless an alternate construction exit is approved by the city engineer. 
(4)  Stormwater treatment practices. Post-construction water quality must be addressed for all sites containing more than one acre of disturbance. Water quality volume design requirements must be met. 
a.  Water quality volume design requirements require implementation of the one-inch sizing criterion. One-inch sizing: The first one inch of water from any storm event, draining from that portion of the site that discharges to the stormwater treatment unit, must be collected and released over a 24-hour period. 
1.  Dry ponds are not an acceptable stand-alone water quality treatment technology. When used they should be proceeded by a forebay and used in conjunction with infiltration, vegetative filters, or inline treatment. Dry ponds must dewater within 72 hours. 
2.  Technologies that may be used to meet water quality requirements include but are not limited to infiltration, bioretention, in-line treatment devices, disconnected impervious areas, vegetated filter strips, constructed wetlands, and wet ponds. 
3.  Landscaped areas shall be designed, where possible, to incorporate stormwater management. Peak flow control may be achieved by adding inline or overflow storage such as parking lot detention, pipe storage, or a dry pond. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-186. - Design guidelines. 
Specific requirements, guidance, and technical specifications for compliance with this article are found in the South Carolina DHEC Stormwater Management BMP Handbook including the South Carolina DHEC Stormwater Management and Sediment and Erosion Control Plan Review Checklist For Design Professionals Manual. Although the intention is to establish uniform design practices, it neither replaces the need for engineering judgment nor precludes the use of information not presented. Other accepted engineering and construction procedures and practices may be used if approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-187. - Monitoring. 
The engineering department of public works may monitor the quantity and concentration of pollutants in stormwater discharges from the areas and/or locations in the city. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-188. - Inspections. 
(a)  The city engineer or his designee may conduct routine inspections and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the stormwater and sediment control plan as approved. 
Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the city engineer shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. The permittee shall notify the city engineer at least two working days before the start of construction. 
(b)  The permittee or his/her agent shall, at a minimum, make regular inspections of all control measures at least every seven days and after every one-half inch rain event. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the stormwater and sediment control plan, and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to the city engineer. 
(c)  The city engineer may enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports. 
(d)  The city engineer or his designee may make regular post-construction maintenance inspections of BMPs for stormwater treatment and control and provide a written report to the owner of such device outlining deficiencies and required corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-189. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Cease and desist order; revocation of permit. In the event that any person holding a site development permit or individual building permit pursuant to this article violates the terms of the permit, or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety or persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city engineer may suspend or revoke the site development permit by issuance of a written notice. 
(b)  Violation and penalties. Any person found to be in violation of this article that fails to comply with a compliance directive issued by the city engineer shall be punishable as provided in the City Code. Each day in violation of the provisions of this division shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The punishment shall be in addition to any remedial activity needed to safeguard the public, the environment or the city storm drainage system. The city reserves the right to conduct emergency repair or maintenance to any STP at the responsible party's expense if the responsible party is unwilling or unable to perform the necessary work. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-190. - Management variances. 
The city engineer may grant a written variance from any requirement of the city storm drainage policy if there are exceptional circumstances applicable to the site such that strict adherence to the provisions of these regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of the policy. A written request for a variance shall be provided to the city engineer and shall state the specific variances sought and the reasons with supporting data for their granting. 
A project may be eligible for a variance from water quantity control requirements if the applicant can demonstrate that: 
(1)  The proposed project will return the disturbed area to a pre-development runoff condition and the pre-development land use is unchanged at the conclusion of the project. 
(2)  The imposition of peak control requirements for rates of stormwater runoff would aggravate downstream flooding. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-191. - Appeals process. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or notice of violation of the city engineer or his designee may appeal the same by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within 30 days of the issuance of said decision or notice of violation. If the person to whom the decision or notice of violation is directed fails or neglects to appeal the notice of violation within 30 days of the issuance of said decision or notice of violation, the decision or notice of violation becomes final. 
The city manager or his designee will review the appeal. The notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the violation or decision of the city engineer is alleged to be in error. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager may appeal the decision to the city court of the city in accordance with its rules and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 04282008, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR ILLICIT DISCHARGES OR CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 44-192. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(2)  To ensure the proper installation, operation, and maintenance of construction site best management practices (BMPs). 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-193. - Definitions. 
Best management practices (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Construction activity: Land clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Hazardous materials: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Illicit discharge: Means any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer) and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities. 
Illicit connections: An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks not authorized by the appropriate permitting authority. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit: A permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Pollutant: Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, sediment from land disturbances, floatables, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, hazardous substances and wastes, sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens, dissolved and particulate metals, animal wastes, wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure, and noxious or offensive matter of any kind that may cause or contribute to pollution. 
Storm drainage system: Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
Stormwater: Any surface or sub-surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stormwater management department (SWMD): The city engineering department responsible for implementing the provisions of this article. 
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-194. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the stormwater management department (SWMD) or the NPDES permitting authority. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-195. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city engineering department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Other duly authorized officers of the city may also enforce provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-196. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of the United States Environmental Protection Agency's water quality standards including allowable amounts, other than stormwater. 
The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation, or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one part per million chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC) or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SWMD prior to the event. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such connection to continue. 
(4)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the SWMD. 
(5)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from SWMD. The location of the discharge point shall be identified. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the discharge of the drain or conveyance is to be determined. The drain or conveyance shall be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer system or other discharge. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the SWMD. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-197. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-198. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person or entity when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-199. - Unauthorized connection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to the city's MS4 without written permission, or to reconnect access when it has been suspended or terminated due to an illicit discharge without the prior approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-200. - Litter and refuse control. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw litter, garbage, bottles, cans, or containers upon any public right-of-way or property or the premises of another without permission of the owner. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the property owner to keep leaves that have been piled for leaf collection out of any inlet or catch basin. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-201. - Industrial, construction, or land-disturbing activity discharges. 
(a)  Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES (or state) stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the SWMD prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(b)  Projects subject to a city construction permit, including single-family residential building permits, must develop and adhere to a sediment and erosion control plan. Failure to properly implement the approved plan constitutes a violation of this article. 
(c)  The city will require best management practice implementation for any land-disturbing activity, including land or individual lot clearing, grubbing, landscaping, etc., that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the MS4, or waters of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-202. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the SWMD ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination, and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The SWMD shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The SWMD has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at the discharger's own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  If the SWMD has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the SWMD is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the SWMD may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction or refer the case to the NPDES permitting authority. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-203. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release, and in addition to other notification requirements, the facility shall notify the SWMD in person, by phone, or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the SWMD within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
For facilities that operate under existing NPDES permits for stormwater discharge, spill reporting shall be made to the permitting authority in accordance with the permit. The SWMD shall be provided with copies of any written notification required by the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-204. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Whenever the SWMD finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the SWMD may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(2)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(3)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and 
(4)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)  If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the city or a contractor will do the work and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-205. - Civil penalties. 
Any person found to be in violation of this article that fails to comply with a compliance directive issued by the SWMD and referenced in section 44-184 shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, section 1-13. General penalty for violations of code and ordinances; continuing violations of the City Code. Each day in violation of the provisions of this division shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The punishment shall be in addition to the remedial process provided for in section 44-185. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-206. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 04282008A, § 1 (Exh. A), 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-207. - Article designation and authority. 
This article may be cited as the stormwater management utility ordinance and is adopted pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, §§ 48-14-10—48-14-150; S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; and S.C. Admin. Regs. §§ 72-300—72-316. 
(Code 1980, § 25-110; Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-208. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of words and terms used in this article shall be as set forth in S.C. Code 1976, § 48-14-20 and 26 South Carolina and S.C. Admin. Regs. § 72-301. 
(Code 1980, § 25-111; Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, 4-28-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 44-209. - Establishment; administration; duties and powers. 
(a)  In accordance with the authority cited in section 44-171 and other applicable laws and regulations of the state, the city council hereby establishes a stormwater management utility to carry out the purposes, functions and responsibilities set forth in this article. The stormwater management utility shall operate as a separate division of the department of engineering and public works under the supervision of the director of that department as set forth in section 2-259. The utility shall have the powers and discharge the duties delegated or granted to it as a local government implementing agency under the authority cited in section 44-171, successor provisions thereto, other applicable laws and regulations of the state, and the ordinances of this city. 
(b)  All ordinances to annex property and bring it within the city limits shall, upon annexation, include any special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study dated March 4, 1980, for the unincorporated areas of Aiken County, with accompanying map and other data, and shall be deemed adopted by reference when the annexation is approved, and shall be deemed part and parcel of any annexation ordinance that receives a majority city council vote and is enacted pursuant to this Code section. 
(Code 1980, § 25-112; Ord. No. 10102005D, § 1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-210. - Boundaries and jurisdiction. 
The boundaries and jurisdiction of the stormwater management utility shall extend to the corporate limits of the city, including all areas hereafter annexed thereto, and such additional areas lying outside the corporate limits of the city as shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 25-113; Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-211. - Regulation of land-disturbing activity. 
The city council shall establish by ordinance a system regulating land-disturbing activities, including, but not limited to, provisions for reviewing and approving stormwater management and sediment control plans; creating design requirements for such plans and land-disturbing activities; and providing operational and maintenance requirements for stormwater management facilities and measures. 
(Code 1980, § 25-114; Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-212. - Stormwater utility fees. 
The city council shall establish by ordinance the amount or amounts and classifications of stormwater management utility fees to be implemented to help fund the stormwater management utility and its programs and projects. In establishing such fees, the city council shall consider, among other things, the following criteria: 
(1)  The fee system must be reasonable and equitable so that users pay to the extent they contribute to the need for the utility, and the fees must bear a substantial relationship to the cost of service; 
(2)  The components of the calculations used to establish fees may include, but shall not be limited to, the following cost factors: 
a.  Stormwater management planning and preparation of comprehensive watershed master plans for stormwater management; 
b.  Regular inspections of public and private stormwater management facilities and measures and the construction thereof; 
c.  Maintenance and improvement of stormwater management facilities that have been accepted by the city for that purpose; 
d.  Plan review and inspection of sediment control and stormwater management plan, measures, and practices; 
e.  Retrofitting designated watersheds to reduce existing flooding problems or to improve water quality; 
f.  Acquisition of interests in land, including easements; 
g.  Design and construction of stormwater management facilities and measures and acquisition of equipment; 
h.  Administration and enforcement; 
i.  Water quantity and water quality management, including monitoring and surveillance; and 
j.  Debt service and financing costs. 
(3)  The components of the calculations used to establish fees shall be based on an equivalent residential unit (ERU) comprised of a lot of one-third acre in size containing a single-family residential structure with reasonable general adjustments being made for, but not limited to, the following factors: 
a.  Commercial and land uses other than single-family residential; 
b.  Open and/or forested land; 
c.  Lot or tract size; 
d.  The amount of the site that is impervious; and 
e.  Other generally accepted factors determined by the city engineer to be relevant to such calculations based upon the provisions of this article. 
(4)  The practical difficulties and limitations related to establishing, calculating, and administering such fees. 
Stormwater Management Utility Fees 
Ordinance Number 	Date Adopted 
Ord. No. 06102019A 
June 10, 2019 
 
(Code 1980, § 25-115; Ord. No. 06092003D, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, 4-28-2008) 
Editor's note— The stormwater management utility fees are not set out herein, but can be located at the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 44-213. - Stormwater utility enterprise fund, investment of funds, and borrowing. 
Funds generated for the stormwater management utility from fees, bond issues, other borrowing, and other sources shall be deposited into a stormwater utility enterprise fund which shall be maintained and managed by the city manager, with the advice and assistance of the director of the department of finance and data processing, to accomplish the purposes of this article. The fund shall be invested and reinvested pursuant to the same procedures and practices followed by the city for investment and reinvestment of water and sewer system funds. The city council may use any form of borrowing or financing authorized by the laws of the state to fund capital acquisitions or expenditures for the stormwater management utility to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 25-116; Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-214. - Billing of stormwater management utility fee. 
The stormwater management utility fee shall be billed monthly to users by being included on the monthly water and/or sewer bill provided by section 44-11 for those real properties having active water and/or sewer billing accounts. For real properties not having active accounts, the fee shall be billed semiannually to the owners or other persons listed on the real property tax records for such properties and shall be due on or before the 30th day after such billing. Semi-annual fees unpaid as of the 31st day after billing shall constitute a lien against the property on which they are due. After written notice to the owners or other persons listed on the real property tax records, the past due semi-annual fees may be added to real property taxes due on any such property. The city manager shall develop guidelines and procedures for the implementation of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 25-117; Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-215. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city engineer or such other official as the city manager shall designate shall be the enforcement officer for the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, and any such violation shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. Each day violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalties provided in this article, the city engineer may assess a civil penalty not to exceed $200.00 against any person violating any provision of this article. In setting the amount of the civil penalty, the city engineer shall consider the type, duration, and severity of the violation and the responsiveness of the person against whom the penalty is assessed in remedying the violation. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate violation that may be the subject of such a penalty. The city engineer, with the assistance of the city attorney, shall make a written demand for payment of the civil penalty upon the person, including an explanation of the basis of the violation and penalty. If full payment of the penalty is not made within 30 days after such demand is mailed or delivered to the person, the city attorney may commence a civil action in the appropriate court to recover the penalty. 
(d)  In addition to any other penalties or remedies provided in this article, the city, upon the recommendation of the city attorney and approval of the city manager, may institute a civil action in the appropriate court to obtain compliance with the provisions of this article or remedy or prevent the violation or threatened violation of any provision of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 25-118; Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, 4-28-2008)  
Sec. 44-216. - Municipal liability. 
Nothing in this article and no action or failure to act under this article shall or may be construed to: 
(1)  Impose any liability on the city, or its departments, agencies, officers or employees for the recovery of damages; or 
(2)  Relieve any person engaged in a land-disturbing activity of duties, obligations, responsibilities, or liabilities arising from or incident to operations associated with such activity or imposed by the provisions of this article or the laws and regulations pursuant to which it was adopted. 
(Code 1980, § 25-119; Ord. No. 04282008, § 1, 4-28-2008)  
Chapter 45 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 14, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 45, §§ 45-1—45-64, and enacted a new Ch. 45 as set out herein. The former Ch. 45 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 11242008, § 1(Exh. A), 11-24-2008. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 45-1. - Statutory authorization. 
Municipality. The legislature of the state of South Carolina has in S.C. Code of Laws, Title 5 and Title 6, and amendments thereto, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Aiken, South Carolina does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-2. - Findings of fact. 
The special flood hazard areas of the city of Aiken are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
Furthermore, these flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-3. - Statement of purpose and objectives. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect human life and health, minimize property damage, and encourage appropriate construction practices to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions by requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. Uses of the floodplain which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion are restricted or prohibited. These provisions attempt to control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters, and control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion. Additionally, the chapter prevents or regulates the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
The objectives of this article are to protect human life and health, to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, and to insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. The provisions of the chapter are intended to minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in the floodplain, and prolonged business interruptions. Also, an important floodplain management objective of this chapter is to minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects and rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding. 
Floodplains are an important asset to the community. They perform vital natural functions such as temporary storage of floodwaters, moderation of peak flood flows, maintenance of water quality, groundwater recharge, prevention of erosion, habitat for diverse natural wildlife populations, recreational opportunities, and aesthetic quality. These functions are best served if floodplains are kept in their natural state. Wherever possible, the natural characteristics of floodplains and their associated wetlands and water bodies should be preserved and enhanced. Decisions to alter floodplains, especially floodways and stream channels, should be the result of careful planning processes that evaluate resource conditions and human needs. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-4. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city of Aiken as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study, dated August 16, 2018 with accompanying maps and other supporting data that are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
Upon annexation any special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study for the unincorporated areas of Aiken County, with accompanying map and other data are adopted by reference and declared part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-5. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-6. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-7. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state law. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-8. - Partial invalidity and severability. 
If any part of this chapter is declared invalid, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in force. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-9. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Aiken or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-10. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Aiken from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Secs. 45-11—45-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 45-21. - General. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-22. - Definitions. 
Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means structures that are located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
Addition (to an existing building) means an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. Additions to existing buildings shall comply with the requirements for new construction regardless as to whether the addition is a substantial improvement or not. Where a firewall or load-bearing wall is provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building and must comply with the standards for new construction. 
Agricultural structure means a structure used solely for agricultural purposes in which the use is exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of livestock. Agricultural structures are not exempt from the provisions of this article. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the local floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any enclosed area of a building that is below grade on all sides. 
Building. See structure. 
Coastal high hazard area means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of the primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. 
Critical development means development that is critical to the community's public health and safety, is essential to the orderly functioning of a community, store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, or house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of critical development include jails, hospitals, schools, fire stations, nursing homes, wastewater treatment facilities, water plants, and gas/oil/propane storage facilities. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water. 
Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management). Issued by President Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before April 16, 1979. 
Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April 26, 1979. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs). 
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) is an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) is an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency which contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Flood-resistant material means any building material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours) with floodwaters without sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost cosmetic repair. Any material that is water-soluble or is not resistant to alkali or acid in water, including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not flood-resistant. Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumbers are acceptable flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that restrict evaporation from below and materials that are impervious, but dimensionally unstable are not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain water excessively after submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of flood plain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI)) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places; 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of interior, or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of interior in states without approved programs. Some structures or districts listed on the state or local inventories may not be "Historic" as cited above, but have been included on the inventories because it was believed that the structures or districts have the potential for meeting the "Historic" structure criteria of the DOI. In order for these structures to meet NFIP historic structure criteria, it must be demonstrated and evidenced that the South Carolina Department of Archives and History has individually determined that the structure or district meets DOI historic structure criteria. 
Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC) applies to all new and renewed flood insurance policies effective on and after June 1, 1997. The NFIP shall enable the purchase of insurance to cover the cost of compliance with land use and control measures established under section 1361. It provides coverage for the payment of a claim to help pay for the cost to comply with state or community floodplain management laws or ordinances after a flood event in which a building has been declared substantially or repetitively damaged. 
Limited storage means an area used for storage and intended to be limited to incidental items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant or breakaway material, void of utilities except for essential lighting and cannot be temperature controlled. If the area is located below the base flood elevation in an A, AE and A1-A30 zone it must meet the requirements of subsection 45-41(4) of this chapter. 
Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG) is an elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any deck support, exterior walls of a building or proposed building walls. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for the purpose of this article, the Nations Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) are shown. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)of 1929 means, as corrected in 1929, elevation reference points set by national geodetic survey based on mean sea level. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means vertical control, as corrected in 1988, used as the reference datum on Flood Insurance Rate Maps. 
New construction means structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after March 26, 1979. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is completed on or after March 26, 1979. 
Primary frontal dune means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and, (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means a building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions during a ten year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event. 
Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. The act provides that no new flood insurance shall be provided for any property found by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to have been declared by a state or local authority to be in violation of state or local ordinances. 
Stable natural vegetation means the first place on the oceanfront where plants such as sea oats hold sand in place. 
Start of construction means for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Such repairs may be undertaken successively and their costs counted cumulatively. Please refer to the definition of "substantial improvement". 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project of improvement to a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or, 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Permits shall be cumulative for a period of five years. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether "substantial improvement" will occur. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from a term or terms of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Secs. 45-23—45-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 45-31. - Designation of local floodplain administrator. 
The director of engineering and utilities and/or their designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-32. - Adoption of letter of map revisions (LOMR). 
All LOMRs that are issued in the areas identified in section 45-4 of this chapter are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-33. - Development permit and certification requirements. 
(a)  Development permit. Application for a development permit shall be made to the local floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities. The development permit may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; and the location of fill materials, storage areas, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  A plot plan that shows the 100-year floodplain contour or a statement that the entire lot is within the floodplain must be provided by the development permit applicant when the lot is within or appears to be within the floodplain as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the floodplain identified pursuant to either the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of subsection 45-34(11) or the standards for subdivision proposals of section 45-42 and the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of section 45-43. The plot plan must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by it. The plot plan must show the floodway, if any, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the floodway identified pursuant to either the duties or responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of subsection 45-34(11) or the standards for subdivision proposals of subsection 45-42(12) and the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of section 45-43. 
(2)  Where base flood elevation data is provided as set forth in section 45-4 or the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of subsection 45-34(11) the application for a development permit within the flood hazard area shall show: 
a.  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new and substantially improved structures, and 
b.  If the structure will be floodproofed in accordance with the non-residential construction requirements of subsection 45-42(2) the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation data is not provided as set forth in section 45-4 or the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of subsection 45-34(11), then the provisions in the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of section 45-43 must be met. 
(4)  Alteration of watercourse.Where any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development, the application for a development permit shall include a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation, an engineering study to demonstrate that the flood- carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse is maintained and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. 
(b)  Certifications. 
(1)  Floodproofing certification. When a structure is floodproofed, the applicant shall provide certification from a registered, professional engineer or architect that the non-residential, floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in the non-residential construction requirements of subsection 45-42(2) and subsection 45-45(2)b. 
(2)  Certification during construction. A lowest floor elevation or floodproofing certification is required after the lowest floor is completed. As soon as possible after completion of the lowest floor and before any further vertical construction commences, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the local floodplain administrator a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by it. Any work done prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local floodplain administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. The permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed shall correct deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(3)  As-built certification. Upon completion of the development a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or architect, in accordance with SC law, shall certify according to the requirements of subsections 45-33(b)(1) and (b)(2) that the development is built in accordance with the submitted plans and previous pre-development certifications. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-34. - Duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Permit Review. Review all development permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Requirement of federal and/or state permits. Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C 1334. 
(3)  Watercourse alterations. 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Land, Water, and Conservation Division, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
b.  In addition to the notifications required watercourse alterations per subsection 45-34(3)a, written reports of maintenance records must be maintained to show that maintenance has been provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. This maintenance must consist of a comprehensive program of periodic inspections, and routine channel clearing and dredging, or other related functions. The assurance shall consist of a description of maintenance activities, frequency of performance, and the local official responsible for maintenance performance. Records shall be kept on file for FEMA inspection. 
c.  If the proposed project will modify the configuration of the watercourse, floodway, or base flood elevation for which a detailed Flood Insurance Study has been developed, the applicant shall apply for and must receive approval for a conditional letter of map revision with the Federal Emergency Management Agency prior to the start of construction. 
d.  Within 60 days of completion of an alteration of a watercourse, referenced in the certification requirements of subsection 45-33(b)(3), the applicant shall submit as-built certification, by a registered professional engineer, to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Floodway encroachments. Prevent encroachments within floodways unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection 45-42(5) are met. 
(5)  Adjoining floodplains. Cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to the management of adjoining floodplains and/or flood-related erosion areas in order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards. 
(6)  Notifying adjacent communities. Notify adjacent communities prior to permitting substantial commercial developments and large subdivisions to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
(7)  Certification requirements. 
a.  Obtain and review actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with administrative procedures outlined in subsection 45-33(b)(2). 
b.  Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with the floodproofing certification outlined in subsection 45-33(b)(1). 
c.  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with the non-residential construction requirements outlined in subsection 45-42(2). 
d.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in the coastal high hazard area requirements. 
(8)  Map interpretation. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(9)  Prevailing authority. Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations for flood protection elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, etc.) shall prevail. The correct information should be submitted to FEMA as per the map maintenance activity requirements outlined in subsection 45-42(7)b. 
(10)  Use of best available data. When base flood elevation data and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with section 45-4, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize best available base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to the standards for subdivision proposals outlined in subsection 45-42(12) and section 45-43, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Data from preliminary, draft, and final Flood Insurance Studies constitutes best available data from a federal, state, or other source. Data must be developed using hydraulic models meeting the minimum requirement of NFIP approved model. If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Part 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be used. 
(11)  Special flood hazard area/topographic boundaries conflict. When the exact location of boundaries of the areas special flood hazards conflict with the current, natural topography information at the site; the site information takes precedence when the lowest adjacent grade is at or above the BFE, the property owner may apply and be approved for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. The local floodplain administrator in the permit file will maintain a copy of the Letter of Map Amendment issued from FEMA. 
(12)  On-site inspections. Make on-site inspections of projects in accordance with the administrative procedures outlined in subsection 45-35(a). 
(13)  Administrative notices. Serve notices of violations, issue stop-work orders, revoke permits and take corrective actions in accordance with the administrative procedures in section 45-35. 
(14)  Records maintenance. Maintain all records pertaining to the administration of this article and make these records available for public inspection. 
(15)  Annexations and detachments. Notify the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Land, Water and Conservation Division, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program within six months, of any annexations or detachments that include special flood hazard areas. 
(16)  Federally funded development. The President issued Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management May 1977. E.O. 11988 directs federal agencies to assert a leadership role in reducing flood losses and losses to environmental values served by floodplains. Proposed developments must go through an eight-step review process. Evidence of compliance with the executive order must be submitted as part of the permit review process. 
(17)  Substantial damage determination. Perform an assessment of damage from any origin to the structure using FEMA's Residential Substantial Damage Estimator (RSDE) software to determine if the damage equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(18)  Substantial improvement determinations. Perform an assessment of permit applications for improvements or repairs to be made to a building or structure that equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction. Cost of work counted for determining if and when substantial improvement to a structure occurs shall be cumulative for a period of five years. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether "substantial improvement" will occur. 
The market values shall be determined by one of the following methods: 
a.  The current assessed building value as determined by the county's assessor's office or the value of an appraisal performed by a licensed appraiser at the expense of the owner within the past six months. 
b.  One or more certified appraisals from a registered professional licensed appraiser in accordance with the laws of South Carolina. The appraisal shall indicate actual replacement value of the building or structure in its pre-improvement condition, less the cost of site improvements and depreciation for functionality and obsolescence. 
c.  Real estate purchase contract within six months prior to the date of the application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-35. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a permit progresses, the local floodplain administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this article, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Revocation of permits. The local floodplain administrator may revoke and require the return of the development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. 
(d)  Periodic inspections. The local floodplain administrator and each member of his/her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(e)  Violations to be corrected. When the local floodplain administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his/her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law on the property he owns. 
(f)  Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the floodplain administrator shall give him written notice, by certified or registered mail to his last known address or by personal service, that: 
(1)  The building or property is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, 
(2)  A hearing will be held before the local floodplain administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and, 
(3)  Following the hearing, the local floodplain administrator may issue such order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as appears appropriate. 
(g)  Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the floodplain administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, he/she shall make an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within such period, not less than 60 days, the floodplain administrator may prescribe; provided that where the floodplain administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible. 
(h)  Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal from the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the floodplain administrator and the clerk within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the floodplain administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order. 
(i)  Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an appeal, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the discretion of the court. 
(j)  Denial of flood insurance under the NFIP. If a structure is declared in violation of this article and after all other penalties are exhausted to achieve compliance with this article then the local floodplain administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to initiate a section 1316 of the National Flood insurance Act of 1968 action against the structure upon the finding that the violator refuses to bring the violation into compliance with the article. Once a violation has been remedied the local floodplain administrator shall notify FEMA of the remedy and ask that the section 1316 be rescinded. 
(k)  The following documents are incorporated by reference and may be used by the local floodplain administrator to provide further guidance and interpretation of this article as found on FEMA's website at www.fema.gov: 
(1)  FEMA 55 Coastal Construction Manual. 
(2)  All FEMA Technical Bulletins. 
(3)  All FEMA Floodplain Management Bulletins. 
(4)  FEMA 348 Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage. 
(5)  FEMA 499 Home Builder's Guide to Coastal Construction Technical Fact Sheets. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Secs. 45-36—45-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 45-41. - General standards. 
Development may not occur in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) where alternative locations exist due to the inherent hazards and risks involved. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall demonstrate that new structures cannot be located out of the SFHA and that encroachments onto the SFHA are minimized. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Reasonably safe from flooding. Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure. 
(3)  Flood Resistant Materials and Equipment. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with flood resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Minimize flood damage. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages, 
(5)  Critical development shall be elevated to the 500 year flood elevation or be elevated to the highest known historical flood elevation (where records are available), whichever is greater. If no data exists establishing the 500 year flood elevation or the highest known historical flood elevation, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates 500 year flood elevation data, 
(6)  Utilities. Electrical, ventilation, plumbing, heating and air conditioning equipment (including ductwork), and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood plus one foot. 
(7)  Water supply systems. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system, 
(8)  Sanitary sewage systems. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Gas or liquid storage tanks. All gas or liquid storage tanks, either located above ground or buried, shall be anchored to prevent floatation and lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads. 
(10)  Alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter. This includes post-FIRM development and structures. 
(11)  Non-conforming buildings or uses. Non-conforming buildings or uses may not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of an existing building or structure located totally or partially within the floodway, provided that the bulk of the building or structure below base flood elevation in the floodway is not increased and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this chapter, 
(12)  American with Disabilities Act (ADA). A building must meet the specific standards for floodplain construction outlined in section 45-42, as well as any applicable ADA requirements. The ADA is not justification for issuing a variance or otherwise waiving these requirements. Also, the cost of improvements required to meet the ADA provisions shall be included in the costs of the improvements for calculating substantial improvement. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-42. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard (Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, V, and VE) where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in section 45-4 or outlined in the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator section 45-34, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. No basements are permitted. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in accordance with the elevated buildings requirements in subsection 45-42(4). 
(2)  Non-residential construction. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in accordance with the elevated buildings requirements in subsection 45-42(4). No basements are permitted. Structures located in A-zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
b.  A registered, professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in the floodproofing certification requirements in subsection 45-33(b)(1). A variance may be considered for wet-floodproofing agricultural structures in accordance with the criteria outlined in section 45-55 of this chapter. Agricultural structures not meeting the criteria of section 45-55 must meet the non-residential construction standards and all other applicable provisions of this chapter. Structures that are floodproofed are required to have an approved maintenance plan with an annual exercise. The local floodplain administrator must approve the maintenance plan and notification of the annual exercise shall be provided to it. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
b.  Manufactured homes that are to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not subject to the provisions for residential construction in subsection 45-42(1) of this chapter must be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement in accordance with section 40-29-10 of the South Carolina Manufactured Housing Board Regulations, as amended. Additionally, when the elevation requirement would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height an engineering certification is required. 
d.  An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the local floodplain administrator and the local emergency preparedness coordinator. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. New construction and substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to preclude finished space and be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed all of the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2.  The bottom of each opening must be no more than one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior grade immediately under the opening. 
3.  Only the portions of openings that are below the base flood elevation (BFE) can be counted towards the required net open area. 
4.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
5.  Fill placed around foundation walls must be graded so that the grade inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent grade outside the building on at least one side of the building. 
b.  Hazardous velocities. Hydrodynamic pressure must be considered in the design of any foundation system where velocity waters or the potential for debris flow exists. If flood velocities are excessive (greater than five feet per second), foundation systems other than solid foundations walls should be considered so that obstructions to damaging flood flows are minimized. 
c.  Enclosures below lowest floor. 
1.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
2.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, must be void of utilities except for essential lighting as required for safety, and cannot be temperature controlled. 
3.  One wet location switch and/or outlet connected to a ground fault interrupt breaker may be installed below the required lowest floor elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in subsections 45-42(1), (2) and (3). 
4.  All construction materials below the required lowest floor elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in subsections 45-42 (1), (2), (3) and (4) should be of flood resistant materials. 
(5)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 45-4, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles and has erosion potential. The following provisions shall apply within such areas: 
a.  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, additions, and other developments shall be permitted unless: 
1.  It has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood. Such certification and technical data shall be presented to the local floodplain administrator. 
2.  A Conditional Letter of Map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision must be obtained upon completion of the proposed development. 
b.  If subsection 45-42(5)a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article IV. 
c.  No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection 45-42(3) and the encroachment standards of subsection 45-42(5)a are met. 
d.  Permissible uses within floodways may include: general farming, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary, game farm, and other similar agricultural, wildlife, and related uses. Also, lawns, gardens, play areas, picnic grounds, and hiking and horseback riding trails are acceptable uses, provided that they do not employ structures or fill. Substantial development of a permissible use may require a no-impact certification. The uses listed in this subsection are permissible only if and to the extent that they do not cause any increase in base flood elevations or changes to the floodway configuration. 
(6)  Recreational vehicles. 
a.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is: 
1.  On wheels or jacking system; 
2.  Attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices; and 
3.  Has no permanently attached additions. 
b.  Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either be: 
1.  On site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet the development permit and certification requirements of section 45-34, general standards outlined in section 45-41, and manufactured homes standards in subsection 45-42(3) and 45-42(4). 
(7)  Map maintenance activities. The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requires flood data to be reviewed and approved by FEMA. This ensures that flood maps, studies and other data identified in section 45-4 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management criteria are based on current data. The following map maintenance activities are identified: 
a.  Requirement to submit new technical data. 
1.  For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical or scientific data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA as soon as practicable, but no later than six months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals include; but not limited to: 
(i)  Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries; 
(ii)  Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard area; 
(iii)  Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts; and 
(iv)  Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with subsection 45-43(1). 
2.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data, required in accordance with subsection 45-42(7), prepared in a format required for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall also be the responsibility of the applicant. 
3.  The local floodplain administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for: 
(i)  Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood elevation; and 
(ii)  Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but no floodway. 
4.  Floodplain development permits issued by the local floodplain administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to subsection 45-42(7). 
b.  Right to submit new technical data. The floodplain administrator may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the local jurisdiction and may be submitted at any time. 
(8)  Accessory Structures. 
a.  A detached accessory structure or garage, the cost of which is greater than $3,000, must comply with the requirements as outlined in FEMA's Technical Bulletin 7-93 Wet Floodproofing Requirements or be elevated in accordance with subsections 45-42(1) and 45-42(4) or dry floodproofed in accordance with subsection 45-42(2). 
b.  If accessory structures of $3,000 or less are to be placed in the floodplain, the following criteria shall be met: 
1.  Accessory structures shall not be used for any uses other than the parking of vehicles and storage, 
2.  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential, 
3.  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters, 
4.  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure, 
5.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be installed in accordance with subsection 45-41(5), 
6.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below base flood elevation in conformance with subsection 45-42(4)a, and 
7.  Accessory structures shall be built with flood resistance materials in accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials. 
(9)  Swimming pool utility equipment rooms. If the building cannot be built at or above the BFE, because of functionality of the equipment then a structure to house the utilities for the pool may be built below the BFE with the following provisions: 
a.  Meet the requirements for accessory structures in subsection 45-42(8) 
b.  The utilities must be anchored to prevent flotation and shall be designed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood. 
(10)  Elevators. 
a.  Install a float switch system or another system that provides the same level of safety necessary for all elevators where there is a potential for the elevator cab to descend below the BFE during a flood per FEMA's Technical Bulletin 4-93 Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
b.  All equipment that may have to be installed below the BFE such as counter weight roller guides, compensation cable and pulleys, and oil buffers for traction elevators and the jack assembly for a hydraulic elevator must be constructed using flood-resistant materials where possible per FEMA's Technical Bulletin 4-93 Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
(11)  Fill. An applicant shall demonstrate that fill is the only alternative to raising the building to meet the residential and non-residential construction requirements of subsections 45-42(1) or 45-42(2), and that the amount of fill used will not affect the flood storage capacity or adversely affect adjacent properties. The following provisions shall apply to all fill placed in the special flood hazard area: 
a.  Fill may not be placed in the floodway unless it is in accordance with the requirements in subsection 45-42(5)a. 
b.  Fill may not be placed in tidal or non-tidal wetlands without the required state and federal permits. 
c.  Fill must consist of soil and rock materials only. A registered professional geotechnical engineer may use dredged material as fill only upon certification of suitability. Landfills, rubble fills, dumps, and sanitary fills are not permitted in the floodplain. 
d.  Fill used to support structures must comply with ASTM Standard D-698, and its suitability to support structures certified by a registered, professional engineer. 
e.  Fill slopes shall be no greater than two horizontal to one vertical. Flatter slopes may be required where velocities may result in erosion. 
f.  The use of fill shall not increase flooding or cause drainage problems on neighboring properties. 
g.  Fill may not be used for structural support in the coastal high hazard areas. 
h.  Will meet the requirements of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, Ensuring That Structures Built On Fill in or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonable Safe from Flooding. 
(12)  Standards for subdivision proposals and other development. 
a.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations. 
b.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
c.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
d.  The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to FEMA in subsection 45-42(7) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that generates base flood elevations. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-43. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard (Zones A and V) established in section 45-4, are small streams where no base flood data has been provided and where no floodways have been identified. The following provisions apply within such areas: 
(1)  In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(2)  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and new development shall be permitted within 100 feet of the stream bank unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  If subsection 45-43(1) is satisfied and base flood elevation data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall comply with all applicable flood hazard ordinance provisions of article IV and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with elevations established in accordance with subsection 45-35(k). 
(4)  Data from preliminary, draft, and final Flood Insurance Studies constitutes best available data. Refer to FEMA Floodplain Management Technical Bulletin 1-98 Use of Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Data as Available Data. If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Part 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be used. 
(5)  When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal, state, or other source one of the following methods may be used to determine a BFE For further information regarding the methods for determining BFEs listed below, refer to FEMA's manual Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas: 
a.  Contour interpolation. 
1.  Superimpose approximate Zone A boundaries onto a topographic map and estimate a BFE. 
2.  Add one-half of the contour interval of the topographic map that is used to the BFE. 
b.  Data extrapolation. A BFE can be determined if a site within 500 feet upstream of a reach of a stream reach for which a 100-year profile has been computed by detailed methods, and the floodplain and channel bottom slope characteristics are relatively similar to the downstream reaches. No hydraulic structures shall be present. 
c.  Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations. Perform hydrologic and hydraulic calculations to determine BFEs using FEMA approved methods and software. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-44. - Standards for streams with established base flood elevations but without floodways. 
Along rivers and streams where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway is identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS. 
(1)  No encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-45. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 45-4, are areas designated as shallow flooding. The following provisions shall apply within such areas: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade; or, 
b.  Be completely flood-proofed together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in section 45-34. 
(3)  All structures on slopes must have drainage paths around them to guide water away from the structures. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Secs. 45-46—45-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 45-51. - Establishment of appeal board. 
The zoning board of appeals, as established by the city council of the city of Aiken, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-52. - Right to appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the court. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-53. - Historic structures. 
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-54. - Functionally dependent uses. 
Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exist, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage and create no additional threat to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-55. - Agricultural structures. 
Variances may be issued to wet floodproof an agricultural structure provided it is used solely for agricultural purposes. In order to minimize flood damages during the base flood and the threat to public health and safety, the structure must meet all of the conditions and considerations of section 45-58, this section, and the following standards: 
(1)  Use of the structure must be limited to agricultural purposes as listed below: 
a.  Pole frame buildings with open or closed sides used exclusively for the storage of farm machinery and equipment, 
b.  Steel grain bins and steel frame corncribs, 
c.  General-purpose barns for the temporary feeding of livestock that are open on at least one side; 
d.  For livestock confinement buildings, poultry houses, dairy operations, and similar livestock operations, variances may not be issued for structures that were substantially damaged. New construction or substantial improvement of such structures must meet the elevation requirements of subsection 45-42(2) of this chapter; and, 
(2)  The agricultural structure must be built or rebuilt, in the case of an existing building that is substantially damaged, with flood-resistant materials for the exterior and interior building components and elements below the base flood elevation. 
(3)  The agricultural structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. All of the structure's components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, hydrodynamic, and debris impact forces. Where flood velocities exceed five feet per second, fast-flowing floodwaters can exert considerable pressure on the building's enclosure walls or foundation walls. 
(4)  The agricultural structure must meet the venting requirement of subsection 45-42(4) of this chapter. 
(5)  Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation (BFE), plus any required freeboard, or be contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with subsection 45-41(5) of this chapter. 
(6)  The agricultural structure must comply with the floodway encroachment provisions of subsection 45-42(5) of this chapter. 
(7)  Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected. Such protection may include protective watertight floodproofed areas within the building, the use of equipment hoists for readily elevating contents, permanently elevating contents on pedestals or shelves above the base flood elevation, or determining that property owners can safely remove contents without risk to lives and that the contents will be located to a specified site out of the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-56. - Considerations. 
In passing upon such applications, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage, and the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development, and the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(8)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(9)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges; and 
(10)  Agricultural structures must be located in wide, expansive floodplain areas, where no other alternative location for the agricultural structure exists. The applicant must demonstrate that the entire farm acreage, consisting of a contiguous parcel of land on which the structure is to be located, must be in the special flood hazard area and no other alternative locations for the structure are available. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-57. - Findings. 
Findings listed above shall be submitted to the appeal board, in writing, and included in the application for a variance. Additionally, comments from the department of natural resources, land, water and conservation division, state coordinator's office, must be taken into account and included in the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-58. - Floodways. 
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result unless a CLOMR is obtained prior to issuance of the variance. In order to ensure the project is built in compliance with the CLOMR for which the variance is granted the applicant must provide a bond for 100 percent of the cost to perform the development. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-59. - Conditions. 
Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. The following conditions shall apply to all variances: 
(1)  Variances may not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(3)  Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(4)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
(5)  The local floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued for unpermitted development or other development that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Violations must be corrected in accordance with subsection 45-35(e) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 45-61. - Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted April 23, 2012 and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued there under are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this ordinance shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the city of Aiken enacted on April 23, 2012, as amended, which are not reenacted herein, are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 45-62. - Effect upon outstanding building permits. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit has been granted by the chief building inspector or his authorized agents before the time of passage of this chapter; provided, however, that when start of construction has not occurred under such outstanding permit within a period of 60 days subsequent to passage of this chapter, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05142018B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2018)  
Chapter 46 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, ch. 36; traffic, ch. 42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of taxis by municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 58-23-1210 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Definition. 
The word "taxicab," as used in this article, shall mean any motor vehicle in which the public is transported from place to place for hire, not over fixed routes. The definition of "taxicab," as used in this article, shall not include ambulances, vehicles providing medical or medically related services during transportation, and vehicles operated by schools or child care facilities to transport children to and from such schools or facilities. 
(Code 1980, § 24-21) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-32. - Compliance with article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating taxicabs upon the streets or highways of the city without complying with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 24-22)  
Sec. 46-33. - Maximum number to be determined by council. 
The city council shall, from time to time, determine, by resolution, the maximum number of taxicabs required for the public convenience and necessity of the area of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 24-23)  
Sec. 46-34. - Identification. 
The word "taxi" shall be prominently and conspicuously painted, in contrasting colors, on the outside of each front door of a taxicab, or securely fastened to each such door in such manner that the work "taxi" is incapable of removal while the vehicle is in motion and incapable of removal without the application of tools. 
(Code 1980, § 24-24)  
Sec. 46-35. - Maintenance. 
Every taxicab operated in the city shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 24-25)  
Sec. 46-36. - Inspection. 
(a)  The department of public safety is hereby charged with the duty of making such periodic inspection of all taxicabs operated in the city as it deems advisable. In the event it is found that a taxicab so inspected is not in a state of good repair, the director of public safety shall have the right to suspend the owner's right to operate such vehicle as a taxicab until the vehicle is placed in a state of good repair. 
(b)  If the owner fails to make a vehicle available for inspection under this section, the director of public safety shall have the right to suspend such owner's right to operate such vehicle as a taxicab until it has been made available. 
(Code 1980, § 24-26)  
Sec. 46-37. - Fares. 
Taxicab operators are authorized to set such fares for their services as they may deem reasonable. 
(Code 1980, § 24-27)  
Sec. 46-38. - Engaging cab with fraudulent intent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage or use any taxicab, not intending, at the time when such taxicab is engaged, to pay the legal fare, but with the intent to defraud the owner or driver of such taxicab. 
(Code 1980, § 24-28)  
Sec. 46-39. - Revocation or suspension of licenses, permits and registration cards issued under article. 
(a)  The city council reserves unto itself the right to revoke any license to do business, as well as any driver's permit and registration card, issued under this article for good and sufficient reason, which, in its judgment and discretion, requires that such license, driver's permit and registration card be revoked. It shall be the duty of the department of public safety, from time to time, to make reports to the city manager relative to the conduct of, the activities of and convictions of any of the licensees and drivers of taxicabs which, in the opinion of the department of public safety, may be good and sufficient reason to revoke the license or driver's permit and registration card. After due notice to the licensee or taxicab driver concerned, the city council shall hold a hearing regarding the merits of the revocation of the license or driver's permit and registration card, as the case may be, and it shall record its judgment in the minutes of the hearing. 
(b)  In the event of cancellation or expiration of the policy of insurance required by section 46-59 the license to operate a taxicab covered by such policy shall be forthwith suspended and the right to operate the taxicab shall forthwith cease and terminate and it shall be unlawful to operate such taxicab until such time as proper evidence that the required insurance has again been obtained. 
(c)  In the event a holder of a taxicab driver's permit and registration card is found guilty of driving under the influence of intoxicating beverages or narcotics, disorderly conduct, breach of the peace or any other criminal offense, his permit and registration card shall be revoked. Nothing in this article shall limit the cause for which a taxicab driver's permit and registration card may be revoked by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 24-29)  
Secs. 46-40—46-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to require license to operate taxicab or other public conveyance, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-1-20. 
 
Sec. 46-56. - Filing of application. 
Any person desiring a license to operate a taxicab business, as required by the license ordinance of the city, shall file with the city clerk a written application for such license, upon forms to be furnished by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 24-35) 
State Law reference— Application for taxi license required, S.C. Code 1976, § 58-23-1210.  
Sec. 46-57. - Contents of application. 
The application for license to operate a taxicab business shall state the full name, age, home address and business address of the applicant and shall further state whether or not the applicant uses intoxicating beverages, narcotics or other drugs and whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city or of any state or federal statute or law, and if so, the nature of such conviction and the number of times convicted for each offense stated, and all other information concerning the applicant that shall, from time to time, be required. The application shall further state the make, body type, year, model, motor serial number and current state license plate number of each vehicle to be operated under the license, together with such other information in regard to such vehicles as may be required. 
(Code 1980, § 24-36)  
Sec. 46-58. - Applications by partnerships and corporations. 
If the applicant for license to operate a taxicab business is a partnership or corporation, the requirements of sections 46-56 and 46-57 shall be complied with by each partner of such partnership or by the principal or managing officer of such corporation in charge of the actual operation of the business within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 24-37)  
Sec. 46-59. - Applicant's insurance. 
The applicant for license to operate a taxicab business shall not be issued such license until and unless he first files with the city clerk proof of a policy of insurance indemnifying the public against personal injury or property damage which may be caused by the negligent operation of each vehicle to be used for hire pursuant to such license. Such insurance policy shall provide the amount of coverage required by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 24-38) 
State Law reference— Liability insurance for taxis required, S.C. Code 1976, § 58-23-1220.  
Sec. 46-60. - Fee. 
The fee for the license referred to in this division shall be as prescribed in the license ordinance. Such fee shall be paid, by cash or cashier's check, at the time of filing the license application. 
(Code 1980, § 24-39)  
Sec. 46-61. - Investigation and inspection prior to issuance. 
The department of public safety shall investigate the applicant and the facts stated in the application for a license to operate a taxicab business. It shall be the further duty of the department of public safety to make careful inspection of each vehicle to be used as a taxicab by the applicant. The department of public safety shall report the findings of such investigation and inspection and shall submit to the city clerk its recommendations as to whether or not such license should be issued. 
(Code 1980, § 24-40)  
Sec. 46-62. - Issuance or refusal. 
The city clerk may issue a license for the operation of a taxicab business, if the report and recommendations required by section 46-61, in his judgment, justify the issuance. If such report and recommendations do not, in his judgment, justify such issuance, the city clerk shall refuse to issue the license and shall refund the license fee to the applicant. 
(Code 1980, § 24-41) 
State Law reference— Revocation of taxi license, S.C. Code 1976, § 58-23-1350.  
Sec. 46-63. - Transfer. 
No license for the operation of taxicab business shall be transferred by the licensee to any other person, except upon written application by the licensee and transferee to the city clerk for approval of the transfer. Upon investigation, as required by the terms of this division, the department of public safety shall submit a report to the city clerk, together with its recommendations and the city clerk may approve such transfer if, in his judgment, the transfer is justified. 
(Code 1980, § 24-42) 
State Law reference— Transfer of taxi license, S.C. Code 1976, § 58-23-1360.  
Sec. 46-64. - License tag or sticker. 
(a)  Issuance and display. With each license issued under section 46-62, the city clerk shall furnish a metal tag or windshield sticker for each vehicle to be operated under the license, and such metal tag or windshield sticker shall be prominently displayed upon each such vehicle at all times while the vehicle is being operated in or about the city for hire. 
(b)  Transfer from one vehicle to another. The metal tag or sticker issued under subsection (a) of this section shall not be transferred from one vehicle to another vehicle, except upon a report to and the granting of permission by the city clerk, upon recommendation by the department of public safety. 
(c)  Replacement. In the event that the metal tag or sticker issued under subsection (a) of this section is lost or stolen, a new tag or sticker shall, upon application by the owner, be issued by the city clerk, upon payment of the costs therefor. 
(Code 1980, §§ 24-43—24-45)  
Secs. 46-65—46-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S PERMIT AND REGISTRATION CARD 
 
Sec. 46-86. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab on the streets of the city, without having first obtained a taxicab driver's permit and registration card. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a taxicab business to hire, employ or permit any person to drive a taxicab employed in such business, who does not have a valid registration card and driver's permit to drive such taxicab. 
(Code 1980, § 24-51)  
Sec. 46-87. - Application. 
Application for a permit and card required by this division shall be filed with the city clerk and shall state the full name, age and home address of the applicant, whether or not the applicant is of sound body, whether or not the applicant has good eyesight and good hearing and whether or not he uses intoxicating liquors, drugs or narcotics. The application shall further state whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of this Code or of any other ordinance of the city or of any state or federal law and, if so, the number of times and the nature of such violations and convictions. The application shall give all other information that may be required of the applicant. 
(Code 1980, § 24-52)  
Sec. 46-88. - Applicant's qualifications. 
No taxicab driver's permit or registration card shall be issued to any person who is under the age of 18 years or to any person who does not have a current and valid driver's license issued by the state. 
(Code 1980, § 24-53) 
State Law reference— Qualification of drivers, S.C. Code 1976, § 58-23-1270.  
Sec. 46-89. - Investigation and report, with recommendations by department of public safety. 
The department of public safety shall investigate the applicant and facts stated in the application filed under this division and shall forward a report, together with recommendations relative to the issuance of a taxicab driver's permit and registration card, to the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 24-54)  
Sec. 46-90. - Fee. 
A fee in such sum as is prescribed by ordinance, shall be paid to the city clerk for the city, for the issuance of each taxicab driver's permit and registration card, the fee so charged to be to cover the expense of providing the application and permit forms, registration card, photograph and costs of the investigation as required by this division. Any ordinance prescribing such fee is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 24-55)  
Sec. 46-91. - Issuance. 
The city clerk may issue a taxicab driver's permit and registration card to the applicant, if the report and recommendations made by the department of public safety in his judgement, justify such issuance. 
(Code 1980, § 24-56)  
Sec. 46-92. - Numbering. 
A taxicab driver's permit shall be serially numbered, when issued, and each registration card shall bear the serial number of the driver's permit in conjunction with which it is issued. 
(Code 1980, § 24-57)  
Sec. 46-93. - Design and contents of card. 
A taxicab driver's registration card issued under this division shall be of such design and wording as may be recommended by the department of public safety. Such registration card shall afford sufficient space for a photograph of the person to whom it is issued, which photograph shall be furnished by the city and affixed to the registration card in the space so provided. The registration card shall further contain the name of the holder thereof, together with his fingerprints. 
(Code 1980, § 24-58)  
Sec. 46-94. - Display of card; permit to be carried. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of a taxicab to fail to conspicuously display his registration card at all times in the taxicab, in order that the registration card may be seen by any passengers in such vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a driver of a taxicab to operate such vehicle upon the streets and highways of the city without having in his immediate possession a valid driver's permit issued under this division. 
(Code 1980, § 24-59)  
Sec. 46-95. - Expiration and renewal. 
A taxicab permit and registration card shall expire and shall be renewed at the same time as drivers' licenses issued by the state highways and public transportation department expire and are renewed. 
(Code 1980, § 24-60)  
Secs. 46-96—46-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TOURISM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, adopted July 11, 2005, set out provisions designated as Art. I, §§ 46-1—46-37. Inasmuch as there were already provisions designated as §§ 46-31—46-37 and to allow for the inclusion of general provisions as pertain to this chapter, said article has been redesignated as Art. III, §§ 46-116—46-152 as set out herein. 
 
Sec. 46-116. - Definitions. 
Charter service, limousines, or mini-bus means a motor propelled vehicle operating under a South Carolina Public Service Commission class C "charter" certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
Motor coach means any multi-passenger vehicle seating more than 30 people, or exceeding 40 feet in length. 
Private passenger motor vehicle means a motor vehicle used for tours for hire. 
Public conveyances shall include taxicabs, charter services, limousines, mini-buses, public motor passenger vehicles, motor coaches, and private passenger motor vehicles. 
Public motor passenger vehicle means any taxicab, limousine, or mini-bus as described. 
Special permit means one issued for prior commitments or specific nontouring purposes for transporting passengers. 
Taxicab means a motor propelled vehicle operating under a South Carolina Public Service Commission class C "taxi" certificate of public convenience and necessity restricted to the seating capacity of not over six passengers, including the driver. 
Tour guide means any person who acts or offers as a guide for hire in the City of Aiken within automobiles, buses, or other motor vehicles when the primary purpose of riding in such vehicles is not transportation, but touring the City of Aiken. 
Tours means a visitation for hire by any means for purposes of sightseeing, which originates or is conducted within the city limits of Aiken, South Carolina. A tour for these purposes shall include only motorized vehicles and shall not include people on foot, bike, or in horse drawn carriages. Transportation whose primary purpose is point-to-point conveyance or which offers neither commentary nor narration and which does not involve stops for purposes of viewing is not considered a tour under these guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-117. - Application for business license. 
The owner and operator of any public conveyance used for tours or for touring for hire, before operating it within, or from, the city, shall make and file, with the city business license administrator, written application for a license, that shall be sworn to by the applicant, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner, and in the event the owner is a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation. 
(2)  The number of vehicles actually owned, and the number of vehicles for tours actually operated by such owner or operator on the date of the application. 
(3)  The number of vehicles for which a permit is desired. 
(4)  The make of each vehicle, type, year made, identification number, passenger capacity, and classification for each vehicle for which an application for permit is submitted. 
(5)  An accurate and certified net worth statement of the owner, or applicant, over and above all debts, judgments, claims, or demands whatsoever. 
(6)  Record of conviction by any criminal court, if any, of the applicant or if the applicant is a corporation, the criminal court record of the officers, directors, and supervising employees thereof, including the general manager, and all operators. 
(7)  Copy of the current South Carolina Public Service Commission motor vehicle carrier's permit to render public motor passenger service under the classification for which applied application is made. 
(8)  A copy of owner's, or operator's, local passenger tariff filed on file with the South Carolina Public Service Commission, shall also be filed with the city. 
(9)  Copies of licenses, or certificates, of persons who will be operating the tour vehicles. 
(10)  Such other information as city council may, in its discretion, require. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-118. - Public convenience and necessity. 
The business license administrator, or city manager, may, when in either's judgment the public interest and safety require, grant, or refuse to grant, approval of a business license application for any public conveyance. In evaluating the application for public conveyance, the business license administrator, or city manager, shall take into consideration the demands of the public for quality service within or from the city; the financial responsibility of the applicant as established by the public service commission, when required; the number, kind and type of equipment, and any demand for increased parking upon the streets of the city, which may result; and whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved by the granting of such license. Limousines, taxicabs and tour buses must pass all inspection requirements of the city and state, and must be air-conditioned. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-119. - Business license issuance; fee; expiration. 
The owner and operator of each public conveyance for which a license is granted by city council shall annually obtain a business license in accordance with the schedule of business license fees then in effect. Such license fees shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other license fees or charges established by proper authority and applicable to public conveyances. A permit shall be issued annually for each vehicle and shall be permanently affixed in a prominent place upon the vehicle. No more than ten permits shall be issued for any calendar year, with remaining applicants being placed on a waiting list in the order in which their applications are received. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-120. - Suspension and revocation of business license or vehicle permit. 
Any business license or vehicle permit may be suspended or revoked by the business license administrator, or city council, at any time in case: 
(1)  The owner's record of performance is unsatisfactory. 
(2)  The owner fails to operate the public conveyance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  The owner shall cease to operate any public conveyance for a period of 30 consecutive days without having obtained permission for cessation of such operation from the city. Vehicle permits recovered under this section will be reissued to the first person or company on the waiting list for vehicle permits. 
(4)  The owner or operator of a public conveyance has been convicted of violating the laws of the state relating to the operation of such public conveyance. 
(5)  The owner or operator of a public conveyance refuses to allow inspection by the public safety department or the lawful city authority or agent of permits, proof of liability insurance, daily manifest, or safety and sanitary conditions of the vehicle. 
(6)  The holder of a license shall fail to register properly in the correct and true owner's name, the public conveyance covered by the license. 
(7)  The owner or operator fails to maintain in effect or show proof of liability insurance on each vehicle for which a permit is issued. 
(8)  Such other basis as appears in the business license ordinance, or is deemed sufficient by city council, the business license administrator, or the city manager. 
No business license shall be revoked unless, and until, seven days of notice of a hearing shall have been given to the holder of such license and such hearing is duly held thereon; the notice to contain the reasons for proposed suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-121. - City tour driver's permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a driver of a public motor passenger vehicle as herein defined without having in his or her possession a valid city tour driver's permit. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-122. - Same—Application; persons ineligible for permits. 
(a)  The driver of any public tour motor passenger vehicle shall, before driving it upon the streets of the city, possess a valid South Carolina driver's license, or commercial driver's license, and make and file with the parks, recreation, and tourism department director a written application for a city tour driver's permit which shall be sworn to by the applicant and shall include full name, date of birth, driver's license or commercial driver's license number, and residence of the applicant; and shall state that the applicant is possessed of all requirements necessary to operate such tour vehicles in a safe, prudent, and satisfactory manner; a statement as to whether or not subject uses intoxicating beverages, drugs, or narcotics; and a statement as to whether or not such applicant has been convicted of any provisions of this Code, or other ordinance, or state or federal law; and shall set forth the nature of such offense(s), if any, and such other information as may be required for determining qualifications. Any false entry on the application will be cause for disapproval of the permit. 
(b)  Before issuing any permit as required by section 46-4, the parks, recreation, and tourism department director, or his designee, shall investigate the facts set out in such application, and shall not grant a permit to any person who has been convicted of any major crime or the violation of laws and ordinances involving moral turpitude, alcohol beverage control, or who is a habitual user of drugs or alcohol, or who has a record of habitually violating traffic laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-123. - Same—Duration; expiration date. 
Tour driver's permits, as required by this chapter, shall be for the period of one year, and each such permit shall expire on December 31 of each year. The cost of the driver's permit will be $50.00 annually. A one-time initial processing fee of $25.00 must also be paid by applicants. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-124. - Tour driver permit card—Issuance. 
On approval of any tour driver's permit required by this chapter, the parks, recreation, and tourism director, or his designee, shall issue a card which shall bear on its face a photograph of the permittee, the number of the permit, the expiration date, name of company or corporation hiring the driver, and such other information as the director may direct. Temporary permits may be issued in the discretion of the parks, recreation and tourism director if circumstances warrant the need for a temporary tour operator. Temporary tour driver's permits shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-125. - Same—Display. 
The public motor passenger vehicle operator's permit card shall, at all times, be kept on display in the public motor passenger vehicle operated by such operator, easily visible for the passenger, while such permittee is in control of such public motor passenger vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-126. - Transferability of driver's permit. 
The driver's permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable between individuals or companies. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-127. - Contents of application. 
(a)  Each driver's permit, required by the provisions of this chapter, shall be applied for in writing, on such application form as the parks, recreation, and tourism department director may prescribe, which shall show that the applicant has obtained a driver's license from the South Carolina Division of Motor Vehicles after satisfactorily completing an examination, and which shall show the experience of the applicant as a driver of motor vehicles; whether such applicant has been convicted of a violation of a motor vehicle, traffic, or criminal law, giving particulars of each offense charged; and such other information as the director may prescribe. 
(b)  Such application shall be accompanied by at least two recent photographs of the applicant, the size of which shall be determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-128. - Age of applicant. 
Every applicant for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall be at least 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-129. - Revocation. 
Any driver's permit granted under the terms of this chapter may be revoked by the parks, recreation and tourism director, or city council, for violation of provisions of this chapter after notice to permittees in writing citing them to appear before the parks, recreation, and tourism department director, or city council, and show cause why the permit should not be revoked. The director or city council may refuse permission to operate a public motor passenger vehicle and revoke the driver's permit of drivers when it appears their physical condition or record for violation of traffic laws, city ordinances, or other state and federal laws applicable to public motor passenger service vehicles, that they are unfit operators of such a vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-130. - Appeal from revocation of permit. 
Any person dissatisfied with the decision by the parks, recreation, and tourism department director shall have the right of appeal to the city manager and thence, to the city council, provided such appeal be made in writing within seven days from the decision of the director. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-131. - Identification of vehicles. 
(a)  Holders of city business licenses for the operation of public motor passenger vehicles upon the streets of the city, shall have a number assigned to each such vehicle, and this number shall be posted on both sides and on the rear of the vehicle. Such numbers shall be in plain white or black paint and printed in Arabic numbers of not less than one-half inch in width and at least four inches in height. The number shall be of a different color than the body of such vehicle so as to make the numbers easily legible. 
(b)  Holders of a city business licenses for the operation of public motor passenger vehicles upon the streets of the city shall also have the name of the owner or company of such vehicle printed in legible letters of not less than one-half inch in width, and not less than four inches in height, upon each side of the vehicle. The fleet numbers and letters shall be of a permanent nature and shall be of a different color than the body of such vehicle so as to make the lettering easily legible. Magnetic signs of equal size designating ownership of the vehicle will meet this requirement for company or owner designation signs. 
(c)  The provision as set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above for numbering or displaying the company name on each side of public motor passenger vehicles shall not apply to charter service limousines. 
(d)  Bus decorations must not be themed in anyway. 
(1)  Standard designed buses or trolleys are permitted. 
(2)  Bus or trolley colors must not be harsh, loud, or gaudy to the eye. 
(3)  No fluorescent paint schemes are allowed. 
(4)  No graphic wraps are allowed. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-132. - Vehicle license plates required. 
(a)  All public motor passenger vehicles, including substitute or so-called emergency taxicabs, limousines, and mini-buses shall be required to display on the rear of each vehicle the applicable state taxi or bus license plate issued by the South Carolina Division of Motor Vehicles prior to operating under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All public motor passenger vehicles including substitute or so-called emergency taxicabs, limousines, and mini-buses shall be required to display on the front of each vehicle the metal license plate issued by the public service commission prior to operating under the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  License plates issued by the South Carolina Division of Motor Vehicles and the South Carolina Public Service Commission shall be permanently attached to the public motor passenger vehicle in the appropriate location and in the place normally provided for a license plate. 
(d)  Limousines are authorized to display public passenger license plates or personalized license plates issued by the South Carolina Division of Motor Vehicles in lieu of state taxi plates. All other licensing provisions of this chapter apply. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-133. - Transportation of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport in a motor passenger vehicle, used as a public motor passenger vehicle in the transportation of passengers for hire, any containers of beer, wine or alcoholic beverages. This section shall not apply to unopened beer, wine, or alcoholic beverages belonging to a passenger being transported when such alcoholic beverages are in the baggage of such passengers, or upon his person. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-134. - Rates to be posted. 
All persons owning, driving, operating or controlling public conveyance, shall post therein a conspicuous place where it may be easily and conveniently read by any passenger, a card upon which shall be printed in plain legible type of the tariff rates. Such rates include baggage handling for passengers, and any other fee. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-135. - Solicitation of business prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or driver of any public motor passenger vehicle to solicit business upon the streets of the city, or to use his vehicle upon the streets of the city as a stand for soliciting business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator or driver of any taxicab to solicit business upon the private property of others without the permission of the owner of such private property. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-136. - Maximum load. 
The maximum load for any public motor passenger tour vehicle while operated upon the streets of the city under this Code shall be 29 passengers and one driver, for a total of 30 persons. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-137. - Vehicles—Sanitation, safety condition, and maintenance. 
Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times; shall be kept and maintained in a safe condition, properly maintained, and serviced at all times. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-138. - Same—Inspection. 
The public safety department of the city is hereby charged with the duty of making periodic inspections of all public motor passenger vehicles operating under this chapter and licensed to do business in the city. The public safety department director may, in its discretion, suspend the right of a public motor passenger vehicle to be operated until the same shall be placed in a state of good repair, or in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-139. - Refusal of passenger to pay lawful fare. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-140. - Operator to render overall service. 
(a)  All persons or firms engaged in the operation of public conveyances in or from the city, operating under the provisions of this chapter, shall render a good overall service to the public desiring to use such public transportation. Holders of licenses for public motor passenger vehicles issued pursuant to this chapter shall keep the office open 24 hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching public motor passenger vehicles unless such holder or operator in all advertisements shall specifically limit the hours of service so that the general public may be properly and fully informed. All calls received for public motor passenger vehicle service shall be answered promptly and, if such service cannot be rendered promptly, they shall immediately notify prospective passengers how long the delay will be and give the reasons for it. Any owner or driver who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the city, or who shall not be able to answer the call promptly and shall fail to promptly notify the proposed passengers shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, and the license granted to such owner or operator shall be revoked at the discretion of city council. 
(b)  The operator or owner may refuse service to disorderly or intoxicated persons or those individuals who have a history of failure to pay for services rendered. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-141. - Daily manifests. 
(a)  Every operator of a public conveyance shall maintain a daily manifest for each vehicle upon which are recorded all trips made each day showing the time, place of origin, destination of each trip and the number of passengers, the amount of the fare, and all such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner by the operator at the conclusion of his/her tour of duty. Daily manifests shall be promptly recapitulated by the owner and operator on a monthly tally sheet. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the operator by the owner and shall be of a character approved by city council. 
(b)  Every holder of a license pursuant to this chapter shall retain and preserve all daily operators' manifests in a safe place for at least the current calendar year and preceding calendar year, and such manifests shall be inspected periodically, from time to time, by the city manager or his designee or agent. Such manifests shall also be made available for inspection upon the request of any police officer. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-142. - Vehicle routes and size. 
(a)  Tour vehicles must not be longer than 40 feet and not carry more than 30 persons, including the driver. Tour buses exceeding this size are expressly forbidden from conducting tours within the Aiken City limits. Nothing in this section shall prohibit tour buses from parking in an appropriate location, as approved by the city manager, on a city side street or commercial parking lot in order to allow occupants to walk downtown or visit retail establishments in the city. Motor coaches are expressly prohibited from traveling within any residential or historic district in the city, or upon any unpaved road in the city limits, unless approved by the city manager. Any vehicles used for tours for hire, other than private passenger motor vehicles shall be restricted to the applicable Aiken Tour route, attached as Exhibit 'A.' 
(b)  Idling of engines is only allowed while passengers are embarking onto or debarking from vehicles, not to exceed 15 minutes except at Rye Patch and Hopelands. The tour bus will not stop during the tours in front of residences, businesses, or other locations. The tour bus will unload at Park Avenue and Newberry Street. The tour bus can be parked for extended stays (longer than 15 minutes) and motorcoaches must be parked on Union Street or Fairfield between Park Avenue and Richland Avenue. 
(c)  There are no route limitations on private passenger motor vehicles. 
(d)  There shall be no more than two tours in private passenger automobiles in operation at any one time. Schedules and routes of these tours will be coordinated through the parks, recreation, and tourism director or designee. 
(e)  No one other than a registered tour guide may conduct a tour for hire in a private passenger motor vehicle. A tour guide card will be placed in the rear window of the vehicle while touring for hire. 
(f)  Private passenger motor vehicles need only comply with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state regulating traffic generally. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005; Ord. No. 11132006A, § 2, 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-143. - Hours and capacity. 
Any motor touring vehicles may only operate in the historic districts from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday provided however that tours in the RSS and HD zones can only operate from 11:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Tours in the HD zone can only operate on Two Notch Road and Audubon Drive. Tour vehicles are expressly forbidden from operating on any other unpaved street within the RSS and HD zone. Tour carriages are permitted in these areas, however. 
No more than two tour vehicles are allowed to operate in the city limits at any one time. 
Tour Frequency 
January 1—January 31: Each Saturday regular tour plus two others in the month. 
February 1—end of February: Each Saturday regular tour plus three others in the month. 
March 1—May 31: Each Saturday regular tour plus four others each month. 
June 1—August 31: Each Saturday regular tour plus two others each month. 
September 1—October 31: Each Saturday regular tour plus four others each month. 
November 1—December 31: Each Saturday regular tour plus two others each month. 
The city manager, or his designee, up to two times per calendar year, may temporarily alter the routes of travel, and parking limitations of this article as well as the trip limitation provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005; Ord. No. 11132006A, § 2, 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-144. - Business licenses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a tour within the city limits of Aiken, South Carolina, unless such person either holds a current business license granted by the City of Aiken, is employed by a tour company which holds a current business license for such activity, or has hired a certified tour guide to narrate the tour. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-145. - Certification. 
It shall be unlawful for persons to act or offer to act as a tour guide for hire within the city limits unless they have been certified by the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-146. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring tour guide certification shall submit an application in writing to the tour coordinator on a form to be supplied by the tour coordinator. 
(b)  An applicant for tour guide must not be less than 18 years of age and must provide the following materials: 
(1)  Positive identification. 
(2)  A current, valid driver's license if applicable to operate motorized or carriage tours. 
(3)  A recent photograph. 
(4)  Proof of successfully passing the City of Aiken certification examination. 
(c)  All applicants will submit to a background investigation to be completed by the public safety department and state law enforcement division (SLED). The background investigation through SLED will be at the applicant's expense. 
(d)  Any applicant that has been convicted of a felony or violation of laws involving moral turpitude will not be eligible for licensing. Any applicant that has pending charges of the same will not have their application processed until final disposition of the charges. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-147. - Issuance of certification. 
Upon successfully meeting all of the requirements under this article and the passage of the competency examination for tour guide certification, the tour coordinator shall issue to the application a photographic identification card indicating that the holder is a certified tour guide. 
(1)  The identification card must be visible at all times when conducting a tour. 
(2)  The identification card shall remain the property of the city and must be returned upon expiration, revocation, or suspension of the certification. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-148. - Competency examination. 
(a)  No person shall be issued a tour guide certification card unless that person has passed the tour guide certification examination given by the tour coordinator. The examination shall be given not less than quarterly and shall test the applicant's knowledge of the following: 
(1)  The history and architecture of Aiken. 
(2)  The local government. 
(3)  The proper conduct of tour guides. 
(4)  The regulations applicable to the conduct of tours within the city. 
(b)  The fee for the initial and subsequent tour guide certification examination shall be determined by city council. 
(c)  Dates for administration of the examination shall be announced and published by the tour coordinator. 
(d)  Applicants shall be provided with a tour guide manual and a list of source material from which examination questions may be taken. 
(e)  There shall be no limit upon the number of times an applicant may take the examination, upon payment of the applicable fee for each examination. 
(f)  Successful passage of the tour guide certification examination shall be upon a grade of 80 percent or greater. Upon each successful passage, a certified tour card shall be issued for a period of three years, during which time the applicant shall not be required to take the examination again. 
(g)  At the expiration of the three-year period, the certified tour guide shall be required to submit a new background investigation through SLED, as stipulated in section 7-11014. They shall also be required to take and similarly pass the tour guide certification examination again before being issued a new tour guide certification for another three-year period. 
(h)  All examination papers shall be fairly and impartially graded and shall be retained by the tour coordinator until the appeal period provided hereinafter has expired. 
(i)  A tour guide certification shall be in effect for 36 months from the date of issue. Certification may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fee, for each 36-month period thereafter, unless the permit for the proceeding period has been revoked or is suspended. 
(j)  A tour guide certification card issued under this article is not transferable and is to be used solely by the person to whom it was issued. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a tour guide verification identification card or cause or allow its defacement. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-149. - Appeals. 
Any decision by the tour coordinator to deny a license for an individual seeking to become a certified tour guide may be appealed to the city manager within ten business days of the decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-150. - Suspension and/or revocation. 
(a)  Upon the recommendation of the tour coordinator, the city manager may suspend or cause the suspension of a tour guide certification for the following reasons: 
(1)  Making false statements in the application for the tour guide certification. 
(2)  Operating a tour service or vehicle in violation of any provision of this article or state law. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by the suspension or revocation of a tour guide certification may appeal the decision to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-151. - Exemption of nonprofit organizations. 
The city manager shall have the authority to exempt nonprofit organizations from these regulations in order to conduct special, nonrecurring tours for a limited duration of time, and not to exceed two in any week. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-152. - Enforcement. 
The city manager shall designate the appropriate agency within city government to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Violations of this chapter shall carry a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 per occurrence, up to 30 days in jail, or both. Tour operators may contest their citations in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 07112005A, § 2, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 46-153. - Not-for-hire tours—Buses. 
(a)  Individuals conducting tours to special groups for no cost may do so in accordance to the provisions set forth in section 46-133 "Transportation of alcoholic beverage prohibited," section 46-136 "Maximum load," section 46-137 Vehicles—Sanitation, safety condition and maintenance," section 46-142 "Vehicle routes and size," section 46-143 "Hours and capacity," section 46-145 "Certification," and section 46-152 "Enforcement." 
(b)  Donations for non-profit organizations may be accepted in lieu of fees. 
(Ord. No. 11132006A, § 2, 11-13-2006)  
Secs. 46-154—46-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSPORTATION OF HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES FOR PURPOSES OF TOURING 
 
Sec. 46-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City: A body politic and a political subdivision of South Carolina known as the City of Aiken including all areas within the city limits. 
Company: The holder of a license to operate a horse-drawn carriage business under the provisions of this chapter whether a person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Driver: Any person who drives or operates a horse-drawn carriage upon the streets of the city for a licensed carriage company. 
Driver's permit: The written authority granted by the city and issued by the public safety department for an individual to drive or operate a horse-drawn carriage within the city. 
Horse-drawn carriage: Any hack or carriage which is operated by being drawn by a horse, mule, or other beast of burden for hire, for the transportation of passengers. 
Inspector: The individual employee or department of the city charged with the responsibility for administering and enforcing the Aiken City Code. 
License: The right and privilege granted by the city for operation of a tour business incorporating the use of one or more horse-drawn carriages within the corporate limits of the city. 
Not-for-hire tours: Touring conducted by a tour guide for an educational group, local school group, leadership program, local churches, local assisted living facilities, economic development partnership or City of Aiken, but the guide does not receive compensation. 
Permit: Includes the carriage company permission to operate or the individual carriage identification number, or as the case may be. 
Point-to-point: Vehicles for hire which primarily do not follow a reoccurring route, rather transport passengers from one specific location to another. 
Public conveyances: Transportation of people by a carriage-for-hire. 
Special event: A prearranged tour to accommodate a one-time, nonrecurring special occasion such as a convention or nonprofit activity. 
Street: Means and includes any street, alley, lane, avenue, court or public right-of-way or thoroughfare in the city. 
Tour guide: Any person who acts or offers as a guide for hire in the City of Aiken when the primary purpose is touring the City of Aiken. 
Touring: Activities where the primary purpose is to pass by and see historic, architectural sites, cultural attractions or scenic areas in the city, but shall not include mere point-to-point travel. 
Vehicle for hire: Employment of a horse-drawn carriage for passengers, generally for a fee or a fare, for the purposes of touring, point to point transportation, or special events. The vehicle is not deemed to be "for hire" when such passengers are not on board. 
Veterinarian: A veterinarian licensed in South Carolina who specializes in large animals. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-202. - Licensing and permits. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall operate a business involving the use of one or more horse-drawn carriages for hire upon the streets of the city unless a license for such business has first been granted by the city. The owner shall make and file, with the city business license administrator, written application for a license, that shall be sworn to by the applicant, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner, and in the event the owner is a corporation, if requested, a copy of its articles of incorporation. 
(2)  Record of conviction by any South Carolina criminal court, if any, of the applicant or if the applicant is a corporation, the criminal court record of the officers, directors, and supervising employees thereof, including the general manager, and all operators. This record must be obtained from the Aiken Department of Public Safety. 
(3)  Such other information as city council may, in its discretion, require. 
(b)  The city shall reserve the right for its animal control officer, with or without a licensed veterinarian to inspect, and, at its own expense with or without the permission of the tour company, any animal or equipment actively used for the purpose of touring. 
(c)  The carriage company shall give to the public safety animal control officer of the city the name, address, and telephone number of the veterinarian who certifies the health of its horses. The carriage company shall also maintain the following information on each horse and make this information available, upon request from the city: 
(1)  The current veterinarian examination record; 
(2)  Annual immunization record including, but not limited to, rabies, Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis, eastern and western equine encephalomyelitis, tetanus, influenza, and negative Coggins test; 
(3)  A picture of the horse and a name or other designation for the horse; 
(4)  Description of any identifying characteristics, marks, or brands; 
(d)  No more than three horse-drawn carriage tour companies shall be licensed to operate in the city. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-203. - Public conveyance and necessity. 
The business license administrator, may grant, or refuse to grant, approval of a business license application for any public conveyance. In evaluating the application for public conveyance, the tourism supervisor, or his designee, shall take into consideration the demands of the public for quality service within, or from, the city; the number, kind and type of equipment, and any demand for increased parking upon the streets of the city, which may result; and whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved by the granting of such license. Carriages must pass all inspection requirements of the city and state. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-204. - Suspension and revocation of business license or vehicle permit. 
Any and carriage permits may be suspended by the tourism supervisor, at any time in case: 
(1)  Any applicant who fails to comply with the requirements of this article shall not be issued or reissued carriage identification number until proof of compliance is presented by the applicant and certified by the attending veterinarian, public safety, codes enforcement, or the tourism supervisor. All of the requirements of this chapter both serve as conditions for issuance of a carriage identification number and apply to the business once operational. 
(2)  The business license administrator may temporarily suspend the business license of any carriage company for violation of any provision of the business license ordinance. The carriage company may appeal any such suspension to city council provided a written appeal has been submitted to the business license administrator within ten days of the suspension decision. 
(3)  The tourism supervisor shall determine whether a company which applies for a carriage tour operator's license is, indeed a stand alone company, with separate ownership, management and equipment. Existing carriage tour companies shall not be given a license to operate for a new company created in name only. If city council, after notice and a hearing, determines that there exists collusion or other sharing of ownership between companies holding a license to operate carriage tours, that operator or operators' carriage identification number shall be revoked. 
(4)  The owner's record of performance is unsatisfactory. 
(5)  The owner shall cease to operate any public conveyance for a period of 30 consecutive days without having obtained permission for cessation of such operation from the city. Permits recovered under this section will be reissued to the first person or company on the waiting list for permits. 
(6)  The owner or operator of a public conveyance has been convicted of violating the laws of the state relating to the operation of such public conveyance. 
(7)  The owner or operator of a public conveyance refuses to allow inspection by the public safety department or the lawful city authority or agent of permits, daily manifest, records as outlined in section 46-202, "Licensing and Permits", subsection (c), or safety and sanitary conditions of the vehicle. 
(8)  The holder of a license shall fail to register properly in the correct and true owner's name, the public conveyance covered by the license. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-205. - Vehicle-for-hire or carriage-for-hire. 
Holders of a city business license for the operation of horse-drawn carriages upon the streets of the city shall be assigned a current year city identification number which will be maintained by the tourism supervisor. The permit number shall be attached on the rear of the carriage body and shall be permanently displayed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-206. - Carriage driver's permit required. 
(a)  No person shall operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire upon the streets of the city and no person who owns or operates a horse-drawn carriage company shall permit a horse-drawn carriage to be driven at any time for hire unless the driver of the carriage shall first have obtained, and maintains, a valid horse-drawn carriage driver's permit issued by the city. Driver's permits will be issued and records will be maintained by the city. 
(b)  Application. The driver of any horse-drawn carriage shall possess a valid driver's license and make and file with the city a written application for a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit. Such application shall be sworn to by the applicant and shall include the full name, date of birth, driver's license state and number, and residence of the applicant. All drivers of horse-drawn carriages shall be required to pass a horse-drawn carriage competency examination indicating the driver is knowledgeable and capable of handling horses and horse-drawn carriages in emergency situations and that the applicant possesses all requirements necessary to operate a horse-drawn carriage in a safe, prudent and satisfactory manner. The examination shall be conducted by the city or its assigned representative. A statement as to whether or not such applicant has been convicted of violating any provision of this chapter, or other city ordinance, state or federal law; and shall set forth the nature of the offense(s), if any, and furnish other information as may be required for determining the applicant's qualifications. Any false entry on the application will be cause for disapproval of the driver's permit. 
(c)  Horse-drawn carriage driver's permits and carriage operation permits shall begin to be issued on July 1 each year and all issued permits shall expire on June 30 of the following year. The cost of the carriage driver's permit will be as set by city council. A one-time initial processing fee of $25.00 must also be paid by applicants. 
(d)  On approval of any carriage driver's permit the city shall issue a card which shall bear on its face a photograph of the permittee, permit number, expiration date, and any other information as the city designee may direct. 
(e)  The drivers' permit card shall, at all times, be kept on their person while that permittee is in control of the carriage. 
(f)  Carriage driver's permit(s) issued pursuant to this article, shall not be transferable between individuals. 
(g)  Every applicant for a permit under the provisions for this chapter shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(h)  Any carriage driver's permit granted under the terms of this chapter may be suspended by the city for any violation of this chapter and after due notice to the permittee in writing, citing him to appear before the municipal court and show cause why his permit should not be permanently revoked. The city may revoke the city driver's permit of any driver when, in his judgment, the driver's physical condition or record for violation of traffic laws, city ordinances, moral turpitude, or other state and federal laws applicable to public passenger service vehicles which indicates the permittee an unfit operator of such a public passenger vehicle or carriage. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-207. - Tour guide certification. 
It shall be unlawful for persons to act or offer to act, as tour guides for hire within the city limits unless they have been certified by the city under the provisions of Ord. No. 07112005A and Code sections 46-144—46-148, and all related sections. The carriage driver may also be the tour guide, but must be certified for each role. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-208. - Insurance. 
Any company offering horse-drawn vehicle tours in the City of Aiken shall be required to provide proof of insurance at the time of the operating permit application and upon request by any inspecting agent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-209. - Design standards. 
(a)  Animal-drawn vehicles shall be authentically styled traditionally colored passenger carriages, similar to surreys, or rockaways; car tires are not appropriate. Wagons which patently were designed for cargo instead of passengers will not be approved. Carriages shall not exceed 16 feet in length or six feet and four inches in width. Carriages will be measured in length from end to end including the wheels but excluding the shaft. Carriages will be measured in width from outermost point to outermost point. 
(b)  Carriages must be approved by the city. Any person dissatisfied with any city decision to either approve or not to approve the carriage, shall have the right of appeal to the city's equine commission. Any such appeal must be submitted in writing to the city manager's office within ten days from the date that the decision by the inspector is rendered. Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the city's equine commission to not approve the carriage, shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Any such appeal must be submitted in writing to the city manager's office within ten days from the date that the decision by the city's equine commission is rendered. The decision of city council is final. 
(c)  No commercial advertising of any kind is permitted on any part of a carriage, horse, harness or driver. The carriage company name and phone number shall be permissible with lettering no more than 14 inches high. 
(d)  Harness shall be suitable for the particular horse and carriage configuration to be used for any such tour. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-210. - Identification of carriages/posting of information. 
(a)  Information on the carriage vehicle's official gross weight and dimensions shall be maintained with the vehicle whenever the vehicle is in operation. The vehicle's official rated capacity for number of passengers shall be conspicuously posted on or in the vehicle. 
(b)  The number of carriages actually owned, and the number of carriages for tours actually operated by such owner or operator on the date of the application. 
(c)  The number of carriages for which a permit is desired. 
(d)  The make of each carriage, type, year made, city issued identification number, and passenger capacity for each carriage for which an application for permit is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-211. - Condition of carriages and harnesses. 
(a)  Each horse-drawn carriage operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the carriage is in service. 
(b)  Carriages in operation 30 minutes before sundown shall have side carriage lamps and illuminated red tail lights in accordance with South Carolina Code 56-5-4650 and related sections. 
(c)  The interior and exterior finish of each carriage shall be maintained. All metal should be clean. Each carriage will be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris at all times, suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(d)  Harness used shall be clean and in good condition. Bitless bridles are forbidden. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-212. - Safety equipment. 
The following safety equipment shall be maintained on each carriage at all times: 
(1)  A first aid kit. 
(2)  A two-way radio or mobile telephone for immediate communication with the company's home office. 
(3)  A halter and lead shank for each animal hitched to the carriage. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-213. - Traffic related regulations. 
The operator of any animal-drawn vehicle within the city shall be subject to vehicle and traffic provisions of this ordinance and shall operate his or her carriage in accordance with the traffic laws of the state. 
(1)  No driver shall permit an animal to pull a carriage at a speed faster than a slow trot, except for emergency situations. In such emergencies, the driver shall take all precautionary measures possible so not to endanger any passenger or other person. 
(2)  Due to the nature of operating animal-drawn vehicles in areas of congestion and heavy traffic within the city, it shall be unlawful to operate an animal-drawn vehicle except when the animals are under complete control and with due care for the safety of others. Due caution should be exercised when emergency vehicles are present and using emergency warning lights or sirens. 
(3)  Whenever three or more motor vehicles are backed up behind a horse-drawn carriage the driver shall, at the earliest reasonable opportunity, pull the carriage over to the side of the road to allow those vehicles to pass. 
(4)  All carriages for hire must keep moving at all times and may not stop except as required by traffic regulations and by subsection (b), above and where particular exigencies reasonably require it. 
(5)  In the case of an accident or breakdown, the vehicle should be moved, if possible, so as to not impede traffic. 
(6)  Any driver who experiences a mechanical failure of the carriage or harness while on the roads, will move the passengers to safety and then unhitch the horse from the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-214. - General operating regulations. 
(a)  The total number of horse-drawn carriages allowed to operate at any one time upon the streets of the city is limited to six of which four may be on tour. Any carriages in excess of the four on tour shall only be permitted, if the carriage is in transport to or from their staging area. The carriages in operation shall be divided equally among the carriage companies. 
(b)  In order to relieve congestion on the streets and to mitigate impact upon residents and businesses no more than one carriage shall be driven along any three-block section in the same direction at any one time. A three-block section is defined as that linear segment of any individual street circumscribed by four contiguous intersecting streets. Where these spacing requirements are not met, the drivers of the last carriages to enter that section shall generally be deemed to have committed the violation. This provision applies only to carriages while used for hire. However, drivers of carriages which are not being used for hire are encouraged to observe these spacing requirements. 
(c)  Carriage company shall be responsible for maintaining the cleanliness of the loading zone. 
(d)  No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers when the carriage is in motion. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a driver of any carriage to leave the vehicle, or the immediate premises there of, while the vehicle is parked or while awaiting passengers. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit passengers verbally or by gesture, directly or indirectly, or to advertise or hawk tickets at any loading zone, upon the streets, or in any public outdoor space of the city. The sale of tour tickets may only occur inside, on private property or other locations as designated by city council. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to consume or transport alcoholic beverages aboard any carriage while touring. 
(h)  A driver may refuse service to any potential customer who appears to be impaired or disorderly. 
(i)  Any driver or operator discovering personal property left on his carriage shall deliver or report such property to the office of the carriage company within 12 hours after the discovery. The driver's report shall include brief particulars to enable the company to identify the owner of the lost property. The driver will advise any passenger claiming to have lost property while on tours to report such loss to the police. The company shall retain any found property for at least 60 days before disposal. 
(j)  Carriages shall not be operated in adverse weather conditions. 
(k)  Drivers must keep the horse's reins in their hands while an animal is hitched to the carriage. Only the driver may handle the reins, whip, and brake. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-215. - Loading zones. 
(a)  Passengers may be loaded or discharged only in designated loading zones. Carriages may remain in loading zone only while loading or discharging passengers or while waiting to load passengers for a prearranged tour. However; no carriage may remain in a loading zone for more than ten minutes without providing water to the horse. 
(b)  The following locations are designated as loading zones: 
(1)  In front of the Washington Center for the Performing Arts located at 126 Newberry Street. 
(2)  Location on private property (i.e. outside of the road right-of-way and any public areas) for prearranged tours or special events. 
(3)  Location on street adjacent to homes, restaurants, hotels, churches, and other establishments for prearranged tours or special events for persons departing from or arriving at those establishments provided that there is no off-street parking otherwise available and that the carriage is parked outside of any travel lane. 
(4)  The city may establish additional loading zones and conditions for those loading zones. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-216. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Horse-drawn carriages for hire, including those used for tours or special event shall be operated on the streets of the city only as follows (with the exception in subsection (b) below): 
(1)  During Eastern Daylight Time: 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. No tour may begin after 7:30 p.m. 
(2)  During Eastern Standard Time: 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. No tour may begin after 5:00 p.m. 
(3)  During the holiday season (Thanksgiving through New Year's Day): 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. No tour may begin after 10:30 p.m. 
(b)  Until after 11:00 a.m., tours are prohibited on the streets including Two Notch between Audubon and South Boundary; Mead Ave. east of Sumter Ave. towards Two Notch; Grace Ave. east of Sumter Ave. to Powderhouse Rd.; and Orangeburg St. between Grace Ave. and South Boundary. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006; Ord. No. 11232015 , § 1, 11-23-2015)  
Sec. 46-217. - Geographic area of operation and routes. 
(a)  The permitted area of operation for horse-drawn carriages carrying passengers for touring or special events is defined as follows: 
(1)  General areas for touring carriages for hire include all land bounded on the north by Edgefield Avenue, on the east by the Williamsburg Street, on the south by South Boundary, and on the west by Fauberg Street and the remaining Historic District land bounded on the north by South Boundary, on the east by Powderhouse Road, on the south by Price Avenue, and on the west by Hitchcock Woods. 
(2)  Only carriages for hire which are equipped with brakes are allowed on Laurens St. from the railroad overpass south to New Lane and on Newberry St. between Colleton Ave. and New Lane. 
(b)  Routes are established as follows: 
(1)  Carriages used for touring must operate the route within the geographical area outlined in the above subsection (a). 
(2)  Carriage operators wishing to tour outside of the above geographical area must submit a written request to the tourism supervisor at least seven normal business days prior to touring. If approved, a special route permit shall be issued and must be in possession of the carriage driver at all times during the special tour. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-218. - Special exceptions. 
The city manager or his designee may approve exceptions to this article regarding routes, maximum number of carriages, and hours for special events. Special events may include, but are not limited to parades or the annual carriage drive. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-219. - Stables, exercise and paddock area. 
(a)  When stables or exercise lots are maintained within the city limits, the company shall maintain the structure and premises in a sanitary condition through the proper use of lime and pesticides and comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  Manure shall be cleaned from the stable, exercise and paddock area daily and then placed in covered containers or a Dempsey dumpster. Such containers shall be at least 50 feet from any other dwelling or pool, patio or other structure on an adjoining lot and at least 25 feet from any property line, notwithstanding any other provision contained in this chapter having requirements for covered containers. 
(2)  All manure shall be removed from the premises at least weekly or more often as necessary to prevent or reduce the propagation of flies and creation of odors. 
(3)  Exercise and paddock areas shall be designed and maintained to drain so as to prevent ponding and propagation of insects. The area shall be designed and maintained so as to prevent the pollution by drainage or run off into adjacent streams or other water bodies. 
(4)  Any spilled feed on the property shall be promptly removed so as to prevent attraction of flies, rodents and birds, or the creation of odors. 
(5)  Provisions shall also be made for insect control. 
(6)  The exercise or training areas on the property shall be dampened to prevent dust. 
(b)  Horses will be provided the following conditions: 
(1)  Each individual animal shall have a stall large enough for the animal to safely turn around; but no individual animal may be kept in a stall less than ten feet by 12 feet or 120 square feet in area, except that standing stalls may be used for less than 12 hours per day. Ceilings in stalls and stables shall be at least nine feet from the bedding and flooring. 
(2)  Ventilation adequate to ensure good health and comfort of animals shall be provided in stable and stall areas. 
(3)  Adequate and leak-free roofing is required for any stable or stall area in which animals are housed in the city. 
(4)  Adequate amounts of straw bedding or shavings in stalls shall be kept clean and dry. 
(5)  Adequate fresh water shall be provided in paddocks and stalls at all times while any animal is present. 
(6)  Food shall be kept free of contamination and stored in rodent-proof containers. 
(c)  Complaints regarding any stable or lot that is not maintained in compliance with the foregoing requirements should be filed with the City of Aiken animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-220. - Treatment and condition of horses. 
(a)  A licensed veterinarian shall certify, after due and proper inspection, the good health of each animal before it is placed in service. A minimum of one such health inspections and certificates shall be required for each animal each calendar year. 
(b)  No driver may use more than a light touch of the whip upon any animal, and no driver or other person may forcefully strike an animal, or make movements or noise intended to frighten or harm an animal. 
(c)  Horses shall be allowed access to fresh water at least every one hour while in service. 
(d)  Horses shall not be in harness more than two and one-half hours consecutively without at least 30 minutes of rest. 
(e)  No animal shall be subject to any condition or treatment, whether in service or out of service, which will impair the good health and physical condition of that animal. This includes providing shade as relief from heat when not working. 
(f)  Unless written approval is given by a licensed veterinarian, no animal having open sores or wounds or any disease or ailment, shall be permitted to be in service on the streets of the city. 
(g)  Prompt veterinary care and services shall be provided for sick horses, and when deemed necessary by a licensed veterinarian, the sick horse shall be promptly removed from the immediate service. 
(h)  Each animal shall have its hooves properly trimmed and shod for street use. 
(i)  Each animal shall be groomed daily in order that there are no signs of fungus, dandruff, or a dirty coat. 
(i)  Harnesses shall be properly fitted, maintained, and clean so that no irritating material will come in direct contact with the animal. 
(j)  Horse shall not be worked in extreme conditions of heat and humidity which may be harmful to the horse. 
(k)  Carriage animals shall be a minimum of 1,000 lbs. No one horse may be used to pull more than one and one-half times it's own weight. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-221. - Inspections, compliance, and enforcement. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer, the tourism supervisor, a city-contracted inspector, or city code enforcement official shall be empowered to inspect the stables, stalls, horses, carriages and other operating facilities of any carriage company doing business within the city limits, during normal business hours, with or without prior notice, and to examine operating practices of any carriage company to ensure continuous compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The public safety department shall have the authority to immediately remove from operation upon the streets of the city any horse-drawn carriage which does not meet the requirements of this chapter, and may prohibit operation of the carriage until deficiencies have been corrected. Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the public safety department shall have the right of appeal to the city manager. Any such appeal may be submitted in writing to the city manager within ten days from the date that the decision by the public safety department is rendered. The decision of the city manager is final. 
(c)  Operators and agents of the carriage company and passengers shall comply with all city ordinances and state and federal laws which govern the treatment of animals, including horses, mules or other beast of burden. Failure to comply with this chapter can result in revocation of the business permit and punishment at the discretion of the municipal court. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall carry a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 per occurrence, or punished within the jurisdictional limits of the city court. Tour operators may contest their citations in municipal court. 
(e)  The carriage company, upon continued violation of the provisions of this section by the company, its agents, employees or persons acting on its behalf, the right to operate horse-drawn carriages, shall also be suspended as follows: 
(1)  Upon two violations within a six-month period, the company shall be suspended for a period not to exceed seven days. 
(2)  Upon three violations within a one-year period, the company shall be suspended for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(3)  Upon four violations within a one-year period, the company shall be suspended for a period not to exceed 180 days. 
(4)  Once a 180-day suspension period has been served, if the company continues to violate the ordinance and receives three violations within the one-year period following the 180-day suspension, all permits and certifications will be permanently revoked. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-222. - Compliance with other requirements. 
Companies shall also comply with all building code and zoning ordinance conditions to the extent any conflict shall arise, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-223. - Not-for-hire tours. 
(a)  Individuals conducting tours to special groups for no cost may do so in accordance to the provisions set forth in section 46-206 "Carriage driver's permit required," section 46-207 "Tour guide certification," section 46-209 "Design standards," section 46-211 "Condition of carriages and harnesses," section 46-212 "Safety equipment," section 46-213 "Traffic related regulations," section 46-214 "General operating regulations," section 46-215 "Loading zones," section 46-216 "Hours of operation," section 46-217 "Geographic area of operation and routes," section 46-218 "Special exceptions," section 46-219 "Stables, exercise and paddock area," section 46-220 "Treatment and condition of horses," section 46-221 "Inspections, compliance, and enforcement," and section 46-224 "Tour reports." 
(b)  Donations for non-profit organizations may be accepted in lieu of fees. 
(c)  Not-for-hire tours whether accepting donations or not shall adhere to section 46-224 "Tour Reports" as described below. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-224. - Tour reports. 
(a)  Each operator shall, on the date or within the time period hereinafter prescribed, make a report to the tourism supervisor on forms provided, the total number of tours conducted and the total number of tickets sold for each tour conducted. Required reports shall be remitted to the tourism supervisor on or before the fifteenth day of the following month after the quarter. The quarters are defined as January to March, April to June, July to September, and October to December. If the due date for reporting falls on a Saturday or Sunday, or a federal, state, or City of Aiken observed holiday then reporting is considered timely on the following business day. Furthermore, if the due date for reporting falls during the period of a natural disaster which directly precluded the responsible party from timely submitting the reports and payments, an additional ten-day extension may be granted upon written request to the tourism supervisor. A natural disaster is defined as a hurricane, earthquake, flood, or tornado. The responsible party is considered directly precluded from timely submitting reports if their offices are deemed by emergency officials to be damaged to the extent of being unsafe or unavailable for use due to the disaster or postal service to the immediate area is suspended during the due date. 
(b)  Failure to file the required reports as required by this section will subject the operator to a $50.00-penalty. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any misrepresentation of the information required by returns as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, shall subject any tour operator to suspension and/or revocation of the tour guide certificate as may be determined by the tourism supervisor. The tour operator may appeal any such suspension or revocation to the city manager provided a written appeal has been submitted to the director of parks, recreation and tourism within ten days of the decision to suspend or revoke. 
(Ord. No. 11132006B, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-2006)  
Secs. 46-225—46-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WALKING TOURS 
 
Sec. 46-251. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms mean: 
City: A body politic and a political subdivision of South Carolina known as the City of Aiken including all areas within its city limits. 
Company: The holder of a license to operate a walking tour business under the provisions of this chapter whether a person, firm, partnership, or corporation. 
Inspector: The individual employee or department of the city charged with the responsibility for administering and enforcing this code. 
License: The right and privilege granted by the city for operation of a business incorporating the use of one or more walking tours within the city. 
Not-for-hire tours: Touring conducted for educational groups, nonprofit organizations, local religious organizations, local assisted living facilities, economic development partnership, or the City of Aiken when the tour guide receives no compensation. 
Street: Means and includes any street, alley, lane, avenue, court, or public right of way or thoroughfare in the city limits. 
Tour guide: Shall mean any person who acts or offers as a guide for hire in the City of Aiken when the primary purpose is touring the City of Aiken. 
Touring: Operation of a walking tour of at least eight, but no more than 40, persons where the primary purpose is to walk to see historic and architectural sites, cultural attractions, or scenic areas in the city. 
(Ord. No. 01082007, § 2(Exh. A), 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 46-252. - Licensing of walking tour companies for hire. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate a business involving the use of one or more walking tour companies for hire upon the streets of the city unless a license for such business has first been granted by the city. 
(b)  Each walking tour company, as a condition of holding a license under the provisions of this chapter, shall establish and maintain a fixed headquarters on public, or private, property for the operation of the company's business. The headquarters shall conform to all applicable city ordinances. 
(c)  Applicants shall provide their most recent tax return, income verification, profit/loss statements, or other verification of gross receipts as part of their business license application. 
(d)  Applicants shall also provide a record of conviction by any criminal court, if any, of any tour guides, the applicant, or, if the applicant is a corporation, the criminal court record of the officers, directors, and supervising employees thereof, and all operators. Applicants will obtain these criminal record reports from the Aiken Department of Public Safety. 
(e)  Any applicant who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall not be issued a business license until proof of compliance is presented by the applicant and certified by the city tour supervisor, public safety department, or codes enforcement officer. All of the requirements of this chapter both serve as conditions for issuance of a license and apply to the business once operational. 
(f)  The business license administrator, or other designated official, may temporarily suspend the business license of any walking tour company for violation of any provision of this ordinance. The walking tour company may appeal any such suspension to city council provided a written appeal has been submitted to the business license administrator within ten days of the suspension decision. 
(g)  No more than two separate walking tour companies shall be licensed to operate in the city. 
(h)  The business license administrator, tourism director, or other designated official, shall determine whether a company that applies for a walking tour operator's license is, indeed a different company, with separate ownership, management, and equipment. Existing walking tour companies shall not be given a license to operate for a new company created in name only. 
(Ord. No. 01082007, § 2(Exh. A), 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 46-253. - General operating regulations. 
(a)  The guide and guests of a walking tour shall not trespass on private property, block streets, or deny access to driveways. The tour company shall be responsible for collection and removal of all trash generated by guests. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to consume, or transport, alcoholic beverages while participating in any walking tour. 
(c)  A guide may refuse tour service to any potential customer who appears to be uncooperative, boisterous, impaired, disorderly, or in any manner disruptive to conducting a tour. 
(d)  Walking tours shall not be operated in adverse weather conditions as determined by the tourism supervisor. 
(e)  Speaker phones, bullhorns, or other audio amplification devices are prohibited on walking tours. 
(f)  Walking tour routes must be approved by the city manager or another person designated by the city manager. 
(g)  No animals shall be permitted on tours, except service animals or animals trained to assist the visually impaired. 
(h)  Any person conducting a walking tour must be certified by the City of Aiken tourism supervisor as a tour guide. 
(Ord. No. 01082007, § 2(Exh. A), 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 46-254. - Hours of operation, number of guests, and frequency of tours. 
Walking tours for hire shall be operated on the streets of the city only as follows: 
(1)  Tours are permitted between 9:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. in the downtown commercial districts. 
(2)  Tours are permitted between 9:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in residential areas. However, tours using routes which focus on city commercial areas, which utilize residential streets, may operate until 9:00 p.m. 
(3)  In the Horse District (HD) zone, Residential Single Family, Stable (RSS) zone, and on Colleton Avenue, walking tours must begin after 11:00 a.m. and terminate before 6:00 p.m. 
(4)  No more than four walking tours per month may be conducted outside the downtown commercial area, except on a tour route which is specifically approved for use after 6:00 p.m. 
(5)  Prior to 6:00 p.m., walking tours in the downtown commercial area are limited to 28 guests. 
(6)  After 6:00 p.m., tours in the downtown commercial area are permitted up to 40 guests. Tour groups numbering between 28 and 40 guests must have an additional person assisting with the tour. Tour assistants will not require such certification, but must be recognized designees of the tour company. 
(7)  Any walking tour outside the downtown commercial area, except on those routes approved for use after 6:00 p.m., are limited to 15 guests. After 6:00 p.m., up to 40 guests are allowed on specifically approved routes. 
(8)  No more than two walking tours may be conducted at any one time, and tours must be spaced at least two blocks apart except at the tour departure or completion area. 
(Ord. No. 01082007, § 2(Exh. A), 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 46-255. - Tour guide certification. 
It shall be unlawful for persons to act, or offer to act, as tour guides for hire within the city limits unless they have been certified by the city. 
(Ord. No. 01082007, § 2(Exh. A), 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 46-256. - Special events. 
The city manager, or a city manager designee, may approve exceptions to this chapter regarding routes, maximum number of guests, and hours for special events. 
(Ord. No. 01082007, § 2(Exh. A), 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 46-257. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall designate the appropriate agency within city government to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Violations of this chapter are unlawful and shall carry a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 per occurrence. Other punishment within the jurisdiction of the municipal court may also be exacted from violators. Tour operators may contest any citation in municipal court. 
(b)  A walking tour company, upon continued violation of the provisions of this article by the company, its agents, employees or persons acting on its behalf, then its right to operate a walking tour shall be administratively suspended as follows: 
(1)  Upon two violations within a three-month period, the company shall be suspended for a period not to exceed seven days. 
(2)  Upon three violations within a one-year period, the company shall be suspended for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(3)  Upon four violations within a one-year period, the company shall be suspended for a period not to exceed 180 days. 
(4)  Once a 180-day suspension period has been served, if the company continues to violate the ordinance and receives three violations within the one-year period following the 180-day suspension, all permits and certifications will be permanently revoked. 
(Ord. No. 01082007, § 2(Exh. A), 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 46-258. - Not-for-hire tours. 
(a)  Individuals conducting tours to special groups for no cost may do so in accordance to the provisions set forth in section 46-253 "General operating regulations," section 46-254 "Hours of operation and frequency," section 46-255 "Tour guide certification," section 46-256 "Special events," and section 46-257 "Enforcement." 
(b)  Donations for non-profit organizations may be accepted in lieu of tour fees. 
(c)  Not-for-hire tours whether accepting donations or not shall adhere to section 46-259 "Tour reports" as described below. 
(Ord. No. 01082007, § 2(Exh. A), 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 46-259. - Tour reports. 
(a)  Each operator shall, on the date or within the time period hereinafter prescribed, make a report to the tourism supervisor, on forms provided, the total number of tours conducted and the total number of guests for each tour conducted. Required reports shall be remitted to the tourism supervisor on or before the fifteenth day of the following month after the quarter. The quarters are defined as January to March, April to June, July to September, and October to December. If the due date for reporting falls on a Saturday or Sunday, or a federal, state, or City of Aiken observed holiday then reporting is considered timely on the following business day. Furthermore, if the due date for reporting falls during the period of a natural disaster which directly precluded the responsible party from timely submitting the reports and payments, an additional ten-day extension may be granted upon written request to the tourism supervisor. A natural disaster is defined as a hurricane, earthquake, flood, tornado, or winter weather that prevents normal business from being conducted. The responsible party is considered directly precluded from timely submitting reports if their offices are deemed by emergency officials to be damaged to the extent of being unsafe or unavailable for use due to the disaster or postal service to the immediate area is suspended during the due date. 
(b)  Failure to file the required reports under this section will subject the operator to a $50.00 civil penalty. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any misrepresentation of the information required by returns as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, shall subject the tour operator to suspension and/or revocation of his business license by the business license administrator and/or the tour guide certificate as may be determined by the director of parks, recreation and tourism or the director's designee. The tour operator may appeal any such suspension or revocation to the city manager or the city manager's designee provided a written appeal has been submitted to the business license administrator within ten days of the decision to suspend or revoke. 
(Ord. No. 01082007, § 2(Exh. A), 1-8-2007)  
ARTICLE VI. - TOWING FRANCHISES 
 
Sec. 46-260. - Nonexclusive franchise—City council authority to grant. 
The city council may and is empowered to grant to any qualified person, a nonexclusive franchise to engage in the business of providing conventional towing services and heavy duty towing services in response to requests by the department of public safety. Heavy duty towing services are defined as services with wreckers capable of towing motor vehicles weighing over 7,000 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 05092011, § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2011)  
Sec. 46-261. - Minimum eligibility for towing franchise. 
Aiken Department of Public Safety shall investigate the facts listed in the application for a nonexclusive towing franchise. Within 60 days after completion of the investigation, the application shall be reviewed by city council unless any one of the following exists: 
(1)  The applicant has been removed from the franchise list within the last 24 months; 
(2)  A material statement made in the application is untrue; 
(3)  A fact exists of which the director of public safety or his designee has knowledge of which would be cause for removal or suspension of the applicant from the rotation list; 
(4)  The applicant has not been issued a city business license; 
(5)  The applicant has a felony conviction; 
(6)  The applicant has not obtained the required insurance. 
(Ord. No. 05092011, § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2011)  
Sec. 46-262. - Right of owner or driver to request a towing service. 
The owner or driver of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall have the right to choose any towing service, even if such service has not been granted a city franchise. Before calling any towing service to tow a wrecked or disabled vehicle, the investigating officer on the scene should, if practical, determine the wrecked or disabled vehicle owner's or driver's preference for towing services. 
(Ord. No. 05092011, § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2011)  
Sec. 46-263. - Rules and regulations for conventional towing services. 
All towing services granted a nonexclusive conventional towing franchise must comply with the following: 
(1)  All towing services shall maintain a secure storage area for all vehicles towed. This may be a locked building or a secured fenced-in area where the stored vehicles and other property shall not be accessible to the public. Each service will have personnel available during normal business hours for the public to have access to their vehicle, if needed. 
(2)  Each towing service shall provide the department of public safety with normal working hours, business day and night phone numbers, holiday phone numbers, pager numbers, and cellular phone numbers, as available. 
(3)  All towing services shall be equipped with, and utilize, legally authorized lighting and other safety equipment to protect the motoring public. This equipment shall be maintained in good working order. 
(4)  The following equipment must be carried on all wreckers: brooms, shovels, a container to haul glass and other debris from the highway, a five-pound-ABC-rated fire extinguisher, absorbent material, and safety chains and tie-down chains (for haulers rollback). The towing service shall clean the roadway prior to leaving a wreck scene. 
(5)  Towing services shall be available to the department of public safety 24 hours each day, seven days per week, and 52 weeks per year. Each towing service shall keep its facilities adequately staffed during all service hours. Each towing service shall respond to a request for the release of a motor vehicle from its service facility the following business day or on an agreed upon time of release that is within reason for both parties. 
(6)  Towing services shall not respond to a scene for service unless requested by a proper public safety authority. 
(7)  Motor vehicles that have been reported stolen or which have been designated as evidence shall be towed to a location to be determined by the officer on the scene. Once a stolen vehicle is approved by the department of public safety for release, the vehicle owner, or the owner's designee, must show proof that the towing charge has been paid, and then the owner's vehicle will be returned. 
(8)  All other motor vehicles must be towed to the service's facility and secured there until claimed by the owner, or other person entitled to lawful possession of the motor vehicle, or if unclaimed, until lawful disposal of the motor vehicle has been effected by the towing service in accordance with state law. 
(9)  Towing services must be available to respond within 30 minutes to any scene where an officer will be standing by awaiting that response. In the event that 30 minutes expires without wrecker arrival, the officer may request the on-duty dispatcher to confirm the expiration of time, attempt to contact the tardy towing service to advise of the cancellation, and summon the next towing service on the appropriate list. In the event that the tardy towing service arrives after cancellation and summoning of another towing service, the tardy towing service will be turned away. Repeated failures to respond to any scene within 30 minutes may result in removal from the rotation list. 
(10)  The towing service must have a wrecker of sufficient size and strength to handle a job. A separate rotation list shall be maintained for the heavy-duty wreckers. Where services of a heavy-duty wrecker are needed, a heavy-duty wrecker shall be called from the heavy-duty wrecker list. 
(11)  Charges for work performed and storage fees must be in compliance with the current version of the South Carolina Highway Patrol Wrecker Rotation Fee Schedule which is published by the South Carolina Department of Public Safety. 
(12)  Wrecker operators must conduct themselves in a proper manner at all collision scenes and when dealing with the public. 
(13)  Towing services and operators shall be familiar, and comply, with the laws regarding business solicitations on South Carolina highways. 
(14)  Each towing service on the city franchise rotation list must have signs on its vehicle doors indicating the company's name, address, and telephone number. The signs must be plainly visible with letters not less than two inches high in a color which contrasts to that of the wrecker. 
(15)  Each wrecker on the vehicle rotation list shall be equipped with a towing log. The log shall be maintained by the towing service and shall accurately reflect all towing done by the towing service at the request of the Aiken Department of Public Safety. The towing log format should be the same design as now required by the South Carolina Highway Patrol. Each towing service owner shall be responsible for producing this towing log to the city upon request. 
(16)  All towing services on the city franchise rotation list shall carry liability insurance on its wreckers, and its premises, in an aggregate amount not less than $750,000.00. 
(17)  All towing services on the franchise lists shall carry garage keepers liability insurance covering customer's vehicles in a prorata amount calculated upon the basis of the square footage of vehicle storage space for that business on a formula approved by the city manager. In no event shall this garage keepers insurance be in an aggregate amount of less than $50,000.00. 
(18)  Towing services shall be responsible for securing personal property in a vehicle at a towing scene to the best of their ability. In no event, however, shall a towing service be responsible for personal items that do not come into the possession of the towing service. 
(19)  The towing service shall be available to release, within a reasonable period of time, all essential personal property in any towed vehicle to the rightful owner on a 24-hour per day, seven-day per week basis. The towing service location shall have an agent present during normal business hours and at the request of any rightful owner of any towed vehicle, or owner's designee, the towing service must immediately release all essential personal items including, but not limited to, medicines, medical equipment, keys, clothing, tools of their trade, child restraint systems, and perishable items. 
(20)  The towing service shall, upon receipt of proof of ownership or right of possession and the payment of service fees for the motor vehicle, release the motor vehicle to its owner or other person entitled to its lawful possession. Towing services shall effect the release of motor vehicles during all service hours, and shall provide the person taking possession of the motor vehicle an itemized invoice specifying all service fees paid, and record and maintain for the term of the franchise, plus three years, the following information for each motor vehicle released: 
a.  Date and time of release. 
b.  Motor vehicle year, make, model, body style, and VIN. 
c.  License plate number and state. 
d.  Name, address, driver's license number and state; and the residence and business telephone number for the person taking motor vehicle possession. 
(21)  Any complaints from a towing service regarding any incidents involving a public safety officer or the department's operation of the wrecker list must be received by the director of public safety within 15 days of the alleged incident. 
(22)  Failure of any towing service to comply with these regulations may result in their removal from the rotation list. Violation of any of these provisions is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 05092011, § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 03112019 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 46-264. - Rules and regulations for heavy duty towing services. 
All towing services granted a heavy duty nonexclusive towing service franchise must comply with the following: 
(1)  All towing services shall maintain a secure storage area for all vehicles towed. This may be a locked building or a secured fenced-in area where the stored vehicles and other property shall not be accessible to the public. Each service will have personnel available during normal business hours for the public to have access to their vehicle, if needed. 
(2)  Each towing service shall provide the department of public safety with normal working hours, business day and night phone numbers, holiday phone numbers, pager numbers, and cellular phone numbers, as available. 
(3)  All wreckers shall be equipped with, and utilize, legally authorized lighting and other safety equipment to protect the motoring public. This equipment shall be maintained in good working order. 
(4)  The following equipment must be carried on all wreckers: brooms, shovels, a container to haul glass and other debris from the highway, a five-pound-ABC-rated fire extinguisher, absorbent material, and safety chains and tie-down chains (for haulers rollback). The towing service shall clean the roadway prior to leaving a wreck scene. 
(5)  Towing services shall be available to the department of public safety 24 hours each day, seven days per week, and 52 weeks per year. Each towing service shall keep its facilities adequately staffed during all service hours. Each towing service shall respond to a request for the release of a motor vehicle from its service facility the following business day or on an agreed upon time of release that is within reason for both parties. 
(6)  Towing services shall not respond to a scene for service unless requested by a proper public safety authority. 
(7)  Motor vehicles that have been reported stolen or which have been designated as evidence shall be towed to a location to be determined by the officer on the scene. Once a stolen vehicle is approved by the department of public safety for release, the vehicle owner, or the owner's designee, must show proof that the towing charge has been paid, and then the owner's vehicle will be returned. 
(8)  All other motor vehicles must be towed to the service's facility and secured there until claimed by the owner, or other person entitled to lawful possession of the motor vehicle, or if unclaimed, until lawful disposal of the motor vehicle has been effected by the towing service in accordance with state law. 
(9)  Towing services must be available to respond within 45 minutes to any scene where an officer will be standing by awaiting that response. In the event that 45 minutes expires without wrecker arrival, the officer may request the on-duty dispatcher to confirm the expiration of time, attempt to contact the tardy towing service to advise of the cancellation, and summon the next towing service on the appropriate list. In the event that the tardy towing service arrives after cancellation and summoning of another towing service, the tardy towing service will be turned away. Repeated failures to respond to any scene within 45 minutes may result in removal from the rotation list. 
(10)  The towing service must have a wrecker of sufficient size and strength to handle a job. A separate rotation list shall be maintained for the heavy-duty wreckers. Where services of a heavy-duty wrecker are needed, a heavy-duty wrecker shall be called from the heavy-duty wrecker list. 
(11)  Charges for work performed and storage fees must be in compliance with the current version of the South Carolina Highway Patrol Wrecker Rotation Fee Schedule which is published by the South Carolina Department of Public Safety. 
(12)  Wrecker operators must conduct themselves in a proper manner at all collision scenes and when dealing with the public. 
(13)  Towing services and operators shall be familiar, and comply, with the laws regarding business solicitations on South Carolina highways. 
(14)  Each wrecker on the city towing service rotation list must have signs on its vehicle doors indicating the company's name, address, and telephone number. The signs must be plainly visible with letters not less than two inches high in a color which contrasts to that of the wrecker. 
(15)  Each wrecker on the vehicle rotation list shall be equipped with a towing log. The log shall be maintained by the towing service and shall accurately reflect all towing done by the towing service at the request of the Aiken Department of Public Safety. The towing log format should be the same design as now required by the South Carolina Highway Patrol. Each towing service owner shall be responsible for producing this towing log to the city upon request. 
(16)  All towing services on the rotation list shall carry liability insurance on its wreckers, and its premises, in an adequate amount not less than $750,000.00. 
(17)  All towing services on the rotation list shall carry garage keepers liability insurance covering customer's vehicles in a prorata amount calculated upon the basis of the square footage of vehicle storage space for that business on a formula approved by the city manager. In no event shall this garage keepers insurance be in an aggregate amount of less than $50,000.00. 
(18)  Towing services shall be responsible for securing personal property in a vehicle at a towing scene to the best of their ability. In no event, however, shall a towing service be responsible for personal items that do not come into the possession of the towing service. 
(19)  The towing service shall immediately release personal property in any towed vehicle to the rightful owner on a 24-hour per day, seven-day per week basis. The towing service location shall have an agent present during normal business hours and at the request of any rightful owners of any towed vehicle, or owners' designee, the towing service must immediately release personal items including, but not limited to, medicines, medical equipment, keys, clothing, tools of their trade, child restraint systems, and perishable items. 
(20)  Towing services shall, upon receipt of proof of ownership or right of possession and the payment of service fees for the motor vehicle, release the motor vehicle to its owner or other person entitled to its lawful possession. Towing services shall effect the release of motor vehicles during all service hours, and shall provide the person taking possession of the motor vehicle an itemized invoice specifying all service fees paid, and record and maintain for the term of the franchise, plus three years, the following information for each motor vehicle released: 
a.  Date and time of release. 
b.  Motor vehicle year, make, model, body style, and VIN. 
c.  License plate number and state. 
d.  Name, address, driver's license number and state; and the residence and business telephone number for the person taking motor vehicle possession. 
(21)  Any complaints from a towing service regarding any incidents involving a public safety officer or the department's operation of the wrecker list must be received by the director of public safety within 15 days of the alleged incident. 
(22)  Failure of any towing service to comply with these regulations may result in their removal from the rotation list. Violation of any of these provisions is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 05092011, § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 03112019 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 46-265. - Public safety administration of franchise towing services. 
(a)  The wrecker rotation list shall be administered fairly and in a manner designed to ensure that all towing services on the list have an opportunity to provide involuntary towing service business arising from the rotation list. Standard procedure for selecting the next eligible wrecker on the city towing service rotation list will be made by proceeding to call the next service on the list. 
(b)  Towing services shall be called from the rotation lists as set forth above. If a particular towing service is unavailable when called, it shall be passed over and the next wrecker on the appropriate list shall be called to the scene. However, if a towing service or wrecker driver is unable to answer the call, the dispatcher shall be notified about the reason for that towing service's unavailability and log it in the towing log book. Repeated failures by a towing service to respond to calls for service may result in removal from the rotation list. 
(c)  If an officer must cancel a wrecker, it will be done as soon as possible. If possible, the wrecker will be cancelled by the communications center prior to its arrival. However, if the wrecker must be cancelled at the scene, the officer shall inform the dispatcher to place the towing service back on the top of the appropriate rotation list. 
(d)  Aiken Department of Public Safety staff and officers are prohibited from owning any financial interest or any form of ownership interest in any towing service granted a franchise under this chapter. 
(e)  Aiken Department of Public Safety staff and officers are prohibited from recommending services from a particular towing service. 
(f)  Except in cases such as wrecked or disabled motor vehicles where the request for towing is made by a public safety officer at the direct request of the owner or driver of the vehicle, a tow report shall be completed for all motor vehicles for which services are provided. Upon completion of the tow report by the official it shall be reviewed for accuracy and signed by the official and towing service representative at the scene. Motor vehicles shall not be moved from the scene until the tow report has been completed and its removal authorized by the official. Tow reports must set forth at least the following minimum information: 
(1)  Status: Abandoned/derelict/confiscated/stolen/evidence/nuisance. 
(2)  Year, make, model, and body style of motor vehicle. 
(3)  Vehicle identification number (VIN). 
(4)  License plate number and state. 
(5)  Detailed description of the physical condition of the motor vehicle to include any damage, missing parts or accessories, and such other information as will accurately describe the motor vehicle's condition at the time of the tow. 
(6)  Itemized list of all personal property contained in the motor vehicle, as well as any personal property removed by the towing service or official for preservation and safekeeping. 
(7)  Name and address of last registered owner of vehicle. 
(8)  Name and address of all known registered lienholders. 
(9)  Name, badge number and signature of requesting officer. 
(10)  Towing service information. 
(g)  Except in cases such as wrecked or disabled motor vehicles where the request for towing is made by a public safety officer at the direct request of the owner or driver of the vehicle a towing report is not required. In these cases the towing service may obtain owner and lienholder information by making a written request to the Aiken Department of Public Safety. 
(Ord. No. 05092011, § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2011)  
Sec. 46-266. - Suspension from franchise list. 
Any towing service granted a nonexclusive franchise may be suspended by the director of public safety or his designee from such list if the towing service fails to comply with any of the conditions, regulations or requirements of this chapter. Upon learning of grounds for suspension, the director of public safety or his designee shall immediately, by written notice, inform the owner of the towing service of his action of suspension. The director of public safety or his designee may reinstate the towing service to the rotation list upon satisfactory proof that the towing service is in compliance with the conditions, regulations, and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05092011, § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2011)  
Sec. 46-267. - Removal from franchise list. 
(a)  Any towing service placed on the rotation list may be removed from such list for one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The towing service has been suspended from the rotation list at least once and repeatedly or intentionally fails to comply with any of the conditions, regulations or requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The towing service fails to perform the duties established by this chapter or the towing franchise agreement by any of the following: fails to timely answer calls, fails to respond to calls within a reasonable time, fails to maintain clean and orderly storage facilities, or at any time fails to clean the roadway of glass and debris at an accident scene. 
(3)  The owner of the towing service sells 51 percent or more of the business, provided the person or persons purchasing the business may apply for placement on the rotation list. 
(4)  The owner of a towing service applies for placement on the rotation list under another name. 
(5)  When any fact exists that would constitute a ground for denial of an application pursuant to this chapter or the towing franchise agreement. 
(b)  The director of public safety or his designee, upon learning of grounds for removal, shall immediately, by written notice, inform the owner of the towing service of his action of removal and the grounds for removal. Within ten days after receipt of the written notice, the owner shall have the right to file a written request for a hearing before the director of public safety or his designee. If the owner files a timely hearing request, the director of public safety or his designee shall set a time and place for the hearing. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimony, documents, and tangible evidence at a hearing on the issues and to be represented by counsel. 
(Ord. No. 05092011, § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2011)  
Sec. 46-268. - Appeal. 
(a)  Within five business days after receiving written notification that any applicant has been removed from the rotation list, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such order by filing a written notice of appeal, including a written statement stating the grounds of the appeal with the city clerk. The written statement shall include, but not be limited to, statements why the applicant believes the decision of the director of public safety should be reconsidered. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal and written statement, the city clerk shall set a time, date and place for a public hearing on the matter and shall notify the applicant of the hearing. The hearing shall be heard at a regular meeting of the council not later than 30 days after the written notice and statement was filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be heard by the city council, which may affirm, amend, or reverse the decision, or take other action deemed appropriate, subject to the limitations of the terms and conditions of the towing franchise agreement. 
(c)  In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited to the technical rules of evidence under the South Carolina Rules of Evidence. 
(d)  If no appeal is filed within the time prescribed, the action of the director of public safety or his designee shall be final. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, in the event that any appeal is filed, the appellant shall not be allowed to participate in any tows or be placed on the tow rotation list until such time as the appellant is approved or reinstated. 
(Ord. No. 05092011, § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2011) 


ZONING ORDINANCE 
City of Aiken, South Carolina 

Adopted: November 22, 1999 
Revised: June 2009 
Republished: May 2014 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
AIKEN, SOUTH CAROLINA 
(2014) 
____________ 
Fred Cavanaugh 
Mayor 
____________ 
Gail Diggs, District 1 
Lessie Price, District 2 
Dick Dewar, District 3 
Reggie Ebner, District 4 
Steve Homoki, District 5 
Philip Merry, District 6 
City Council 
____________ 
Richard Pearce 
City Manager 
____________ 
Liz Stewart, Chair 
Susan DeBruhl, Vice-Chair 
Robert K. Besley 
Kent Cubbage 
Jack Hunter 
John McMichael 
Charles Matthews 
Planning Commission 
____________ 
Ed Evans 
Planning Director 
____________ 
Sara Ridout 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Aiken, South Carolina. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1999 Code, as revised June 2009, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1999 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of three parts separated by a decimal. The figure before the first decimal refers to the chapter number. The figure after the first decimal is the article number. The figure after the second decimal refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1, article 2, is numbered 1.2.1. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
ZONING CODE 1:1 ZONING CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES ZCT:1 ZONING CODE INDEX Zi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice-President of Supplementation, and Kelly Heaton and Janet Cramer, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Sara Ridout, City Clerk, and Ed Evans, Planning Director, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Aiken, South Carolina. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Aiken, South Carolina. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Aiken, South Carolina. 2014. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 04142014B  4-14-2014 Included 05122014B  5-12-2014 Included 07142014D  7-14-2014 Included 10132014B 10-13-2014 Included Supp. No. 2 06222015C  6-22-2015 Included 10262015B 10-26-2015 Included 11092015 11- 9-2015 Included 12142015C 12-14-2015 Included 02082016B  2- 8-2016 Included 02082016C  2- 8-2016 Included Supp. No. 3 04252016  4-25-2016 Included 07102017  7-10-2017 Included 07102017A  7-10-2017 Included Supp. No. 4 11122018C 11-12-2018 Included  
ZONING ORDINANCE-GENERAL PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL 

1.1.1. - Short Title. 
    This Ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance," and the map herein referred to, which is identified by the title "Zoning Map, City of Aiken, South Carolina," shall be known as the "Zoning Map". 
1.1.2. - Authority. 
    This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 29 of Title 6 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, as amended, including the amendments in the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994, except where specific reference is made to authority granted by other provisions of said Code. 
1.1.3. - Purpose. 
    This Ordinance is intended to ensure that development is compatible with existing and future needs of the community, while promoting the public health, safety, convenience, order, appearance, prosperity, and general welfare, in accordance with the purposes provided in Section 6-29-710, Code of Laws of South Carolina. Specific purposes of this Ordinance include, but are not limited to, the following. 
1.  Provide for adequate light, air, and open space. 
2.  Prevent the overcrowding of land, avoid undue concentrations of population, and lessen street congestion. 
3.  Facilitate creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community. 
4.  Protect and preserve scenic, historic, or ecologically sensitive areas. 
5.  Regulate population density and distribution of population, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, airports and approaches thereto, water supply, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes. 
6.  Facilitate economic growth and business development. 
7.  Facilitate the adequate provision or availability of transportation, police and fire protection, water, sewage disposal, schools, parks and other recreational facilities, affordable housing, disaster evacuation, and other public services. 
8.  Secure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers. 
9.  Further the public welfare in any other way specified by City Council. 
1.1.4. - Jurisdiction. 
    This Ordinance and the provisions it contains shall govern all development within the incorporated area of the City of Aiken, as now or may be hereafter established, together with such unincorporated areas of Aiken County which City Council and the Aiken County Council may jointly agree to become governed by this Ordinance. 
1.1.5. - Zoning Affects Every Building, Structure, and Use. 
    No building, structure, or premises shall be used, and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, moved, remodeled, extended, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with this Ordinance. In addition, no other activity, including land clearing or tree removal, regulated by this Ordinance shall be authorized unless in conformity with this Ordinance. 
1.1.6. - Minimum Requirements. 
    In interpreting and applying provisions of this Ordinance, these provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. 
1.1.7. - Reduction of Lot Area or Increase in Density. 
    No lot shall be so reduced or subdivided in a way that causes it not to meet the requirements in this Ordinance for minimum lot area and lot width, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the regulations herein established. 
1.1.8. - Conflicting Provisions. 
    Where there is a conflict or apparent conflict between provisions of this Ordinance, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
    Where it is possible to implement, administer, or construe a particular provision in more than one way, it shall be implemented, administered, or construed in the way that eliminates or minimizes conflicts with other provisions of this Ordinance. 
    Whenever this Ordinance imposes a more restrictive standard than required by any other City ordinances or requirements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Conversely, whenever any City ordinance or requirement imposes a stricter standard than required by this Ordinance, the provisions of such City ordinance or requirement shall govern. 
1.1.9. - Relationship to Deed Restrictions. 
    Public regulation of land is entirely separate from and independent of private deed restrictions. No weight shall be given to the effect of deed restrictions in construing this Ordinance, nor shall this Ordinance be given inappropriate consideration in the construction of deed restrictions. Where there is a conflict between this Ordinance and any private restrictions, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
1.1.10. - Relationship to Comprehensive Plan. 
    It is intended that this Ordinance implement the planning policies adopted as part of the City's Comprehensive Land Use and Transportation Plan (hereafter, the "Comprehensive Plan"), as amended and periodically updated, including all supplements and attachments thereto. 
1.1.11. - Enactment of Interim Ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Ordinance may be superseded from time to time by the enactment of interim ordinances that affect the timing and issuance of approvals or other standards or provisions of this Ordinance during the period specified by the interim ordinance. Any provision of this Ordinance not specifically regulated by the interim ordinance shall not be affected. 
1.1.12. - Effective Date. 
    The effective date of this codified, updated, and amended Ordinance shall be November 22, 1999. 
1.1.13. - Validity. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
1.1.14. - Civil Liability of City. 
    Nothing contained in or omitted from this Ordinance is or shall be construed as a basis for imposing civil liability upon the City, its officers, or employees. The City, its officers, and employees shall not be liable for any injury, damage, loss, expense, or death arising from or related to any act performed pursuant to this Ordinance, including but not limited to inspections, certifications, approvals, denials, and acceptances; the failure to perform any such act; or the adherence to or failure to adhere to any provision, standard, or requirement set forth in this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 2. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

1.2.1. - Pending Construction. 
A.  Building Permits. Nothing in this Ordinance shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or designated use of any building, structure, or part thereof, for which a building permit has been granted prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or a change in this Ordinance, provided construction shall start consistent with the terms and conditions of the building permit and proceed to completion in a timely manner. 
B.  Approved Site Plans. Nothing in this Ordinance shall require a change to a site plan approved prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, provided a building permit is issued within 60 days of the effective date of this Ordinance and construction starts consistent with the terms and conditions of the building permit and proceeds to completion in a timely manner. 
C.  Approved Concept Plans for PR or PC. Nothing in this Ordinance shall require a change to a concept plan for a Planned Residential or Planned Commercial district approved prior to the adoption of this Ordinance. Any additional approval required to implement a concept plan for which application is made after the effective date of this Ordinance shall follow the requirements in effect at the time of application. 
1.2.2. - Existing Home Occupations. 
    Any home occupation with a current, valid City of Aiken business license existing as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall be permitted to continue indefinitely as long as a business license is obtained each year. If a valid business license is not obtained, or if the business license is revoked, the home occupation may be re-established only in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
1.2.3. - District Conversion. 
    The district names in effect prior to the effective date of this Ordinance are hereby converted, as shown on the following table. 
Old District Conversion Table New RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS R-1 Residential Single-Family RS-15 R-1A Residential Single-Family RS-10 R-1B Residential Single-Family RS-8 R-1C Residential Single-Family RS-6 R-1H Residential Single-Family/Horse RSH R-1S Residential Single-Family/Stable RSS R-1M Residential Manufactured Home RSM R-2 Residential Multifamily Low-Density RML R-2A Residential Multifamily Low-Density RML R-3 Residential Multifamily High-Density RMH R-4 Residential Manufactured Home Park RMP SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS PR Planned Residential PR HD Horse District HD OS/P Open Space OS COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS P Limited Professional LP NB General Business GB PSC Planned Commercial PC CBD Downtown Business DB INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS LI Light Industrial LI SI Industrial I  
CHAPTER 2 - ZONING DISTRICTS 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL 

2.1.1. - Division of City into Districts. 
    In order to regulate and restrict the location of uses and buildings designed, erected, altered, moved, or occupied for specified purposes; to regulate and limit the height, bulk, and size of buildings hereafter erected, altered or moved; to regulate and limit the density of population and vehicular congestion; and to protect historic landmarks and districts, the City of Aiken, South Carolina, is hereby divided into Zoning Districts designated as follows. 
BASE ZONING DISTRICTS RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS RS-15 Residential Single-Family: 15,000 sq. ft. lot RS-10 Residential Single-Family: 10,000 sq. ft. lot RS-8 Residential Single-Family: 8,000 sq. ft. lot RS-6 Residential Single-Family: 6,000 sq. ft. lot RSH Residential Single-Family/Horse RSS Residential Single-Family/Stable RSA Residential Single-Family Attached RSM Residential Manufactured Home RML Residential Multifamily Low-Density RMH Residential Multifamily High-Density RMP Residential Manufactured Home Park SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS PR Planned Residential HD Horse District OS Open Space COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS LP Limited Professional LB Limited Business O Office/Institutional GB General Business PC Planned Commercial PI Planned Institutional DB Downtown Business INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS LI Light Industrial LM Limited Manufacturing (Ord. 10112004C) I Industrial OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS - H Historic District - OA Old Aiken Overlay District  
2.1.2. - Zoning Map. 
    The Zoning Districts referred to above shall be designated by boundaries on the Zoning Map which is attached hereto and is expressly made a part of this Ordinance. The map shall be updated within 60 days following annexation, rezoning, or other change. 
2.1.3. - Rules Governing District Boundaries. 
A.  Existing Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply. 
1.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. Where a street vacation has occurred, boundaries shall follow the revised lot lines approximating the previous centerline of the street. 
2.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. No lot shall be divided by such boundary. 
3.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits. 
4.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
5.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of ditches, streams, rivers, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
6.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in paragraphs 1 through 5 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the Planning Director. 
7.  Where boundaries cannot be determined using the paragraphs above, the Planning Director shall interpret the district boundaries in accordance with 6.2.2. 
B.  New District Boundaries. Any new zoning district boundary created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall follow a property line. 
2.1.4. - Annexations and Other Adjustments to City Limits. 
    Where City limits change by virtue of annexation or some other means, the following provisions shall apply. 
A.  Public notice shall be required for any proposed annexation. The City shall post a public notice sign on each street frontage of the subject property no later than 20 days prior to the public hearing before the Planning Commission. 
B.  An appropriate zoning district for the land areas proposed to be annexed shall be recommended to City Council by the Planning Commission. 
C.  Adjustments shall be made on the Zoning Map within 60 days after the effective date of any annexation. Information regarding the annexation shall be made readily available to the public in the interim. 
ARTICLE 2. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

2.2.1. - Single-Family (RS-15, RS-10, RS-8, RS-6) Districts. 
    The Residential Single-Family Districts provide for low-density residential neighborhoods by prohibiting multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, and any other incompatible use of land. The district designations incorporate the minimum lot size for easy reference (for example, RS-10 has a 10,000-square-foot minimum lot size). 
2.2.2. - Single-Family/Horse (RSH) District. 
    The Residential Single-Family/Horse (RSH) District provides for low-density residential neighborhoods on lots of at least one acre by prohibiting multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, and any other incompatible use of land, while allowing horses and stables that are not used for commercial purposes on single-family lots as an accessory use by right. This District shall be applied only to areas annexed to the City after April 11, 1988. 
2.2.3. - Single-Family/Stable (RSS) District. 
    The Residential Single-Family/Stable (RSS) District provides for low-density residential uses on large lots of at least three acres by prohibiting multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, and any other incompatible use of land, while allowing for open spaces suitable for horse pleasure stables and for single-family residential properties on which horses are kept. 
2.2.4. - Single-Family Attached (RSA) District. 
    The Residential Single-Family Attached (RSA) District provides for the development of three or more separate dwelling units each on its own lot but having common walls. The RSA District is intended primarily for areas near low-intensity commercial zones and may serve as a transition between such uses and areas of detached single-family dwellings. The RSA District includes mandatory design standards to promote appropriate design and compatibility with surrounding uses. (Ord. 06112007A) 
2.2.5. - Manufactured Home (RSM) District. 
    The Residential Manufactured Home (RSM) District provides for low-density residential neighborhoods by prohibiting multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, and any other incompatible use of land, while allowing for manufactured housing units. 
2.2.6. - Multifamily (RML, RMH) Districts. 
    The Multifamily Districts provide for medium- to high-density residential neighborhoods made up of attached single-family and multifamily units protected from incompatible land uses. 
2.2.7. - Manufactured Home Park (RMP) District. 
    The Manufactured Home Park (RMP) District provides a sound and healthy residential environment for manufactured home parks through design standards and protection from incompatible uses. 
ARTICLE 3. - SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS 

2.3.1. - Planned Residential Development (PR) District. 
    The Planned Residential (PR) District permits greater flexibility and more creative and imaginative design for the development of residential areas than is generally possible in other residential districts while potentially allowing a limited range of nonresidential uses primarily serving the residents of the PR project. In exchange for there typically being no minimum lot sizes and widths or minimum setbacks, and a variety of housing types, the developer gives City Council control of the details of a proposed project through approval of a concept plan. The District promotes more economical and efficient use of the land, a harmonious variety of housing types, a higher level of amenities, compatibility with surrounding uses, preservation of natural features and open space, and the interconnection of trails and sidewalks. 
(Ord. 11272006A) 
2.3.2. - Horse (HD) District. 
    The Horse (HD) District provides for the protection and creation of open spaces and facilities necessary for horse-training businesses, polo, and other equestrian activities, and prohibits land uses incompatible with such activities. 
2.3.3. - Open Space (OS) District. 
    The Open Space (OS) District is intended for environmentally sensitive areas and areas of open space (and related structures) that represent a valuable aesthetic asset, including such natural areas as remnant Carolina bays and the portions of Hitchcock Woods within the City limits, along with such historic open space areas as Rye Patch and Hopeland Gardens. 
ARTICLE 4. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

2.4.1. - Limited Professional (LP) District. 
    The Limited Professional (LP) District provides locations for blending limited-scale professional offices and selected institutions and service uses with residential uses. The floor area and design of such uses is regulated to ensure compatibility with adjacent residential areas. The District prohibits retail trade and is primarily intended to serve as a transition between more intense commercial uses and existing residential areas. 
2.4.2. - Limited Business (LB) District. 
    The Limited Business (LB) District provides for blending a limited range of retail and service activities of a pedestrian-oriented nature with residential uses. The floor area and design of such uses is regulated to ensure compatibility with adjacent residential areas. The District is primarily intended to serve as a transition between more intense commercial uses and existing residential areas. 
2.4.3. - Office/Institutional (O) District. 
    The Office/Institutional (O) District provides locations for a wide range of professional offices, institutions, selected service uses, and, where appropriate, residential uses. Primarily intended for location along major roadways, the District is also intended for areas dominated by institutions such as a hospital or college. 
2.4.4. - General Business (GB) District. 
    The General Business (GB) District allows a broad range of commercial uses offering both retail goods and services, and, where appropriate, residential uses. Because the district is intended to serve people from throughout the community who use automobiles to reach the uses, it is located along major roadways, but uses should also be accessible to pedestrians. 
2.4.5. - Planned Commercial (PC) District. 
    The Planned Commercial (PC) District provides for a group of commercial establishments offering a wide range of retail goods and services that are planned and developed as a unit, and, where appropriate, residential uses. The District requires adequate traffic controls on public streets, sufficient off-street parking and off-street loading, and protection of adjacent neighborhoods through buffering. 
2.4.6. - Planned Institutional (PI) District. 
    The Planned Institutional zone provides locations for schools, churches, and some other institutional uses in locations which may affect residential or other more restrictive zones or less intense uses. The District requires a concept plan approved by City Council after Planning Commission review which may address site layout, building design, tree protection and buffers, and other issues to assure compatibility with surrounding uses. 
(Ord. 09082008C) 
2.4.7. - Downtown Business (DB) District. 
    The Downtown Business (DB) District provides for the central commercial and civic functions in the City in a compact area offering maximum convenience. Although activities are intended to be walking-scale, they serve the entire community. The integration of retail, service, entertainment, government, and residential uses is encouraged. 
ARTICLE 5. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

2.5.1. - Light Industrial (LI) District. 
    The Light Industrial (LI) District provides for low-intensity industrial uses, warehousing, and wholesaling activities that do not overburden the available streets, infrastructure, or public services. 
2.5.2. - Limited Manufacturing (LM) District. 
    The Limited Manufacturing (LM) District provides low and medium-intensity manufacturing and industrial uses, warehousing, and wholesaling activities that do not overburden the available streets, infrastructure, or public services. (Ord. 10112004C) 
2.5.3. - Industrial (I) District. 
    The Industrial (I) District provides for a wide variety of industrial uses, warehousing, and wholesaling activities that do not overburden the available streets, infrastructure, or public services. 
ARTICLE 6. - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

2.6.1. - Historic Preservation (-H) Overlay District. 
A.  It is essential that the qualities, areas, sites, structures, and natural and man-made objects relating to the history of the City of Aiken, as well as that of Aiken County, the State of South Carolina, and the United States of America, be preserved and that a generally harmonious exterior appearance of areas, sites, structures, and objects that preserves property values and attracts businesses, tourists, and residents alike be promoted. The purpose of the Historic Preservation (-H) Overlay District is to promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public through preservation and protection of historically, architecturally, and archeologically valuable areas, sites, structures, objects, districts, and neighborhoods along with the promotion of a general harmony as to style, form, proportion, and texture between historic structures and those of more modern design. 
B.  Through historic preservation and the encouragement of harmonious outward appearance, the Historic Preservation Overlay District and its related review procedures will help ensure the following. 
1.  Safeguard the heritage of the City of Aiken so that its historic areas, sites, structures, neighborhood districts, and objects continue to be a distinctive aspect of the City and a visible reminder of the special historical and cultural heritage of the City; 
2.  Preserve the integrity and stability of neighborhoods and business areas; 
3.  Conserve and enhance property values of historic areas, sites, structures, districts, neighborhoods, and geographically associated areas; and 
4.  Promote the continued attraction of businesses, residents, and tourists thereby strengthening the local economy. 
2.6.2. - Old Aiken Overlay (-OA) District. 
    This district is designed to promote a high level of aesthetics and the economic stability of the downtown area by protecting and enhancing the appearance of existing structures and the appearance of new structures. The downtown area is the heart of the City and deserves special protection that this district provides. 
CHAPTER 3 - USE REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - USE TABLES 

3.1.1. - Types of Use. 
    All of the Use Categories listed in the following Use Tables are defined and described in Article 2 of this Chapter. The following paragraphs serve as a key to the Use Tables and indicate how each specific use is treated. 
A.  Uses Permitted By Right. A "P" indicates that a use is allowed by right. Such uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Ordinance. 
B.  Conditional Uses. A "C" indicates a use that is allowed provided that it meets the additional listed standards contained in Article 3 of this Chapter. Conditional uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Ordinance. 
C.  Special Exceptions. An "SE" indicates that a use is allowed only if approved as a special exception by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the procedures of 6.2.18. Special exception uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Ordinance, including the additional listed standards contained in Article 3 of this Chapter. 
D.  Use Permitted in Planned Residential. A "?" indicates a use that may be permitted within a Planned Residential if approved by City Council, in accordance with the procedures of 6.2.16, including the additional listed standards contained in Article 3 of this Chapter. 
E.  Uses Not Allowed. The symbol "-" indicates that a use is not allowed. 
F.  Design Standards. The final column titled "Design Standards" contains a cross-reference to standards that apply to specific uses in Article 3. 
G.  Uses Not Listed. The Planning Director shall use the criteria in 3.2.1.C to determine how an unlisted use should be treated. 
3.1.2. - Prohibited Uses. 
A.  Uses Not Permitted in Commercial Districts. Uses determined by the Building Official to constitute a hazard, danger, or nuisance to the public because of noise, odor, glare, particulate matter, traffic impediments, or similar reasons, including the storage of hazardous materials (as defined by the National Fire Protection Association Guide or any successor publication thereto officially used by the Building Official) shall not be permitted in any commercial district. 
B.  Other Uses Not Permitted. Due to the limited industrial character and environmental assets of Aiken, the following uses are considered noxious and inappropriate and are therefore prohibited within the City limits. 
1.  Battery manufacturing or recycling. 
2.  Intensive agriculture, including hog farming. 
3.  Meat packing. 
4.  Petroleum refining and storage. 
5.  Plastics manufacturing. 
6.  Pulp and paper manufacturing. 
7.  Rubber manufacturing. 
8.  Tanneries. 
3.1.3. - Uses Permitted in the OS District. 
    The only principal use permitted by right in the OS District is passive recreation. Accessory uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Zoning Appeals, including, but not limited to: stables and training of horses; parks and picnic grounds; horseback riding trails or paths; bicycle paths; caretaker's facilities; amphitheaters and stages; meeting facilities; museums; accessory restaurants and food service areas; botanical gardens; nature study areas; and similar uses. 
3.1.4. - Accessory Uses Listed in Use Tables. 
    Only those accessory uses that are regulated by district are included in the following use tables. Other typical accessory uses are found in the Use Category definitions in Article 2 of this Chapter. 
3.1.5. - Residential District Use Table. 
USE TABLE KEY: 
P = Use Permitted By Right 
SE = Special Exception Use   
C = Conditional Use 
- = Not permitted  
USE
CATEGORY SPECIFIC USE RS-15 RS-10 RS-8 RS-6 RSH RSS RSA RSM RML RMH RMP PR Design
Stds. RESIDENTIAL USES (See 3.2.2) Household Living Single-Family, Detached P P P P P P P P P P C ? Duplex - - - - - - - - P P - ? Single-Family, Attached - - - - - - P - - - - ? 3.3.18 Multifamily - - - - - - - - P P - ? Group Home, Type 1 P P P P P P - P P P P ? Manufactured Home - - - - - - - C - - C ? 3.3.16 Mfd. Home Subdivision - - - - - - - P - - - ? 4.2.7 Group Living Group Home, Type 2 - - - - - - - - P P - ? 3.3.12 Residential Assisted Living Facility - - - - - - - - P P - ? All Other Group Living - - - - - - - - SE SE - ? 3.3.13 HORSE-RELATED USES (See 3.2.3) Horses Equestrian Facility (Polo, Dressage, Race Track, Training Facility) - - - - - SE - - - - - ? Equine Hospital, Surgical Facility, Farrier - - - - - SE - - - - - ? Riding or Driving School - - - - - SE - - - - - ? Stable, Commercial - - - - - SE - - - - - ? Stable, Pleasure SE SE SE SE C C SE - SE SE - ? 3.3.21 PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES (See 3.2.4) Community Service All Community Service SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE ? Day Care All Day Care (caring for over 6 persons) - - - - - - - - C C C ? 3.3.7 Educational Facilities College, Other Higher Educational Facility SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE ? School, Public or Private SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE ? Government Facilities City Public Project P P P P P P P P P P P ? Institutions Religious Institution SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE ? Parks and Open Areas Cemetery SE SE SE SE - - - - - - - ? Golf Course SE - - - - SE - - - - - ? Private Noncommercial Recreation, Country Club - - - - - SE - - SE SE SE ? Utilities Minor Utility P P P P P P P P P P P ? Telecommunications Antenna (on existing structure other than a tower) SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE ? 3.3.22 COMMERCIAL USES (See 3.2.5) Overnight Accommodation Bed and Breakfast, Home Stay (1 to 3 rooms) SE - - - SE SE - - SE SE - ? 3.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Inn 
(4 to 10 rooms) - - - - - SE - - SE SE - ? 3.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Meeting Facility - - - - - - - - - - - ? 3.3.4 ACCESSORY USES (See appropriate section for principal use and Chapter 3, Article 4) Accessory Uses Accessory Apartment C C C C C C - - - - - ? 3.4.1 Second Accessory Apartment - - - - - SE - - - - - ? 3.4.1 Home Occupation, Type 1 C C C C C C C C C C C ? 3.4.5 Home Occupation, Type 2 SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE ? 3.4.5  
3.1.6.   Nonresidential District Use Table.
USE TABLE KEY: 
P = Use Permitted By Right 
SE = Special Exception Use   
C = Conditional Use 
- = Not permitted   
? If allowed through approval 
of a concept plan by City Council.  
USE
CATEGORY SPECIFIC USE LP LB O GB PC DB PI LI LM I PR HD OS Design
Stds. Household Living Single-Family, Detached P P C C C P ? SE SE SE ? SE See 3.1.3 3.3.21 Duplex P P C C C P ? SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.8 Single-Family, Attached P P C C C P ? SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.20 Multifamily - - SE SE P P ? SE SE SE ? - Group Home, Type 1 P P C C C P ? SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.11 Upper-Story Residential P P C C C P ? SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.26 Group Living Group Home, Type 2 - - C C C SE ? - - - ? - 3.3.12 Group Home, Type 3 - - - SE - SE ? - - - ? - 3.3.12 Nursing or Convalescent Home SE SE P P - SE ? - - - ? - Residential Assisted 
Living Facility - - P P P P ? SE SE SE ? - All Other Group Living - - P P P P ? SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.13 HORSE-RELATED USES (See 3.2.3) Horses Equestrian Facility (Polo, Dressage, Race Track, Training Facility) - - - - - - - P P P ? P See 3.1.3 Equine Hospital, Surgical Facility, Farrier - - - - - - - P P P ? P Riding or Driving School - - - - - - - P P P ? P Stable, Commercial - - - - - SE - C C C ? C 3.3.22 Stable, Pleasure SE SE - - - - - C C C ? C 3.3.23 Tack Shops 
(Ord. 05142001A) - - - P P P - P P - ? SE PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES (See 3.2.4) Community Service All Community Service SE SE SE SE SE SE ? - - - ? - See 3.1.3 Day Care All Day Care C C C C C C ? C C - ? - 3.3.7 Educational Facilities College, Other Higher 
Educational Facility SE SE P P P P ? - - - ? - School, Public or Private SE SE P P P P ? - - - ? - Government Facilities Ambulance Service - - P P P SE - P P P ? - City Public Project P P P P P P ? P P P - P All Other Public Projects SE SE SE SE SE SE ? SE SE SE ? - Hospitals All Hospitals - - P P - SE - - - - ? - Institutions Religious Institution SE SE P P P P ? P P - ? - All Other Institutions SE SE SE P P SE ? - - - ? - Parks and Open Areas Cemetery SE SE SE SE - SE - - - - ? - Golf Course P P - P - - - - - - ? - Private Noncommercial Recreation, Country Club SE SE P P P P - - - - ? - Passive Open Space P P P P P P - P P P ? P P Passenger Terminal All Passenger Terminals - - - P - SE - SE SE SE ? - See 3.1.3 Utilities Major Non-City Utility - - - SE SE SE - P P P ? - Minor Utility P P P P P P - P P P ? P Telecommunications 
Antenna (new or on 
existing structure) C C C C C C - P P P ? - 3.3.24 Telecommunications Tower - - SE SE SE - - C C C ? - 3.3.24 COMMERCIAL USES (See 3.2.5) Eating Establishments With Drive-Through - - - P P - - SE SE SE ? - See 3.1.3 With Seating, No Drive-Through - C SE P P P - SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.9 Without Seating or Drive-Through - C P P P P - SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.9 Entertainment, Outdoor All Outdoor Entertainment - - - C C SE - C C C ? - 3.3.19 Office Health Services Except Hospitals P P P P P P - - - - ? - Other Offices P P P P P P - - - - ? - Overnight Accommodation Bed and Breakfast, Home Stay (up to 3 rooms) SE - - - - - - - - - ? - 3.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Inn 
(4 to 10 rooms) SE SE P P P P - - - - ? - 3.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Meeting Facility SE - - - - - - - - - ? - 3.3.4 Hotel, Inn or Motel - - SE P P P - - - - ? - Parking, Commercial All Commercial Parking - - - P P P - P P P ? - Retail Sales and Service Adult Business - - - - - - - - - SE - - 3.3.2 Bank with Drive-through - - P P P P - - - - ? - Bank without Drive-through - C P P P P - - - - ? - 3.3.3 Convenience Store - - SE P P P - - - - ? - 3.3.6 Copy Shop, Quick Printer, Quick Sign Shop - P P P P P - P P P ? - Crematorium - - - - - - - SE SE P - - Retail Sales and Service Department or Discount Store, Large Retail Project, Superstore, Power Center - - - P P P - - - - ? - See. 3.1.3 3.3.15 Funeral Home - - - P P P - P P - ? - Furniture Store - P - P P P - - - - ? - Grocery Store - P - P P P - - - - ? - Hardware, Paint, Glass, Wallpaper, or Carpet Store - P - P P P - - - - ? - Health Club or Spa - - P P P P - - - - ? - Indoor Firing Range - - SE SE SE SE - SE SE - - - Kennel, Boarding - - - SE SE SE - SE SE SE ? - Liquor Store - - - P P C - - - - ? - 3.3.16 Manufactured Housing Sales - - - P - - - P P P - - Nightclub or Bar - - - P P C - - - - ? - 3.3.18 Shopping Center - - - P P P - - - - ? - Truck Stop - - - P - - - - - P ? - Vehicle Parts Sales - - - P P P - P P P ? - Veterinary Hospital - - - C P SE - P P - ? - 3.3.27 Other Retail Sales or 
Service - SE P P P P - SE SE - ? - Self-Service Storage All Self-Service Storage - - - SE - - - P P P ? - Vehicle Sales and 
Service Auto Rental and Leasing - - - P P SE - P P P ? - Car Wash - - - P P C - - - - ? - 3.3.5 Fuel Sales - - - P C C - - - - ? - 3.3.10 Taxicab Service - - - P - - - P P P ? - Vehicle Sales and 
Service Towing Service - - - - - - - P P P ? - See. 3.1.3 Truck or Trailer Rental - - - C - - - P P P ? - 3.3.25 Vehicle Repair and Service - - - P P SE - P P P ? - Vehicle Sales - - - P P - - P P P ? - INDUSTRIAL USES (See 3.2.6) Heavy Industrial All Heavy Industrial - - - - - - - - - C ? - See 3.1.3 3.3.14 Restricted Industrial All Restricted Industrial - - - - - - - - C C ? - 3.3.14 Light Industrial Service All Light Industrial Service - - - - - - - C C C ? - 3.3.14 Warehouse and Freight Movement Moving and Storage - - - - - - - P P P ? - Warehousing - - - - - - - P P P ? - Waste-Related Service All Waste-Related 
Service - - - - - - - SE SE P - - Wholesale Trade Contractor's Materials - - - SE - - - P P P ? - Wholesale Business - - - SE - - - P P P ? - Wholesale Business with Accessory Retail Outlet - - - SE - - - P P P ? - ACCESSORY USES (See appropriate section for principal use and Chapter 3, Article 4) Accessory Uses Accessory Apartment C C C C C C - C C C ? SE See 3.1.3 3.4.1 Home Occupation, 
Type 1 P P P P P P - P P P ? P 3.4.5 Home Occupation, 
Type 2 SE SE SE SE SE SE - SE SE SE ? SE 3.4.5 TEMPORARY USES (See Chapter 3, Article 5) Temporary Uses Open Air Sales - SE SE P P P - P P - ? - See 3.1.3 3.5.4  
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
3.1.6. - Nonresidential District Use Table. 
USE TABLE KEY: 
P = Use Permitted By Right 
SE = Special Exception Use   
C = Conditional Use 
- = Not permitted   
? If allowed through approval 
of a concept plan by City Council.  
USE
CATEGORY SPECIFIC USE LP LB O GB PC DB PI LI LM I PR HD OS Design
Stds. Household Living Single-Family, Detached P P C C C P ? SE SE SE ? SE See 3.1.3 3.3.21 Duplex P P C C C P ? SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.8 Single-Family, Attached P P C C C P ? SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.20 Multifamily - - SE SE P P ? SE SE SE ? - Group Home, Type 1 P P C C C P ? SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.11 Upper-Story Residential P P C C C P ? SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.26 Group Living Group Home, Type 2 - - C C C SE ? - - - ? - 3.3.12 Group Home, Type 3 - - - SE - SE ? - - - ? - 3.3.12 Nursing or Convalescent Home SE SE P P - SE ? - - - ? - Residential Assisted 
Living Facility - - P P P P ? SE SE SE ? - All Other Group Living - - P P P P ? SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.13 HORSE-RELATED USES (See 3.2.3) Horses Equestrian Facility (Polo, Dressage, Race Track, Training Facility) - - - - - - - P P P ? P See 3.1.3 Equine Hospital, Surgical Facility, Farrier - - - - - - - P P P ? P Riding or Driving School - - - - - - - P P P ? P Stable, Commercial - - - - - SE - C C C ? C 3.3.22 Stable, Pleasure SE SE - - - - - C C C ? C 3.3.23 Tack Shops 
(Ord. 05142001A) - - - P P P - P P - ? SE PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES (See 3.2.4) Community Service All Community Service SE SE SE SE SE SE ? - - - ? - See 3.1.3 Day Care All Day Care C C C C C C ? C C - ? - 3.3.7 Educational Facilities College, Other Higher 
Educational Facility SE SE P P P P ? - - - ? - School, Public or Private SE SE P P P P ? - - - ? - Government Facilities Ambulance Service - - P P P SE - P P P ? - City Public Project P P P P P P ? P P P - P All Other Public Projects SE SE SE SE SE SE ? SE SE SE ? - Hospitals All Hospitals - - P P - SE - - - - ? - Institutions Religious Institution SE SE P P P P ? P P - ? - All Other Institutions SE SE SE P P SE ? - - - ? - Parks and Open Areas Cemetery SE SE SE SE - SE - - - - ? - Golf Course P P - P - - - - - - ? - Private Noncommercial Recreation, Country Club SE SE P P P P - - - - ? - Passive Open Space P P P P P P - P P P ? P P Passenger Terminal All Passenger Terminals - - - P - SE - SE SE SE ? - See 3.1.3 Utilities Major Non-City Utility - - - SE SE SE - P P P ? - Minor Utility P P P P P P - P P P ? P Telecommunications 
Antenna (new or on 
existing structure) C C C C C C - P P P ? - 3.3.24 Telecommunications Tower - - SE SE SE - - C C C ? - 3.3.24 COMMERCIAL USES (See 3.2.5) Eating Establishments With Drive-Through - - - P P - - SE SE SE ? - See 3.1.3 With Seating, No Drive-Through - C SE P P P - SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.9 Without Seating or Drive-Through - C P P P P - SE SE SE ? SE 3.3.9 Entertainment, Outdoor All Outdoor Entertainment - - - C C SE - C C C ? - 3.3.19 Office Health Services Except Hospitals P P P P P P - - - - ? - Other Offices P P P P P P - - - - ? - Overnight Accommodation Bed and Breakfast, Home Stay (up to 3 rooms) SE - - - - - - - - - ? - 3.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Inn 
(4 to 10 rooms) SE SE P P P P - - - - ? - 3.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Meeting Facility SE - - - - - - - - - ? - 3.3.4 Hotel, Inn or Motel - - SE P P P - - - - ? - Parking, Commercial All Commercial Parking - - - P P P - P P P ? - Retail Sales and Service Adult Business - - - - - - - - - SE - - 3.3.2 Bank with Drive-through - - P P P P - - - - ? - Bank without Drive-through - C P P P P - - - - ? - 3.3.3 Convenience Store - - SE P P P - - - - ? - 3.3.6 Copy Shop, Quick Printer, Quick Sign Shop - P P P P P - P P P ? - Crematorium - - - - - - - SE SE P - - Retail Sales and Service Department or Discount Store, Large Retail Project, Superstore, Power Center - - - P P P - - - - ? - See. 3.1.3 3.3.15 Funeral Home - - - P P P - P P - ? - Furniture Store - P - P P P - - - - ? - Grocery Store - P - P P P - - - - ? - Hardware, Paint, Glass, Wallpaper, or Carpet Store - P - P P P - - - - ? - Health Club or Spa - - P P P P - - - - ? - Indoor Firing Range - - SE SE SE SE - SE SE - - - Kennel, Boarding - - - SE SE SE - SE SE SE ? - Liquor Store - - - P P C - - - - ? - 3.3.16 Manufactured Housing Sales - - - P - - - P P P - - Nightclub or Bar - - - P P C - - - - ? - 3.3.18 Shopping Center - - - P P P - - - - ? - Truck Stop - - - P - - - - - P ? - Vehicle Parts Sales - - - P P P - P P P ? - Veterinary Hospital - - - C P SE - P P - ? - 3.3.27 Other Retail Sales or 
Service - SE P P P P - SE SE - ? - Self-Service Storage All Self-Service Storage - - - SE - - - P P P ? - Vehicle Sales and 
Service Auto Rental and Leasing - - - P P SE - P P P ? - Car Wash - - - P P C - - - - ? - 3.3.5 Fuel Sales - - - P C C - - - - ? - 3.3.10 Taxicab Service - - - P - - - P P P ? - Vehicle Sales and 
Service Towing Service - - - - - - - P P P ? - See. 3.1.3 Truck or Trailer Rental - - - C - - - P P P ? - 3.3.25 Vehicle Repair and Service - - - P P SE - P P P ? - Vehicle Sales - - - P P - - P P P ? - INDUSTRIAL USES (See 3.2.6) Heavy Industrial All Heavy Industrial - - - - - - - - - C ? - See 3.1.3 3.3.14 Restricted Industrial All Restricted Industrial - - - - - - - - C C ? - 3.3.14 Light Industrial Service All Light Industrial Service - - - - - - - C C C ? - 3.3.14 Warehouse and Freight Movement Moving and Storage - - - - - - - P P P ? - Warehousing - - - - - - - P P P ? - Waste-Related Service All Waste-Related 
Service - - - - - - - SE SE P - - Wholesale Trade Contractor's Materials - - - SE - - - P P P ? - Wholesale Business - - - SE - - - P P P ? - Wholesale Business with Accessory Retail Outlet - - - SE - - - P P P ? - ACCESSORY USES (See appropriate section for principal use and Chapter 3, Article 4) Accessory Uses Accessory Apartment C C C C C C - C C C ? SE See 3.1.3 3.4.1 Home Occupation, 
Type 1 P P P P P P - P P P ? P 3.4.5 Home Occupation, 
Type 2 SE SE SE SE SE SE - SE SE SE ? SE 3.4.5 TEMPORARY USES (See Chapter 3, Article 5) Temporary Uses Open Air Sales - SE SE P P P - P P - ? - See 3.1.3 3.5.4  
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
ARTICLE 2. - USE CATEGORIES 

3.2.1. - General. 
A.  Basis for Classifications. Use Categories classify land uses and activities based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, likely impact on surrounding properties, and site conditions. The Use Categories provide a systematic basis for assigning land uses to appropriate zoning districts. 
B.  Principal Use Characteristics. A principal use is assigned to the Use Category that most closely corresponds to its nature as described in the "Characteristics" subsection of each Use Category. 
C.  Considerations Regarding Principal Uses. 
1.  Determination of the appropriate category for a proposed principal use shall be made by the Planning Director in accordance with the provisions of 6.2.2. 
2.  The following shall be used to determine (1) the appropriate category for a use not specifically listed in the Use Tables or the examples in the Use Category descriptions, and (2) whether a use is considered principal or accessory. 
a.  The actual or projected characteristics of the activity in relationship to the stated characteristics of each Use Category. 
b.  The relative amount of site area or floor space and equipment devoted to the activity. 
c.  Relative amounts of sales from each activity. 
d.  The customer type for each activity. 
e.  The relative number of employees in each activity. 
f.  Hours of operation. 
g.  Building and site arrangement. 
h.  Vehicles used and their parking requirements. 
i.  The relative number of vehicle trips generated. 
j.  Signs. 
k.  How the use is advertised. 
l.  The likely impact on surrounding properties. 
m.  Whether the activity is likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site. 
3.  When considering appropriate districts for a use not listed in the Use Tables, the district intent statements in Chapter 2 shall be taken into consideration. 
D.  Developments with Multiple Principal Uses. Developments with multiple principal uses shall conform to the following. 
1.  When all principal uses of a development fall within one Use Category, the entire development is assigned to that Use Category. 
2.  When the principal uses of a development fall within different Use Categories, each principal use is classified in the applicable Use Category and each use is subject to all applicable regulations for that Use Category. 
3.  Developments with multiple principal uses (such as shopping centers) shall incorporate only those uses allowed in the underlying district. 
E.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses are allowed by right in conjunction with a principal use unless otherwise stated elsewhere in this Ordinance. Also, unless otherwise stated, accessory uses are subject to the same regulations as the principal use. Common accessory uses are listed as examples in the Use Category descriptions. 
F.  Use of Examples. The "Examples" subsection of each Use Category lists uses common to that Use Category. The names of these sample uses are generic and are based on common meanings, not on what a specific use may call itself. For example, a use that calls itself "Wholesale Warehouse," but sells mostly to retail consumers, is included in the Retail Sales and Service category rather than the Wholesale Trade category. 
G.  Uses Not Included. The "Uses Not Included" subsection provides cross-references to uses that may appear to be part of a particular category, but which are explicitly handled in a different Use Category. 
3.2.2. - Residential Use Categories. 
A.  Household Living. 
1.  Characteristics. Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household on a month-to-month or longer basis. 
2.  Examples. Living in houses, duplexes, triplexes, other multi-dwelling structures, retirement center apartments, Type 1 group homes (group homes that are considered single-family residences), and other structures with self-contained dwelling units. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Recreational activities, raising of pets, hobbies, swimming pools, storage units, and off-street parking of the occupants' registered vehicles. Home occupations, including in-home care for under six persons (3.4.5) and accessory apartments (3.4.1), are accessory uses subject to additional regulations. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Lodging where unit is rented on a less-than-monthly basis (Overnight Accommodations). 
b.  Group homes that are not considered single-family residences such as Type 2 or Type 3 group homes (Group Living). 
c.  Nursing or convalescent home or residential assisted living facility not having individual dwelling units (Group Living). 
B.  Group Living. 
1.  Characteristics. Residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people that does not meet the definition of Household Living. Tenancy is usually arranged on a monthly or longer basis. Generally, Group Living structures have a common eating area for residents, and the residents may receive care, training, or treatment. 
2.  Examples. Type 2 group homes for the physically disabled, mentally retarded, or emotionally disturbed; Type 3 group homes for drug and alcohol treatment, and alternative or post-incarceration facilities; nursing or convalescent homes; residential assisted living facilities not having individual dwelling units; orphanages; dormitories, fraternities, and sororities; monasteries and convents. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Recreational facilities, associated offices, food preparation and dining facilities, and off-street parking of vehicles for occupants and staff. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than 30 days (Overnight Accommodations). 
b.  Lodging where residents meet the definition of a household, including Type 1 group homes (Household Living). 
c.  Congregate care facilities where individual units meet the definition of a dwelling unit (Household Living). 
d.  Hospices (Institutions). 
3.2.3. - Horse-Related Uses. 
1.  Characteristics. Uses and facilities related to both commercial and pleasure use of horses. 
2.  Examples. Commercial or pleasure stables; keeping of horses in paddocks; special equestrian facilities such as polo fields, horse show areas, dressage areas, racing tracks, and training facilities; repair of leather goods and tack; equine hospitals and surgical facilities; farriers; and riding or driving schools. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices; stables; tack rooms; trailer parking areas; storage containers for manure piles and feed; and storage of equipment, trailers, and carriages. Accessory apartments (3.4.1) are accessory uses subject to additional regulations. 
3.2.4. - Public and Civic Use Categories. 
A.  Community Service. 
1.  Characteristics. Uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature providing ongoing education, training, or counseling to the general public on a regular basis, without a residential component. 
2.  Examples. Libraries, museums, senior centers, community centers, youth club facilities, and social service facilities. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices; meeting areas; limited retail sales; food preparation and dining areas; off-street parking, health, day care, and therapy areas; indoor or outdoor recreation and athletic facilities. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  City community service (Public Project). 
b.  Private lodges or service clubs, and private or commercial athletic or health clubs (Retail Sales and Service). 
c.  Parks (Parks and Open Areas). 
d.  Treatment centers, hospices, and transient lodging or shelters (Institutions). 
e.  Counseling in an office setting (Office). 
B.  Day Care. 
1.  Characteristics. Uses providing care, protection, and supervision for more than six children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence. Care is typically provided to a given individual for fewer than 18 hours each day, although the facility may be open 24 hours each day. 
2.  Examples. Preschools, child care centers, nursery schools, latch-key programs, and adult day care programs. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices, recreation areas, food preparation and dining areas, and off-street parking. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  On-site public or private schools or facilities operated in connection with a business or other principal use where children are cared for while parents or guardians are occupied on the premises (Accessory Use). 
b.  In-home care for six or fewer individuals is considered a Type 2 Home Occupation (3.4.5). 
C.  Educational Facilities. 
1.  Characteristics. Public and private schools at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school level that provide basic academic education. Also includes colleges and other institutions of higher learning that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree usually in a campus setting. 
2.  Examples. Public and private daytime schools, boarding schools, military academies, universities, liberal arts colleges, community colleges, nursing and medical schools not accessory to a hospital, and seminaries. 
3.  Accessory Uses. 
a.  Schools: Play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sports facilities, auditoriums, and before- or after-school day care. 
b.  Colleges: Offices, housing for students and faculty, food service, day care, libraries, laboratories, health and sports facilities, theaters, meeting areas, off-street parking, maintenance facilities, and support commercial (a college-operated bookstore, for example). 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Preschools or nursery schools (Day Care). 
b.  Business, driving, and trade schools (Retail Sales and Service). 
D.  Government Facilities. 
1.  Characteristics. Offices, storage, maintenance, and other facilities for the operation of local, State, or federal government. 
2.  Examples. City Hall, maintenance facilities, fire stations, police stations, emergency medical and ambulance stations, detention centers, post offices, and local, State or federal offices. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Storage, maintenance and fueling facilities, satellite offices, cafeterias, auditorium and meeting rooms, day care, infirmaries, holding cells, and off-street parking areas. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  City facilities (Public Projects). 
b.  County, or State parks or recreational facilities (Parks and Open Areas). 
c.  Water and wastewater facilities, gas, electric, and other infrastructure services, whether public or private (Major or Minor Utility). 
d.  Waste and recycling services (Waste-Related Service). 
e.  Elementary and secondary schools, colleges, and technical schools (Educational Facilities). 
E.  Hospitals. 
1.  Characteristics. Uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and offering overnight care. 
2.  Examples. Medical centers and hospitals. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Out-patient clinics, offices, recreational facilities, laboratories, teaching facilities, meeting areas, cafeterias, day care, off-street parking, maintenance facilities, limited support retail, pharmacy, housing for staff or trainees, and temporary housing for relatives of patients. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Exclusive care and treatment for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents (Institutions). 
b.  Medical clinics that provide care where patients are not kept overnight (Office). 
F.  Institutions. 
1.  Characteristics. Uses that primarily provide meeting areas for religious activities, treatment of terminally ill or those with psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, and transient housing related to social service programs. 
2.  Examples. Churches, temples, synagogues, and mosques; treatment centers and hospices; and transient lodging or shelters for the homeless. 
3.  Accessory Uses. School and recreational facilities, meeting rooms, food service and dining areas, day care, cemeteries, columbariums, mausoleums, memorial parks, storage, off-street parking, and staff residences located on the same site. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Congregate care facilities where individual units meet the definition of a dwelling unit (Household Living). 
b.  Residential assisted living facilities (Group Living). 
c.  Type 1 Group Homes (Household Living). 
d.  Type 2 or Type 3 group homes (Group Living). 
e.  Elementary and secondary schools, colleges, and technical schools as a principal use (Educational Facilities). 
G.  Parks and Open Areas. 
1.  Characteristics. Non-City uses focusing on natural areas consisting mostly of vegetation, passive or active outdoor recreation areas, or community gardens, and having few structures. 
2.  Examples. Parks, golf courses, public swimming pools, non-commercial swim and/or tennis clubs, cemeteries, mausoleums and memorial parks, plazas, recreational trails, botanical gardens, and nature preserves; and membership clubs and lodges. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Clubhouses, swimming pools, maintenance facilities, concessions, caretaker's quarters, and off-street parking. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  City parks (Public Projects). 
b.  Commercial swimming pools, driving ranges, and miniature golf courses (Outdoor Entertainment). 
c.  Commercial tennis or swim clubs, health clubs or spas (Retail Sales and Service). 
H.  Passenger Terminal. 
1.  Characteristics. Non-City facilities for the takeoff and landing of airplanes and helicopters, and terminals for rail or bus service. 
2.  Examples. Airports, bus and train passenger terminals, and helicopter landing facilities. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Freight handling areas, concessions, offices, off-street parking, and maintenance and fueling facilities. 
4.  Uses Not Included. Private helicopter landing facilities that are accessory to another use (for example, Hospital or Government Facility). 
I.  Utilities. 
1.  Characteristics. Non-City public or private infrastructure serving a limited area with no on-site personnel (Minor Utility) or the general community and possibly having on-site personnel (Major Utility). 
2.  Examples. 
a.  Minor Utilities include water and sewage pump stations, stormwater retention and detention facilities, and telephone exchanges. 
b.  Major Utilities include water towers, waste treatment plants, communication towers, and electrical substations. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Control, monitoring, data or transmission equipment, limited storage, and off-street parking. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  City utilities (Public Projects). 
b.  Non-public maintenance yards and buildings (Light Industrial Service). 
c.  Non-public utility offices (Office). 
3.2.5. - Commercial Use Categories. 
A.  Eating Establishments. 
1.  Characteristics. Establishments that prepare and sell food for on or off-premise consumption. 
2.  Examples. Restaurants, drive-ins, fast-food establishments, yogurt or ice cream shops, outdoor vendors with permanent facilities, small-scale catering establishments, and pizza delivery. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Decks and patios for outdoor seating, drive-through facilities, customer and employee parking areas, and valet parking facilities. 
4.  Uses Not Included. Nightclubs and bars (Retail Sales and Service). 
B.  Entertainment, Outdoor. 
1.  Characteristics. Large, generally commercial uses providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation or entertainment-oriented activities. Primarily outdoors, activities may take place in a number of structures. 
2.  Examples. Golf driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, commercial tennis facilities and swimming pools, commercial amphitheaters, publicly- or privately-owned active sports facilities such as ballfields and basketball courts, or drive-in theaters. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Restaurants, bars, concessions, off-street parking, and maintenance facilities. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Indoor theaters (Retail Sales and Service). 
b.  Golf courses, private noncommercial recreation, or country club (Parks and Open Areas). 
c.  Special equestrian events or facilities (Horse-Related Use). 
d.  Indoor entertainment activities such as bowling alleys, game arcades, pool halls, dance halls, or indoor firing ranges (Retail Sales and Service). 
C.  Office. 
1.  Characteristics. Activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government, professional, medical, or financial services. 
2.  Examples. Professional services such as lawyers, accountants, bookkeepers, engineers, or architects; financial businesses such as lenders, investment or brokerage houses, collection agencies, or real estate and insurance agents; advertising offices; data processing; mail order or direct-mail offices; sales offices; government offices and public utility offices; TV and radio studios; educational and scientific research offices; medical and dental clinics or labs; nursing services; and blood-collection facilities. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Cafeterias, health facilities, technical libraries, meeting rooms, day care, off-street parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of on-site employees. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  City offices (Public Projects). 
b.  Offices that are part of and located with a principal use in another category (Accessory Use). 
c.  Contractors and others who perform services off-site, but store equipment and materials or perform fabrication or similar work on-site (Light Industrial Service). 
d.  Urgent care or emergency medical offices (Retail Sales and Service). 
D.  Overnight Accommodations. 
1.  Characteristics. Residential units arranged for short term stays of less than 30 days for rent or lease. 
2.  Examples. Bed and breakfast establishments, hotels, motels, inns, and extended-stay facilities. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Swimming pools and other recreational facilities, limited storage, offices, food preparation and dining facilities, laundry facilities, meeting facilities, and off-street parking. 
E.  Parking, Commercial. 
1.  Characteristics. Facilities that provide parking not accessory to a specific use for which a fee may or may not be charged. 
2.  Examples. Short- and long-term fee parking facilities; and mixed parking lots (partially accessory to a specific use, partly for rent to others). 
3.  Accessory Uses. Small structures intended to shield parking attendants from the weather. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Parking facilities that are accessory to a principal use, but that charge the public to park for occasional events nearby (Accessory Use). 
b.  Public transit park-and-ride facilities (Major Utility). 
c.  Sales or servicing of vehicles (Vehicle Sales and Service). 
F.  Retail Sales and Service. 
1.  Characteristics. Companies or individuals involved in the sale, lease, or rental of new or used products, or providing personal services or entertainment to the general public. 
2.  Examples. 
a.  Sales-Oriented: Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business goods including alcoholic beverages, antiques, appliances, art, art supplies, baked goods, bicycles, books, cameras, carpet and floor coverings, crafts, clothing, convenience goods, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, flowers, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware, home improvements, household products, jewelry, medical supplies, musical instruments, pet food and/or pets, pharmaceuticals, photo finishing, picture frames, plants, printed material, produce, sporting goods, stationery, tobacco and related products, and videos. 
b.  Personal Service-Oriented: Animal grooming; banks; business, driving, martial arts and other trade schools; dance, art, or music studios or classes; security services; dry-cleaning and laundry drop-off establishments; emergency medical care offices; hair, tanning, and personal care services; health clubs and gyms; laundromats; mortuaries; photographic studios; photocopy, blueprint, and quick-sign services; psychics and mediums; taxidermists; and veterinarians. 
c.  Entertainment-Oriented: Bars and taverns; indoor entertainment activities such as bowling alleys, game arcades, pool halls, dance halls, indoor firing ranges, and movie or other theaters. 
d.  Repair-Oriented: Locksmith; repair of appliances, bicycles, canvas products, clocks, guns, jewelry, musical instruments, office equipment, radios, shoes, televisions, and watches; tailor; and upholsterer. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices, food preparation and dining areas, a residential unit for security purposes, storage of goods, manufacture or repackaging of goods for on-site sale, off-street parking, and parking lot/sidewalk sales. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Restaurants (Eating Establishments). 
b.  Small-scale catering (Eating Establishments) and large-scale catering (Manufacturing and Production). 
c.  Laundry and dry-cleaning plants (Industrial Service). 
d.  Lumber yards and other building material sales that sell primarily to contractors and do not have a retail orientation (Wholesale Sales). 
e.  Repair and service of motor vehicles, motorcycles, and light and medium trucks (Vehicle Sales and Service). 
G.  Self-Service Storage. 
1.  Characteristics. Facilities providing separate storage areas for personal or business use designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing or removing personal property. 
2.  Examples. Mini-warehouses. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Living quarters for a resident manager or security, leasing offices, and outside storage of boats and campers. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  A transfer and storage business where there are no individual storage areas or where employees are the primary movers of the goods to be stored or transferred (Warehouse and Freight Movement). 
b.  Use of the storage areas for sales, service, and repair operations (Retail Sales and Service), or manufacturing (Manufacturing and Production). 
c.  Rental of trucks or equipment (Vehicle Sales and Service: Truck or Trailer Rental). 
H.  Vehicle Sales and Service. 
1.  Characteristics. Direct sales of and service to passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, and other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats, and recreational vehicles. 
2.  Examples. Full-service, mini-service, and self-service fuel stations; car washes; quick lubrication services; vehicle repair, transmission, or muffler shop; towing service; auto body shop; alignment shop; auto upholstery shop; auto detailing; tire sales and mounting; and sales, rental, or leasing of consumer vehicles including passenger vehicles, motorcycles, light and medium trucks, boats, and other recreational vehicles. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices, sales of parts, fueling, towing, and vehicle storage. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Refueling facilities for fleet vehicles that belong to a specific use (Accessory Use). 
b.  Vehicle parts sales as a principal use (Retail Sales and Service). 
3.2.6. - Industrial Use Categories. 
A.  Heavy Industrial. 
1.  Characteristics. Firms involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods using natural, man-made, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials. Activities may be considered noxious in terms of their impacts on surrounding uses due to noise, glare, dust, odor, or hazardous materials, or their high incidence of rail or truck traffic, and/or outdoor storage of products, materials, or equipment. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but, if so, they are a subordinate part of sales. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. 
2.  Examples. Concrete batching and asphalt mixing; fuel oil distributors; production or fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing; processing of food and related products, including seafood processing; large-scale catering establishments; sawmills; woodworking, including cabinet makers and furniture manufacturing; production of chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone, plastic, stone, or glass materials or products; clothing or textile manufacturing; movie production facilities; manufacture or assembly of equipment, instruments (including musical instruments), appliances, precision items, and other electrical items; production of artwork and toys; and sign making. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices, cafeterias, off-street parking, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage yards, repair facilities, truck fleets, and a residential unit for security purposes. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on-site and to the general public (Retail Sales and Service). 
b.  Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic material (Waste-Related Service). 
c.  Small-scale catering establishments (Eating Establishments). 
B.  Restricted Industrial. 
1.  Characteristics. Firms involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods using natural, man-made, secondary, or partially completed materials. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. Activities considered noxious because of their impacts on surrounding uses due to noise, glare, dust, odor, or hazardous materials, high incidence of rail or truck traffic, and/or outdoor storage of products, materials, or equipment are prohibited. 
2.  Examples. Fabrication of metal or metal products including appliances; woodworking including cabinet-making and furniture manufacturing; clothing manufacturing; movie production facilities; assembly of equipment, instruments, appliances, precision items, and other electrical items. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices, employee recreational facilities, cafeterias, day care, on-site repair facilities, off-street parking, storage, and a residential unit for security purposes. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Manufacture of passenger vehicles and heavy construction equipment (Heavy Industrial) 
b.  Concrete batching and asphalt mixing (Heavy Industrial) 
c.  Food processing (Heavy Industrial) 
d.  Fuel distribution (Heavy Industrial) 
e.  Sawmills (Heavy Industrial) 
f.  Textiles (Heavy Industrial) 
g.  Any use prohibited by 3.1.2 (Ord. 10112004C) 
C.  Light Industrial Service. 
1.  Characteristics. Firms engaged in the repair or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products mainly by providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. 
2.  Examples. Welding shops; machine shops; tool repair; electric motor repair; repair of scientific or professional instruments; building, heating, plumbing, or electrical contractors; printing, publishing, and lithography; exterminators; janitorial and building maintenance services; research, testing, and development laboratories; laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants; and photo-finishing laboratories. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices, employee recreational facilities, cafeterias, day care, on-site repair facilities, off-street parking, storage, and a residential unit for security purposes. 
4.  Uses Not Included. Contractors and others who perform services off-site if major equipment and materials are not stored on-site and fabrication or similar work is not carried on at the site (Office). 
D.  Warehouse and Freight Movement. 
1.  Characteristics. Firms involved in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer with little on-site sales activity to customers. 
2.  Examples. Separate warehouses used by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores; household moving and general freight storage; cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers; parcel services; and the stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other aggregate materials. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices, day care, truck fleet parking and maintenance areas, off-street parking, and a residential unit for security purposes. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Uses that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes (Waste-Related Service). 
b.  Mini-warehouses (Self-Service Storage). 
E.  Waste-Related Service. 
1.  Characteristics. Characterized by uses that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for transfer to another location and uses that collect sanitary wastes or that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material. 
2.  Examples. Waste transfer or composting, and recycling centers. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices, off-street parking, recycling of materials, on-site refueling and repair, and repackaging and transshipment of by-products. 
4.  Uses Not Included. Disposal of dirt, concrete, asphalt, and similar non-decomposable materials is considered fill. 
F.  Wholesale Trade. 
1.  Characteristics. Firms involved in the sale, lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or order-taking and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. 
2.  Examples. Sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy trucks, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment, and store fixtures; mail-order houses; and wholesalers of food, clothing, auto parts, and building hardware. 
3.  Accessory Uses. Offices, product repair, warehouses, cafeterias, day care, off-street parking, minor fabrication services, repackaging of goods, and a residential unit for security purposes. 
4.  Uses Not Included. 
a.  Firms that engage primarily in sales to the general public or on a membership basis (Retail Sales and Service). 
b.  Firms that are primarily storing goods with little on-site business activity (Warehouse and Freight Movement). 
ARTICLE 3. - STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES 

3.3.1. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this Article shall only apply to conditional or special exception uses in the Use Tables in Chapter 3, Article 1. Where a use is permitted in a PR or PC District that is considered a conditional or special exception use in another district, City Council may apply the specific use standards of this Article in approving the PR or PC District concept plans and any accompanying site plans. 
3.3.2. - Adult Businesses. 
A.  Location. An adult business shall not be located as follows. 
1.  On any lot or parcel within 1500 feet of any zoning district within which residential uses are permitted by right or of any lot or parcel on which a residential use exists; 
2.  On any lot or parcel within 1500 feet of any lot or parcel on which a church, other house of worship, or any religious use is located; 
3.  On any lot or parcel within 1500 feet of any lot or parcel on which a private or public school or educational use is located; 
4.  On any lot or parcel within 1500 feet of any lot or parcel on which a public playground, public swimming pool, public recreational area, public park, or similar use is located; or 
5.  On any lot or parcel within 1500 feet of any lot or parcel on which an adult business use is located. 
B.  Measurement. Distances cited above shall be measured from lot line to lot line at the closest point between the two lots, parcels, or districts, without respect to intervening buildings, structures, or vegetation. 
C.  Miscellaneous. 
1.  Adult businesses shall not allow persons under the age of eighteen years on the premises of the business. 
2.  This Section does not and shall not be construed to authorize or permit any form of activity, use, establishment, or business prohibited by other ordinances of the City or the laws of the State of South Carolina. 
3.3.3. - Bank, Credit Union, or Other Financial Institution. 
    A bank, credit union, or other financial institution located in the LB District shall provide only indoor transactions, which shall be further limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. No automated teller machine, drive-through windows, or night drop windows shall be permitted. Landscaped buffers adjacent to any residential district shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
3.3.4. - Bed and Breakfast Establishments. 
    In addition to promoting tourism, these provisions are also intended to allow the adaptive reuse of estates and dwellings of historic significance and appropriate new uses in Historic Districts. 
A.  Bed and Breakfast Home Stay. A Bed and Breakfast Home Stay with up to three bedrooms for registered overnight guests shall be subject to the following. 
1.  The use shall be owner-occupied. 
2.  The use shall not create noise, light, traffic, or other conditions detrimental to neighboring residents. 
3.  The use shall comply with City codes. 
4.  The resident owner shall maintain a register listing the name, address, and date of occupancy of each overnight guest. 
5.  The resident owner shall comply with all tax, business license, and revenue collection ordinances of the City and State. 
6.  The use shall comply with State law, including, but not limited to, Chapter 4 of Title 45, South Carolina Code of Laws. 
7.  Off-street parking shall comply with 4.5.1 and applicable portions of 4.5.4 as determined by the Planning Director and City Engineer. 
8.  A Bed and Breakfast Home Stay in the RSS District on a parcel at least three acres in size may provide a barn with a maximum of two stalls per guest bedroom for stall rental to registered guests. 
9.  The Zoning Official may inspect the premises without prior notice during normal business hours. 
10.  The principal structure shall be single-family residential in character and the principal use shall be single-family residential. 
11.  No exterior alterations to the building other than those necessary to meet building codes or assure the safety of the structure shall be allowed for the purpose of accommodating the use. 
12.  Meals shall only be served to registered guests. 
13.  Business meetings, receptions, and other events from which the property owner may benefit financially involving anyone other than registered overnight guests shall be prohibited. 
14.  Retail sales shall be limited to postcards, shirts, and other small gift items directly associated with the use for purchase by registered guests only. 
15.  One sign not to exceed 1.5 square feet in area may be allowed either on the building or at the street on a wall or pole not to exceed five feet in height. 
B.  Bed and Breakfast Inn. A Bed and Breakfast Inn with four to ten bedrooms for registered overnight guests shall be subject to the following. 
1.  The use shall comply with paragraphs 1 through 9 of 3.3.4.A applicable to a Bed and Breakfast Home Stay. 
2.  The structure shall be single-family residential in character. 
3.  Meals may only be served to registered overnight guests and their invitees with maximum seating at any one time of two times the number of guest rooms plus registered guests unless a special exception allowing meetings in accordance with paragraph 5 below is granted. 
4.  Retail sales are limited to postcards, shirts, and other small gift items directly associated with the use for purchase by registered overnight guests and their invitees unless a special exception is granted in accordance with paragraph 5 below, in which case sales may be made to individuals associated with meetings. 
5.  Business meetings, receptions, and other events from which the property owner may benefit financially involving people other than registered overnight guests may be permitted by special exception if the criteria at 3.3.4.C.1 are met. The maximum number of attendees at meetings at any one time may be three times the number of guest rooms plus registered guests. The maximum occupancy requested for such meetings shall be stated in the application for the special exception, but may be further limited by the fire marshal, building codes, or by conditions imposed by the Board of Zoning Appeals to assure compatibility of the proposed use with surrounding uses. Meals may be served to all attendees at such events. 
6.  A wall-mounted sign not to exceed 1.5 square feet in area may be located on the exterior wall of the dwelling. In addition, on each street frontage, either a non-backlit, freestanding sign not to exceed 1.5 square feet in area and five feet in height or a wall-mounted sign not to exceed 1.5 square feet in area may be erected. Each sign may be externally illuminated by a low-wattage light (see 4.4.10.B.3). 
C.  Bed and Breakfast/Meeting Facility. A Bed and Breakfast/Meeting Facility with four to ten bedrooms for registered overnight guests and meeting rooms plus other areas for events may be allowed as a special exception in the Limited Professional (LP) District subject to the following requirements. 
1.  The subject property: 
a.  is at least four acres in area; 
b.  is listed on the Aiken Historic Register either individually or as part of a district and individually on the National Register of Historic Places; 
c.  can accommodate at least 50 of the required parking spaces on the site itself with the remainder of the required parking allowed to be on-street contiguous to the site but not in front of another home or business; and 
d.  is surrounded by a wall or dense vegetative screen at least six feet in height, which shall remain. 
2.  The use shall comply with paragraphs 1 through 9 of 3.3.4.A applicable to a Bed and Breakfast Home Stay. 
3.  The structure shall be single-family residential in character. 
4.  Exterior alterations to allow the use, including new parking areas and the associated removal of trees and vegetation, must obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
5.  Meals not associated with meetings may be served to anyone from 7:30 a.m. (Ord. 09282009D) until 11:00 p.m. with a maximum seating capacity set by the Department of Public Safety. 
6.  Business meetings, receptions, and other events from which the property owner may benefit financially involving people other than registered guests may be held. The maximum number of attendees at meetings and events at any one time shall be set by the Department of Public Safety. Such meetings and events shall end by 11:00 p.m. Meals may be served to all attendees at such events. 
7.  Outdoor amplified music shall be allowed as follows: 
a.  paid admission concerts every other week that end no later than 10:00 p.m. except for New Year's Eve celebrations which shall end no later than 12:30 a.m. New Year's Day; (Ord. 09282009D) 
b.  music which accompanies dining is allowed but must conclude by 10:00 p.m.; and 
c.  outdoor amplified music for private events is not allowed except for nonprofit fundraisers in which case the music shall end no later than 10:00 p.m. 
8.  Retail sales are permitted to guests and their invitees and attendees at meetings and other events for items directly associated with the use and/or Aiken by using up to 1500 square feet which can be located in more than one area within the subject property. Gallery or exhibition space is allowed but is not subject to the 1500-square-foot limit. (Ord. 04092007) 
9.  A wall-mounted sign not to exceed 1.5 square feet in area may be located on an exterior wall of the dwelling. In addition, on each street frontage, either a non-backlit, freestanding sign not to exceed 1.5 square feet in area and five feet in height or a wall-mounted sign not to exceed 1.5 square feet in area may be erected. Each sign may be externally illuminated by a low-wattage light (see 4.4.10.B.3). 
3.3.5. - Car Wash. 
    A car wash located in the DB District shall not incorporate fuel sales. 
    Any car wash facility shall be paved and incorporate drainage meeting the City Engineer's standards. 
    Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
3.3.6. - Convenience Store. 
    No convenience store permitted in the LB District shall provide fuel sales. 
    Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
3.3.7. - Day Care. 
A.  General. Day care facilities shall be required to meet the following standards. 
1.  Day care facilities shall comply with all applicable State laws. 
2.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor play area shall be provided for each occupant (other than employees). 
3.  The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of four feet which shall be maintained in good condition. 
4.  Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
5.  An off-street drop-off and loading area shall be provided. 
B.  Day Care Facilities in the RML, RMH, RMP, LP, or LB Districts. Day care facilities located in the RML, RMH, RMP, LP, or LB Districts shall only be permitted to operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
3.3.8. - Duplex Residential. 
    Duplex residential development is permitted in the O, GB, and PC Districts, provided that such residential development is part of a larger project, the residential component does not exceed 50 percent of the land area of the project, and a site plan for the project is reviewed in accordance with 6.2.9. 
3.3.9. - Eating Establishment. 
    Eating establishments permitted in the LB or HD District are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The maximum gross floor area shall not exceed 2,500 square feet in the HD District; 
2.  All off-street parking shall be located behind the front yard setback line; 
3.  Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E; 
4.  In the LB District, the hours of operation, including deliveries, shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; 
5.  No outdoor entertainment or speaker system is permitted; and 
6.  Signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
3.3.10. - Fuel Sales. 
A.  Considered a Principal Use. Fuel sales that are associated with a convenience store or similar use shall always be considered a principal use and permitted only in those districts that allow fuel sales. 
B.  In the PC District. Fuel sales in the PC District shall be permitted only when the facility is incorporated in a larger commercial project, and when access to the facility is shared with such project. 
C.  In the DB District. Fuel sales in the DB District shall be permitted only when the facility is associated with a convenience store. 
3.3.11. - Group Home, Type 1. 
    A Group Home, Type 1 is permitted in the O, GB, and PC Districts, provided that such residential development is part of a larger project, the residential component does not exceed 50 percent of the land area of the project, and a site plan for the project is reviewed in accordance with 6.2.9. 
    A Group Home, Type 1 is subject to all applicable provisions under South Carolina law including, but not limited to, Section 6-29-770 et seq.; any applicable regulations, registration procedures, building code mandates, as well as all licensing and operational requirements of all federal, State, and local governmental agencies with jurisdiction in this area. All applicable City application procedures must be met in addition. (Ord. 10132008A) 
3.3.12. - Group Home, Type 2 or 3. 
    A Group Home Type 2 or Type 3 shall meet the following standards. 
1.  Compliance with all applicable State laws; 
2.  A site plan is approved in accordance with 6.2.9; 
3.  Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E; and 
4.  No Group Home Type 2 or 3 is located within 500 feet of any existing Group Home Type 2 or 3. Such distance shall be measured from lot line to lot line. 
3.3.13. - Group Living. 
    Group living shall be located no closer than 50 feet to any property line. 
    Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
3.3.14. - Industrial Uses. 
    Information about the following factors shall be provided to the Building Official in order to make a determination whether an industrial use is considered light or heavy industrial and whether the use is prohibited within the City limits. Standard accepted methods of measurement as called for by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) shall be utilized. 
1.  Noise. 
2.  Vibration. 
3.  Smoke. 
4.  Toxic gas. 
5.  Particulate matter. 
6.  Odor. 
7.  Heat. 
8.  Glare. 
9.  Electromagnetic interference. 
10.  Radioactivity. 
11.  Fire hazard. 
12.  Other similar conditions. 
3.3.15. - Large Retail Project. 
    Any new Large Retail Project or one for which the cost of alterations, renovation, or expansion in any one-year period exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value of the development as set by the Aiken County Tax Assessor shall comply with the following. 
A.  Permitted Locations. Such a project shall be located only in the Planned Commercial (PC), Planned Residential (PR), or General Business (GB) zones. For a Large Retail Project in any of the three zones, approval of a concept plan as set forth in the provisions for the PC zone, including landscaping and signage, shall be required. After the concept plan is approved, site/landscape plan approval shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit. 
B.  Character of Design. Buildings shall be designed in a way that will reduce massive scale, provide visual interest, and avoid overwhelming surrounding development. The buildings shall be configured in a manner harmonious with topography and vegetation. 
C.  Architectural Controls. 
1.  Materials. Predominant exterior building materials may include brick, wood, stone, tile, split concrete block, or stucco. Smooth-faced concrete block are not permitted. 
2.  Colors. Exterior façade colors must be low-reflecting, low-intensity, subtle, and neutral or earth-toned. Building trim may feature brighter, complementary colors that do not overwhelm the primary colors. Neon tubing is not allowed as an accent material. 
3.  Rooflines. Rooflines shall be varied to add interest, minimize massive scale, and complement the character of nearby neighborhoods by using parapets, gables, eaves, or other similar designs. 
4.  Exterior Walls. No large expanse of blank exterior wall will be allowed. Variation may be achieved by using recesses, projections, windows, columns, horizontal and vertical offsets, awnings, canopies, and other features. 
5.  Screening of Rooftop or Other Mechanical or Electrical Equipment. Equipment shall be screened to minimize noise and views from all directions except overhead. If the equipment is roof-mounted, the screening shall be designed to conform architecturally to the design of the building. Walls or evergreen shrubbery must screen ground-mounted mechanical or electrical equipment; shrubbery must be large enough at the time of planting to screen the equipment. 
6.  Location of Walkways and Entrances. The building design shall clearly indicate to visitors where entrances are located. Walkways shall be well-lighted and marked, easily accessible to parking areas, and in the safest areas. 
7.  Location and Appearance of Outdoor Sales and Storage Areas. Outdoor sales areas shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and shall be screened with walls and/or fences not to exceed 15 feet in height. Materials, colors, and design of such walls and fences shall conform to those used predominantly on the principal building. To prevent unsightly clutter, outdoor storage of products in an area where customers are not permitted is prohibited. 
8.  Outdoor Lighting. Lighting shall comply with the requirements for the Planned Commercial zone at 4.3.8. 
9.  Types, Heights, and Location of Perimeter Fences. Fences shall not exceed eight feet in height except those for outdoor sales and storage areas. Chain-link fencing is not permitted. 
D.  Landscaping. 
1.  General. A conceptual landscape plan shall be incorporated as part of concept plan approval. Prior to issuance of a building permit, approval of a detailed landscape plan conforming to the Landscaping and Tree Preservation provisions in Chapter 4 shall be approved except where such provisions would conflict with the following. 
2.  Planting Strip Along a Street Right-of-Way. 
a.  Along any frontage adjacent to a street right-of-way including out-parcels, there shall be a landscaped planting strip at least 30 feet in depth. Any of this strip subsequently dedicated to the City to be preserved as planting strip shall still be included in meeting the requirements of this section. 
b.  The maximum number of trees must be planted as determined by the Planning Director taking into account the size of the trees at maturity. The Planning Director shall approve the type, size, and location of trees as well as any combination of large and small trees to meet this requirement. Any area in the planting strip beyond the minimum area required shall not be included in determining the required number of trees. 
c.  There shall be a continuous screen consisting of either evergreen shrubbery and/or a berm with plantings complying with the following. 
i.  If only shrubbery is used, the plantings shall be at least three feet high after pruning at the time of planting and shall be planted no more than five feet on center in at least two staggered rows. 
ii.  Any berm must be at least two feet high. Any berm less than five feet high must be planted with evergreen shrubbery at least two feet high after pruning at the time of planting and shall be planted no more than five feet on center in at least two staggered rows. 
iii.  If a berm without shrubbery is used, it shall be at least five feet high and be planted with ground cover. 
iv.  The screen shall be maintained at a minimum of five feet in height after plantings have matured. 
d.  The planting strip may include a sidewalk or pathway parallel to the street and/or sidewalks or pathways perpendicular to the street to provide a pedestrian connection to parking areas. 
3.  Screening of Garbage and Trash Collection Areas and Delivery and Loading Areas. These areas shall be screened from view of adjacent property and street rights-of-way with a masonry wall or wooden fence and/or evergreen shrubbery, shall be located away from pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and shall be out of sight to the maximum feasible extent. 
E.  Delivery and Loading. 
1.  General. Delivery and loading areas shall be designed and located to minimize visual and noise impacts to residential areas. 
2.  Setbacks and Buffers. Each delivery and loading dock shall be set back at least 75 feet from land zoned or used residentially including a landscaped buffer at least 30 feet in depth along the property line conforming to 4.6.7.E. 
3.  Trucks. Delivery trucks shall not be parked during non-delivery hours with any motor, compressor, refrigerator or similar device running unless it is at least 50 feet from property zoned or used residentially. 
F.  Signage. In addition to complying with the sign provisions in Chapter 4, all signs within in a new or altered Large Retail Project shall be compatible and use similar design elements. 
G.  Traffic. The applicant shall submit a traffic impact study for the proposed project. The study shall include information as required by the Planning Director. The developer/owner shall be responsible for any new or additional roads or improvements, turn lanes, traffic signals, or other improvements made necessary by the project. 
H.  Waiver of Requirements. City Council may waive any requirements of this section for alteration or enlargement of an existing project where compliance would be impractical. (Ord. 05102004B) 
3.3.16. - Liquor Store. 
    Liquor stores in the DB zone districts must be located at least 200 feet from a property occupied by a single-family residence. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), adopted November 12, 2018, amended § 3.3.16 and in doing so changed the title of said section from "Manufactured Home" to "Liquor Store," as set out herein. 
3.3.17. - Manufactured Home. 
    See the standards in 4.2.7, Manufactured Home Subdivisions, or 4.2.8, Manufactured Home Parks. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), adopted November 12, 2018, added § 3.3.16 and in so doing renumbered former § 3.3.16 as § 3.3.17, as set out herein. 
3.3.18. - Nightclub or Bar. 
    Nightclubs or bars in the DB zone districts must be located at least 200 feet from a property occupied by a single-family residence. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
3.3.19. - Outdoor Entertainment. 
    Outdoor entertainment establishments located adjacent to a residential district or use may be permitted subject to the following conditions. 
1.  The use shall only be permitted to operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
2.  Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
3.  Any outdoor speakers or public address system shall only be permitted where no sound so produced can be heard at the residential district boundary. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), adopted November 12, 2018, added § 3.3.18 and in so doing renumbered former § 3.3.17 as § 3.3.19, as set out herein. 
3.3.20. - Single-Family Attached Residential. 
    Any attached single-family housing must comply with the standards at 4.2.9 and with the review process at 6.2.16. In addition, attached single-family residential development is permitted in the O, GB, and PC Districts, only if such residential development is part of a larger project, the residential component does not exceed 50 percent of the land area of the project, and a site plan for the project is reviewed in accordance with 6.2.9. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), adopted November 12, 2018, added § 3.3.16 and § 3.3.18 and as a result §§ 3.3.18-3.3.26 have been renumbered as §§ 3.3.20-3.3.28, as set out herein. 
3.3.21. - Single-Family Detached Residential. 
    Detached single-family residential development is permitted in the O, GB, and PC Districts, provided that such residential development is part of a larger project, the residential component does not exceed 50 percent of the land area of the project, and a site plan for the project is reviewed in accordance with 6.2.9. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- See editor's note in § 3.3.20. 
3.3.22. - Stable, Commercial. 
    A commercial stable allowed in accordance with the Use Tables in Chapter 3, Article 1 must comply with 3.3.23.C and D. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- See editor's note in § 3.3.20. 
3.3.23. - Stable, Pleasure. 
    A pleasure stable allowed in accordance with the Use Tables in Chapter 3, Article 1, must comply with the following. These provisions are intended to cover the keeping of horses, whether in enclosed stables or in open paddocks. See the standards in 8.1.11 for nonconforming stables in the RSS District. See the standards in 8.1.12 for horses on nonconforming lots. 
A.  Required Area. The lot shall have a minimum area of one acre and a minimum width of 100 feet. Nonconforming lots of less than one acre may request permission for a pleasure stable through the special exception process in accordance with 6.2.18. 
B.  Number of Horses Allowed. 
1.  There are no restrictions on the number of horses allowed in the RSS and HD Districts. 
2.  On a lot on which horses are allowed by special exception, a maximum of two horses are allowed on the first acre, with one horse allowed for each additional one-half acre. 
3.  In the RSH District, three horses are allowed on the first acre, with one horse allowed for each additional one-half acre. 
C.  Maintenance. The following standards shall apply to all stables, lots, and the horses thereon. 
1.  The lot must be designed and maintained to drain so as to prevent ponding and propagation of insects. 
2.  The lot must be designed and maintained so as to prevent the pollution by drainage of adjacent streams and other water bodies. 
3.  The premises must be maintained in a sanitary condition by such means as the proper use of lime in stalls. (Ord. 09252000D) 
4.  In residential zoning districts, the premises must be maintained by keeping manure in covered containers at least 50 feet from any dwelling or any pool, patio, or other recreational structure on an adjoining lot. Covered containers shall not be required in RSH, RSS, and HD districts. (Ord. 07112011A) 
5.  Except in the RSS and HD Districts, horses must be stabled and otherwise kept in areas on the premises that are no closer to the dwellings, buildings, accessory buildings, and recreational structures on adjoining lots than they are to the dwelling on the premises. 
6.  All manure must be removed from paddocks and stable areas at least twice weekly so as to prevent propagation of flies and creation of odors. All manure containers will be emptied at least once per week (Ord. 09252000D) and manure will be removed from the property. 
7.  All grain on the lot must be stored in rodent-proof containers. 
8.  All feed spillage on the lot must be promptly removed so as to prevent attraction of flies, rodents, and birds, and creation of odors. 
9.  The exercise and training areas on the lot should be dampened as necessary to prevent dust. (Ord. 09252000D) 
10.  Prompt veterinary care and services must be provided for sick horses, and such horses shall be removed promptly when deemed necessary by a licensed veterinarian selected by the City. 
11.  There shall be adequate shelter for the horses from the elements. 
12.  Composting of manure may be permitted by special exception from the Board of Zoning Appeals in the RSS and HD districts. Any application for composting should include a composting plan and a report from an agricultural engineer. 
D.  Complaints. Complaints regarding a lot not maintained in compliance with the foregoing provisions shall be filed with the Zoning Official and investigated by the Environmental Control Officer. Violation of these provisions may result in revocation of a special exception approval for the pleasure stable. 
(Ord. No. 02082016C , § 1(Exh. A), 2-8-2016; Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- See editor's note in § 3.3.20. 
3.3.24. - Telecommunications Facilities. 
A.  Permitted Locations. 
1.  Location in Industrial Districts. A telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna may be located in the LI or I District following approval of an application meeting the requirements set forth in 6.2.5 and demonstration that the conditions in paragraph B. below are met. 
2.  Location in O, GB, and PC Districts. A telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna may be approved by special exception in accordance with the provisions of 6.2.18 when located in the GB or PC Districts. An application meeting the requirements set forth in 6.2.5 shall be required, along with demonstration that the conditions in paragraph B. below are met. 
3.  Location on Existing Structure on City-Owned Property. Wireless communications devices may be located on existing structures on City-owned property following approval of an application meeting the requirements set forth in 6.2.5, demonstration that the conditions in this Section have been met, and approval by City Council. Steps shall be taken to assure that the antenna will not be readily visible, including hiding the antenna within the structure, painting it the same color as the structure, or otherwise camouflaging the antenna. 
4.  Location on Existing Structure on Private Property. An antenna may be located on an existing structure on private property following approval of an application meeting the requirements set forth in 6.2.5 and demonstration that the applicable conditions in this Section have been met. In residential districts, approval of a special exception by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall also be required. Steps shall be taken to assure that the antenna will not be readily visible, including hiding the antenna within the structure, painting it the same color as the structure, or otherwise camouflaging the antenna. 
5.  Location on Existing Tower. The addition of an antenna to an existing tower shall be approved by the Building Official if the antenna would not add to the tower's height and if certification from a structural engineer licensed in South Carolina is submitted confirming that the tower structure is adequate to accommodate the antenna. 
6.  Demolition of Existing Tower. The Building Official may issue a permit for an existing tower to be demolished and a new tower built as long as the new tower does not exceed the height of the original tower and is designed to allow other antennas. A new tower may exceed the height of the original tower only if it is approved through the Board of Zoning Appeals as a special exception. 
7.  Not Permitted on Historic Sites or Districts. No telecommunications tower is permitted within a district or on an individual site listed on the Aiken Historic Register. 
B.  Conditions. An application for approval to erect a communications tower must meet the requirements set forth in 6.2.5 and demonstrate that all of the following conditions are met. An application to place an antenna on an existing structure must provide applicable information as determined by the Building Official. 
1.  General. All applicable health, nuisance, noise, fire, building, and safety code requirements shall apply in addition to the conditions in this Section. Regulations covering visibility, fencing, screening, landscaping, parking, access, lot size, exterior illumination, signs, storage, and all other general zoning district regulations except those superseded by this Section shall apply. 
2.  Location. 
a.  A permit for a proposed tower within 1,000 feet of an existing tower shall not be issued unless the applicant certifies that the existing tower would not meet the applicant's structural specifications and technical design requirements without unreasonable modifications, or that a co-location agreement could not be obtained. 
b.  The applicant must show that a suitable site could not be found on publicly owned property. 
c.  When considered as a special exception, the Board of Zoning Appeals must determine that the visual impact of the tower will not adversely affect the area. 
3.  Maximum Height. 
a.  Freestanding tower: 200 feet. 
b.  Tower or antenna mounted on a structure other than a freestanding tower: one-fourth of the height of the structure or 50 feet, whichever is less, over and above the height of the existing structure. 
4.  Setbacks. 
a.  The tower must be set back from any property occupied by a residential use or on which a residential use is permitted a distance at least 50 percent of the height of the tower but no less than 100 feet. 
b.  Where adjoining property is not used or zoned to allow residential use, the tower should comply with the setback required of any other structure or 25 percent of the tower height, whichever is greater. 
c.  The tower must be set back from the boundaries of a property any portion of which is listed on the Aiken Historic Register or the National Historic Register a distance of at least 50 percent of the tower height. 
5.  Screening. In addition to any landscaping required by 4.6.7.E, prior to initiation of use of a tower, the base of a tower must be screened by evergreen plantings at least three feet high at time of planting and no less than ten feet on center at the time of planting, with a height at maturity that exceeds seven feet. 
6.  Fencing. A tower and any associated structures or facilities must be surrounded by a fence at least eight feet high. See also 4.1.4. 
7.  Color. A tower should be a light grey or similar color to blend with the sky unless it is required to be painted a different color by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
8.  Illumination. A tower shall not be lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or a variance is granted for safety reasons. After dusk and before dawn, lights shall be red only. If permitted by federal authorities, lights shall be shielded to minimize visibility from the ground. Strobe lighting shall not be allowed unless required by a regulatory agency. 
9.  Signage. One sign no larger than two square feet in area shall be placed in a visible location identifying the owner and his street address, the identification code of the tower, and an all-hours emergency telephone number. Such sign may also identify other users of the tower. 
10.  Initiation of Operation. An antenna on a new tower shall begin operation no later than 180 days after installation. 
11.  Abandonment. If a tower which has been operational is not used for a period of more than 180 days, then, upon written notice given to the owner or his agent, the tower shall be removed unless use is resumed within 90 days of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- See editor's note in § 3.3.20. 
3.3.25. - Truck or Trailer Rental. 
    Truck or trailer rental facilities located in the GB District shall provide only vehicles that can be driven by an operator with a standard Class "D" License. No maintenance or servicing of vehicles or trailers shall occur on the site, and no disabled vehicles shall be stored overnight at the site. Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- See editor's note in § 3.3.20. 
3.3.26. - Upper-Story Residential. 
    Upper-story residential development is permitted provided it is part of a larger project, the residential component does not exceed 50 percent of the land area of the project, and a site plan for the project is reviewed in accordance with 6.2.9. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- See editor's note in § 3.3.20. 
3.3.27. - Veterinary Hospital. 
    A veterinary hospital located in the GB District shall not incorporate outdoor kennels when the subject property abuts a residential use or a residential district boundary. Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- See editor's note in § 3.3.20. 
3.3.28. - Water Storage Tank. 
    Approval of a water storage tank shall require a demonstration that no alternative location where such use would be permitted by right is feasible. In addition, to the extent practicable, the base of such tower shall be screened with vegetation and constructed and painted in such fashion as to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
Editor's note- See editor's note in § 3.3.20. 
ARTICLE 4. - ACCESSORY USES 

3.4.1. - Accessory Apartment. 
A.  In Residential Districts. One accessory apartment per lot may be permitted in a residential district (except in the RSS District, which may allow a second accessory apartment) in accordance with the Use Tables in Chapter 3, Article 1, and subject to the following. 
1.  Lot Size and Area. The lot must have an area of at least 10,000 square feet and a minimum width of at least 75 feet. 
2.  Location. The apartment may be within the principal dwelling or in an accessory building. 
3.  Size of the Apartment. The minimum floor area of an accessory apartment shall be at least 450 square feet (see 4.2.2). The floor area of an apartment in an accessory building may not exceed 35 percent of the gross heated floor area of the principal dwelling. (Ord. 01122009) 
4.  Owner-Occupancy Required. Either the principal dwelling or the accessory apartment must be occupied by the property owner. 
5.  Nonconforming Buildings. An accessory apartment may not be located in a nonconforming building without a special exception. 
6.  Expansion or Enlargement to Allow an Accessory Apartment. 
a.  The footprint of a principal or accessory building may not be enlarged to allow an accessory apartment without a special exception. 
b.  A second floor may not be added to an accessory building to allow an accessory apartment without obtaining a special exception, and in no case shall the height of the accessory building exceed the height of the principal building. 
c.  If there is an existing accessory building, a second accessory building may not be erected to allow an accessory apartment unless the lot is at least one-half acre in area. 
7.  Off-Street Parking. One off-street parking space is required for each accessory apartment. Parking for an apartment in an accessory building shall not be in the front yard of the principal building. 
8.  Applicability in RML and RMH Districts. An accessory apartment may not be located in the RML and RMH District unless the lot is occupied only by a detached single-family dwelling and the number of dwelling units does not exceed the allowable density of the District. 
9.  Second Unit in the RSS District. A second accessory apartment may be allowed in the RSS District by special exception in accordance with 6.2.18 as long as the lot is at least one acre in area and all relevant provisions of this paragraph 3.4.1.A are met. 
10.  Conversion of Accessory Building with Reduced Setback Allowed Through Variance or Administrative Waiver. An accessory building for which a reduced setback has been allowed through a variance granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or an administrative waiver pursuant to 3.4.2.H may not be converted to an accessory apartment unless a Special Exception in approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. (Ord. 07122010A) 
B.  In Nonresidential Districts. As accessory apartment is permitted in nonresidential districts, whether in a single-family dwelling or an associated accessory building, in accordance with the Use Tables in Chapter 3, Article 1, and the provisions of 3.4.1.A. 
3.4.2. - Accessory Building or Structure. 
A.  Applicability. Paragraphs B, D, and E shall not apply to (1) any lot in the Horse District zone, (2) any lot in the RSS zone in the Historic Overlay District, or (3) any lot of one acre or more in the RSS zone outside of the Historic Overlay District. (Ord. 01122009) 
B.  Location. 
1.  Detached accessory buildings shall only be permitted in the rear yard and side yard no closer to a street right-of-way than the principal building on the lot except for garages, carports, automatic teller machines, canopies over fuel pumps, and similar structures as determined by the Planning Director. 
2.  In any residential zones or the Limited Professional or Limited Business zones, an accessory building may not be closer to a street right-of-way than the plane of the front wall of the principal building on an adjacent lot. (Ord. 10242005B) 
C.  Setback Required. 
1.  Any accessory building totally detached from the principal building shall be set back not less than ten feet from the side or rear lot line. 
2.  In the LI and I districts, the Planning Director shall determine the specific distance an accessory building shall be set back from the side and rear lot lines based upon the use of the lot involved, the scale of the accessory building, the adjoining lots, and any other relevant factors, but in no event shall it be set back less than 10 feet from the side and rear lot lines. 
D.  Height. The height of an accessory building may not be more than the primary building on the lot. (Ord. 10242005B & 01122009) 
E.  Floor Area. The floor area of all accessory buildings on a lot may not exceed 50 percent of the heated gross floor area of the principal building. (Ord. 10242005B & 01122009) 
F.  Converted Manufactured Homes and Shipping Containers Prohibited. A manufactured unit constructed for residential use may not be used for storage even if converted for that purpose. (Ord. 06122000) No container primarily intended for the shipment of freight or other materials on a boat, truck, or other vehicle may be used for storage except in the LI, LM, and I zones except as permitted for temporary outdoor storage from November 1 to December 31 as set forth at 4.3.3.C. (Ord. 10242005B) (Ord. 06242013C) 
G.  Swimming Pools. A non-inflatable swimming pool on a lot occupied by a single-family dwelling shall comply with this section. (Ord. 10242005B) 
H.  Administrative Waiver for Setbacks. The Planning Director may allow a reduction in the side and/or rear yard setback for an accessory building if the applicant can demonstrate that there is no other reasonable place for the building that would meet the required setbacks and can justify the request based on one or more reasons including, but not limited to, the following. 
1.  The size, shape, and/or topography of the property would make it difficult to comply. 
2.  Compliance would substantially affect the usability of the property. 
3.  The location of other structures on the property would make it difficult to comply. 
4.  The location of vegetation would make it difficult to comply. 
5.  The proposed location would allow preservation of valuable vegetation. 
6.  The area of the reduced setback is adjacent to land that will not be developed. 
The waiver may not be granted without the approval of the Department of Public Safety and the Department of Public Works/Engineering. 
Public notice of an application for such waiver shall be accomplished by mailing of a letter to the owner of each lot directly contiguous to the subject lot excluding one across a street right-of-way and by the posting of a sign on the subject property visible from the abutting street. Approval of the request may not be granted until 15 days after the mailing of the notice letters and posting of the sign. 
Subsequent conversion to an accessory apartment shall require approval of a Special Exception by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to 3.4.1.A (10). (Ord. 07122010A) 
3.4.3. - Amusement, Video Poker, or Gaming Machines. 
A.  Location. The location or operation of coin-operated, non-payout amusement or gaming machines or devices in any number involving any form of payments or reimbursements of money for accumulated free games shall be allowed only in the GB, PC, LI, and I districts subject to the restrictions set forth in this Section. 
B.  Distance Requirements. A building or premises in or on which any such machines or devices are situated or operated in any number shall not be located as follows. 
1.  On any lot or parcel within 300 feet of any residential zoning district or any lot or parcel on which a residential use exists. 
2.  On any lot or parcel within 300 feet of any lot or parcel on which a church, other house of worship, or any religious use is located. 
3.  On any lot or parcel within 300 feet of any lot or parcel on which a private or public school or any educational use is located (this shall include, but not be limited to, kindergartens and daycare facilities). 
4.  On any lot or parcel within 300 feet of any lot or parcel on which public playground, public swimming pool, public recreational area, public park, or similar use is located. 
5.  On any lot or parcel within 300 feet of any lot or parcel on which the location or operation of such machines or devices is in existence. 
C.  Distance Measurement. Pursuant to § 1-22-710(C) of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, as amended, the distances in this Ordinance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the lot on which a building or structure is used as a licensed video poker establishment to the nearest property line of the location set forth in paragraph B. above. 
D.  Signs. Pursuant to § 12-22-760(A) of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, as amended, a video poker establishment may utilize one green square not exceeding a size of four by four feet. This one green square may be placed on any side of the building in which the licensed video poker establishment is located. The establishment shall continue to comply with the other ordinances promulgated by the City of Aiken with respect to signage for its establishment. 
E.  Other Laws. Anything contained in this Section shall not be construed to authorize or permit any form of activity, use, operation, establishment, or business prohibited by other ordinances of the City or the laws of the State of South Carolina. 
3.4.4. - Fuel Sales. 
    See 3.3.10. 
3.4.5. - Home Occupation. 
    There are two types of home occupations allowed subject to the following provisions. Home occupations existing as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall be governed by Section 1.2.2. 
A.  Type 1 Home Occupation. 
1.  A Type 1 Home Occupation is an accessory use allowed by right as long as it meets the following requirements. 
a.  Receives and annually renews a business license. 
b.  Is conducted entirely within a principal dwelling or integral part thereof and involves no outside storage of any kind including in an accessory building. 
c.  Is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use of the dwelling and does not use more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling. 
d.  Does not affect the residential character of the dwelling nor cause the dwelling to be extended. 
e.  Does not create any disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, unhealthy or unsightly condition, or traffic or parking problem. 
f.  Does not involve on-site retail sales or services which involve visits by customers on any sort of regular basis (not including home party type sales occurring infrequently). 
g.  Is conducted only by persons residing on the premises. 
2.  A Type 1 Home Occupation may have a non-illuminated identification sign no larger than 1.5 square feet mounted on the wall of the dwelling, but no freestanding sign. If a bed and breakfast is located in the same dwelling, the sign may include the names of either or both. 
B.  Type 2 Home Occupation. A Type 2 Home Occupation may be permitted as a special exception subject to conditions imposed by the Board of Zoning Appeals and the following requirements. 
1.  Compliance with paragraphs 1 through 5 of 3.4.5.A regarding Type 1 Home Occupations. 
2.  Not more than one non-resident of the dwelling is employed. 
3.  Applicable City codes regarding wiring, plumbing, handicapped accessibility, etc., are addressed prior to issuance of the business license and initiation of the home occupation. 
4.  Does not involve any displays pertaining to the home occupation visible outside of the dwelling. 
5.  Is subject to inspection of the premises by the Zoning Official without prior notice during normal business hours. 
6.  May have one sign not exceeding 1.5 square feet in area for each lot-of-record mounted against the wall of the principal building (see 4.4.10.B). 
3.4.6. - Satellite Dish Antenna. 
A.  Residential Location. Satellite dish antennas greater than 3 feet in diameter shall be permitted only in rear yards in all residential districts and residential developments in any other district. 
B.  Commercial/Industrial Location. Satellite dish antennas used in conjunction with a commercial/industrial use shall be permitted in any location in the O, GB, PC, DB, LI, or I districts. 
3.4.7. - Swimming Pool. 
    All swimming pools shall meet the latest building code requirements for fencing. 
3.4.8. - Recreational Vehicle Park. 
A.  In an Industrial (I) district, any lot exceeding 25 acres in size and whose principle use is an equestrian facility by special exception approval by the BZA, may not have more than 20 percent of the lot area used for a recreational vehicle park as an accessory use. Each lot shall be restricted to one such recreational vehicle park that shall be limited to not more than five acres in size regardless of the size of the parcels. The recreational vehicle park shall be used primarily by persons having horses stored or participating in equine events that are currently taking place at the equestrian facility. 
B.  The recreational vehicle park must have a site plan approved in accordance with 6.2.9 and a landscape plan approved in accordance with 6.2.10. A certificate of zoning compliance must be issued prior to occupancy. 
C.  The recreational vehicle park shall be maintained in accordance with the following standards after approval: 
1.  Shall obtain and maintain all permits and licenses required by state and local laws and regulations to operate such a facility 
a.  No site/space lease or continuous rental thereof shall exceed four months, after which a site in the recreational vehicle park may not be rented for the same motorhome or trailer for 30 days. 
b.  The owner of the recreational vehicle park shall maintain a guest register that includes the name and address of the tenant; identifying information of the vehicle, such as tag number, vehicle identification number or other unique identification number; the number and identifying information of horses stabled at the facility or the purpose of the overnight stay and the date the vehicle entered and left the park. The guest register and premises will be subject to inspection without prior notice during normal business hours by the Zoning Official or other City official with the authority to enforce City Ordinances. 
c.  Each occupied recreational vehicle site shall display a permit that is readily visible from the internal street of the recreational vehicle park. The permit will be on a form approved by the Planning Director and not smaller in size than eight inches by ten inches. The permit shall include the identifying information of the vehicle, the date of entry into the park, and the last day the vehicle is registered to stay in the park and shall be affixed to the site identification pole. 
2.  A 100-foot setback shall be required along property lines for the recreational vehicle park that abuts any area zoned or used as residential. A 50-foot setback shall be required along property lines that abut properties that are not zoned or used as residential. This area shall be maintained as a buffer and be undisturbed. Additional evergreen vegetation shall be planted to form an effective screen; such vegetation shall be at least three feet high after pruning at time of planting and a height of at least seven feet at maturity with spacing as required by the City. Where deemed necessary by the Planning Director, additional measures may be required to provide an effective screen. This buffer shall be maintained in good order at all times by the owner of the property. 
3.  A planting strip with a minimum ten-foot depth shall be provided parallel and adjacent to each perimeter of the recreational vehicle park and the remainder of the parcel. This strip shall be planted with trees to the maximum extent possible as determined by the Planning Director. Each tree planted in the planting strip shall have a minimum caliper of two inches and be selected from the Approved Tree List. Evergreen shrubbery or a planted berm is required in the planting strip to screen the recreational vehicles. The shrubbery must be at least three feet high after pruning at the time of planting and be planted no more than five feet on center. A berm must be at least three feet high and be planted with ground cover. 
4.  Only motorhomes or travel trailers are permitted to use the recreational vehicle park. All such motorhomes or travel trailers shall be equipped with facilities for sleeping, cooking, and bathing in a bath tub or shower. Tent camping or other shelters for habitation are prohibited. 
5.  No more than 12 recreational vehicle sites are allowed per acre and only one recreational vehicle is allowed per site. Each recreational vehicle site shall be a minimum of 2,000 square feet in area with a minimum width of 25 feet. 
6.  Each recreational vehicle park site shall have an individually designated site number. The number shall be no less than six inches high, reflective, and be permanently attached to a pole or other secure structure on the individual site. This number must be plainly legible and visible from the internal streets of the recreational vehicle park. 
7.  The recreational vehicle park shall be developed in a manner that preserves natural features and landscape, of which not less than 20 percent shall be set aside and maintained as common open space. 
8.  All individual recreational vehicle park site spaces will be provided with operational city water and sewer connections. All dumpsters shall be on a concrete pad and screened by evergreen vegetation at least three feet high after pruning at time of planting and a height of at least seven feet at maturity with spacing as required by the City. 
9.  All utilities such as electric, cable television, telephone, etc. shall be underground. 
10.  All internal streets and private drives accessing the recreational vehicle park shall be a minimum width of 20 feet, surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities and capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus as determined by the City Engineer. Parking shall not be permitted on recreational vehicle park streets. 
11.  Walls, fences, or other permanent structures may not be erected between recreational vehicle sites. 
12.  Each recreational vehicle park site shall abut directly upon a recreational vehicle park street for a minimum distance of 25 feet. Aligned and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography. 
13.  A fire hydrant shall be located within 500 feet of each recreational vehicle park site. 
14.  Each recreational vehicle park site will have a minimum of one parking space in addition to the space provided for the recreational vehicle. The space shall be a minimum of 9 feet in width and 18 feet in length. 
15.  A minimum of 20 feet shall be maintained between the parking of recreational vehicles. Any attachments such as awnings or steps shall for the purposes of this separation requirement be considered to be part of the trailer. 
16.  Street lights shall be installed along the internal streets of the recreational vehicle park at a distance of not more than one every 250 feet. 
17.  There shall be no open storage of personal belongings within a recreational vehicle park, nor shall there be an accessory building, shed, or cabinet placed upon or erected upon individual recreational vehicle park sites for the storage of materials or personal belongings. 
18.  There shall be no removal of axles, wheels or tires from a travel trailer or other recreational vehicle within the recreational vehicle park, except for emergency, temporary removal to accomplish repairs. 
19.  There shall be no separate mail boxes, separate street address designations or other similar accessories which would give the appearance of "permanence" to occupants of a recreational vehicle park. 
(Ord. No. 11092015 , § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015) 
ARTICLE 5. - TEMPORARY USES 

3.5.1. - General Regulations. 
    The following general regulations shall apply to all temporary uses. 
A.  Permanent changes to the site (including tree removal) are prohibited; 
B.  Temporary activities shall not prevent the use of or cause the elimination of required off-street parking; and 
C.  All other required permits must be obtained. 
3.5.2. - Construction/Storage Trailers. 
    A contractor's construction/storage trailer may be approved by the Planning Director in conjunction with any approved development project for which a building permit has been issued. The trailer must be located on the same site as the permitted project and must be removed within one month of issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy for the project. 
3.5.3. - Fairs, Carnivals, and Public Gatherings. 
    Fairs, carnivals, and other major public gatherings are allowed subject to approval by the Department of Public Safety. The Department may refer such uses for approval to City Council in accordance with Section 14-40 of the City Code, where it is deemed necessary. 
3.5.4. - Open Air Sales. 
    Open air sales on vacant lots of seasonal items such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, seafood, and produce are permitted in certain districts according to the Use Tables in Chapter 3, Article 1, provided that the sales activity does not last longer than 30 days per season and all other applicable codes, including sanitation and electrical codes, are met. Such open air sales must also receive and annually renew a business license. 
3.5.5. - Parking Lot/Sidewalk Sales. 
    Parking lot/sidewalk retail sales are allowed provided that no required off-street parking is eliminated or made unusable and safe pedestrian flow is maintained. Such sales shall not be permitted to impede traffic flow. No permanent structures or fencing shall be permitted. Merchandise that is part of a parking lot or sidewalk sale shall not be considered to be a sign for the purpose of Chapter 4, Article 4. 
3.5.6. - Temporary Sales/Leasing Offices. 
    A temporary sales or leasing office is permitted provided that it is located in a model unit for residential projects or on-site for commercial projects. 
3.5.7. - Mobile Food Vending. 
A.  Purpose . The City Council hereby finds that the unrestricted sale or distribution of food and beverage from vehicles or mobile food units on private property, or within or upon public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, under certain circumstances, when not regulated may pose a danger to health, safety, and public welfare. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate mobile food vendors in a manner that protects the public health, safety, and welfare, while also accommodating entrepreneurial activity, as well as an active and social pedestrian environment within appropriate areas of the City of Aiken. 
B.  General Requirements . The following provisions shall apply to all mobile food vendors unless expressly permitted as part of a special event permit: 
1.  All mobile food vendors doing business within the City of Aiken must obtain a City business license, and applicable requirements of the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC); 
2.  The DHEC inspection report shall be prominently displayed at the point of sale; 
3.  Selling of non-food items from a mobile food vendor shall be prohibited with the exception of merchandise displaying the mobile food vendor logo and/or branding; 
4.  Alcohol sales from mobile food vendors are prohibited unless permitted otherwise by the South Carolina Department of Revenue Alcohol Beverage Licensing; 
5.  Mobile food vendors and related patron queuing shall not obstruct or interfere with the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including but not limited to access to or from any business, public building, or dwelling unit, or access to or through a public sidewalk; 
6.  All mobile food vendors must maintain a litter receptacle of sufficient size to accommodate litter resulting from on-site sales. The receptacle must be available to patrons, and must be maintained by the mobile food vendor during hours of service. Recycling receptacles are encouraged; 
7.  Mobile food vendors must collect and remove the above-referenced litter receptacle and all litter and debris generated within a 25-foot radius. Excessive litter attributed to on-site sales upon relocation of the vendor at close of business may result in revocation of the business license; 
8.  Mobile food vendors shall not erect or display any signage other than exhibited on or in the mobile food truck; 
9.  Mobile food vendors must only utilize localized lighting used in or on the mobile food vendor for the purpose of food preparation and menu illumination; 
10.  Mobile food vendors may not sell to persons in vehicles; 
11.  Permanent water, wastewater or electrical connections are prohibited. 
C.  Private Property . All mobile food vendors shall be subject to the following regulations in their operation on private property unless otherwise expressly permitted as part of a special event permit: 
1.  Mobile food vendors, excluding catering trucks as described in Section C.12, are only permitted to locate on private property within areas zoned for commercial or industrial uses with the exception of the LB and LP zone districts; 
2.  Mobile food vendors must have the written permission from the private property owner of the specific location; 
3.  Mobile food vendors, excluding catering trucks, shall not locate with 100 feet from the boundary of residentially-zoned property; 
4.  Mobile food vendors may operate on the property of a school, university, hospital or religious facility with the written consent of the property owner or authorized school official; 
5.  Operation within commercial components of a PR zoned district with written permission of the Home Owners' Association or Property Owners' Association; 
6.  Mobile food vendors shall only operate within the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. the following day on Friday and Saturday. The food vendor may park at the service location no more than one hour prior and one hour following the permitted daily periods of operation. The mobile food vendor and all associated materials may not be located at the service location outside the above-mentioned times, with exception of mobile food vendors located on a parcel with an associated eating establishment under the same ownership; 
7.  No mobile food vendor shall operate within 100 feet from the door of a lawfully established eating establishment that is actively open for business serving customers, unless the food truck vendor provides documentation which is signed by the restaurant owner, that the restaurant owner interposes no objection to a closer proximity. 
8.  Mobile food vendors shall not produce any offensive or loud noise to attract customers or advertise products. 
9.  Mobile food vendors shall not provide furniture, umbrellas, objects or structures outside the vehicle. Mobile food vendors may utilize furniture, umbrellas, objects or structures provided by the property owner with written consent of the property owner. 
10.  Individual mobile food vendors shall not occupy more than three standard parking stalls or 500 square feet. Mobile food vendors shall located on an approved level parking area where it can be demonstrated that the off-street parking is not otherwise reserved, encumbered, or designated to satisfy off-street parking requirements of a business or activity that is operating at the same time as the mobile food vendor. 
11.  Mobile food vendors may not locate in a corner setback (sight distance triangle) as described in Section 4.1.5 of the Zoning Ordinance; 
12.  Catering trucks may operate in any zone district while serving a private event, including private events on residential property, and cannot serve the general public under the following conditions: 
a.  Food and/or drink is distributed or served to attendees of an event in which service is not targeting sale to the general public; 
b.  Catering trucks serving private property shall not establish operation on public rights-of-way unless parking on the subject private property is determined infeasible by the Planning Director or his/her designee, and the property owner has obtained permission from the Director of Public Safety or his/her designee; 
c.  Catering trucks serving private property shall not cause excessive noise, light, or vibration that can be detected from within an adjacent residential unit; 
d.  Catering trucks serving private property shall only operate within the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. in residentially-zoned areas. Otherwise, catering trucks are subject to the requirements of Section C.6. The catering truck may park at the service location no more than one hour prior and one hour following the permitted daily periods of operation. The mobile food vendor and all associated materials may not be located at the service location outside the above-mentioned times. 
D.  Right-of-Way and Public Property. 
1.  No mobile food vendor shall operate on a public street, sidewalk, parkway, alley, trail or any other right-or-way, or on city-owned property, including but not limited to plazas and parks, unless approved by the city as part of a permitted special event or otherwise permitted pursuant to Section D.2 of this Section. 
2.  Mobile food vendors may operate along a public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, or city-owned property pursuant to the following: 
a.  Mobile food vendors may operate as part of a special event with permission of the Department Director responsible for oversight of the facility or location, or his/her designee; 
b.  Mobile food vendors shall not operate within 100 feet of a permitted special event on public property or right-of-way while such event is in progress unless the mobile food vendor has written permission from the event organizer; 
c.  Mobile food vendors shall not operate within any City of Aiken park, playground, plaza, or related facility unless written authorization is obtained from the responsible City Department Director or his/her designee; 
d.  Mobile food vendors may operate in specific locations within public right-of-way as designated by the City Council following a public hearing and recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 07102017A , § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-2017) 
CHAPTER 4 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
ARTICLE 1. - SETBACKS, YARDS, AND HEIGHT 

4.1.1. - Side Yard Setbacks for Corner Lots. 
    In the case of any lot that adjoins two or more streets, yards abutting streets shall be treated as front yards. 
4.1.2. - Setback from Horse Track. 
    Any principal building, accessory building or use, residence, or paddock shall be located a minimum of 75 feet from the outside edge of a track surface where horse racing or training can take place, or from the outside rail of such a track, whichever would result in the maximum separation. This provision shall not apply to buildings located on the same lot as the track, where no minimum separation shall be required. 
4.1.3. - Modification of Yard Regulations. 
A.  Setback on Residential Infill Lots. New or replacement construction may be located in the required front yard setback to the same extent as the principal structure on the adjacent lot is in the required front yard setback. A lot in the RS-6, RML, or RMH zone not having a lot width of 60 feet may have a side yard setback of 7.5 feet to allow construction of a single-family dwelling unless the Building Official requires a greater setback. (Ord. 04102000C) 

B.  Side Yard Waived. Attached residential dwellings with common walls located over the lot line shall not be required to provide side yards. 
C.  Projection Into Yards. The following may extend or project into a required yard. 
1.  Cornices, sills, eaves, belt courses, chimneys, or other similar architectural feature. 
2.  Unroofed platforms, landings, steps, or balconies. 
3.  Heating and air conditioning units, transformers, or other similar machinery. 
4.1.4. - Fences and Walls. 
A.  Location. A fence or wall may be located in accordance with B, C, and D below except where prohibited by corner setbacks for intersection visibility (see 4.1.5 below). (Ord. 02142005) 
B.  In Nonresidential Districts. A fence or wall in any nonresidential district shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
C.  In Residential Districts. In the area between the plane of the front of the principal building and any street, no fence or wall shall exceed four feet in height except where a higher fence conforming to these regulations exists on a common property line of an adjacent lot in which case the proposed fence may be no higher than that fence. No fence or wall on any other portion of the lot may exceed six feet in height. (Ord. 02142005) 
D.  In Historic Districts. The Design Review Board shall have the authority to permit a fence or wall in an Historic District up to a height of twelve feet. (Ord. 02142005) 
4.1.5. - Corner Setback and Intersection Visibility. 
A.  General. The following standards shall apply at any corner of intersecting streets or driveways, except in the DB District. 
1.  Corner setbacks extend within the area formed by the legs of a triangle whose apex is the point of intersection of the rights-of-way of the adjacent streets. 
2.  No structure or planting (at mature growth) that exceeds three feet in height shall be permitted within a corner setback. Exceptions are permitted for utility poles, lighting standards, mail boxes, City or State traffic signs, and existing trees if the lower canopy of the trees allow a clear line of sight between three feet and seven feet above the street grade and the trunks of such trees are sufficiently spaced or are so located as to be unlikely to substantially interrupt the line of sight. A sign structure permitted by Chapter 4, Article 4 may be located within the intersection visibility area provided that visual clearance exists between three feet and seven feet above the ground. 

B.  Required Corner Setbacks. 
1.  The following corner setbacks shall be required. 
Street Type (x) Street Type (y) Non-Arterial
Roadway Minor
Arterial Major
Arterial Major Arterial 30 feet/15 feet 30 feet/25 feet 30 feet/30 feet Minor Arterial 25 feet/15 feet 25 feet/25 feet Non-Arterial Roadway 15 feet/15 feet  

2.  These distances may be reduced by the Building Official upon a showing that no public safety issues exist. 
4.1.6.   Exceptions to Height Requirements.
    The following structures may extend above the height limits in Articles 2 and 3 of this Chapter, provided that the portion of the structure exceeding the height limit is not used for dwelling purposes. 
1.  Chimneys or smokestacks; 
2.  Cooling towers, gas containers, elevator penthouses, skylights, stairways, or ventilating fans; 
3.  Steeples or spires; 
4.  Fire or parapet walls; 
5.  Flagpoles; 
6.  Communication towers; 
7.  Silos, water tanks, or standpipes; and 
8.  Any other similar structures. 
4.1.7.   Fire Suppression Required.
    No building or structure may be erected that exceeds two stories in height, exceeds 15,000 square feet in area, or has more than four dwelling units, unless the building or structure has a sprinkler system approved by the Department of Public Safety. 
4.1.6. - Exceptions to Height Requirements. 
    The following structures may extend above the height limits in Articles 2 and 3 of this Chapter, provided that the portion of the structure exceeding the height limit is not used for dwelling purposes. 
1.  Chimneys or smokestacks; 
2.  Cooling towers, gas containers, elevator penthouses, skylights, stairways, or ventilating fans; 
3.  Steeples or spires; 
4.  Fire or parapet walls; 
5.  Flagpoles; 
6.  Communication towers; 
7.  Silos, water tanks, or standpipes; and 
8.  Any other similar structures. 
4.1.7. - Fire Suppression Required. 
    No building or structure may be erected that exceeds two stories in height, exceeds 15,000 square feet in area, or has more than four dwelling units, unless the building or structure has a sprinkler system approved by the Department of Public Safety. 
ARTICLE 2. - RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS 

4.2.1. - Table of Residential Design Standards. 
STANDARD RS-15 RS-10 RS-8 RS-6 RSH RSS RSA RSM RML RMH RMP PR District Size, min. sq. ft. or acres - - - - - - - 10 
acres 12,500 10,000 8 acres 4 acres Lot Area, minimum sq. ft. or acres 15,000 10,000 8,000 6,000 1 acre 3 acres - 6,000 3,500 2,500 - See 4.2.6.C, 4.2.6.D, 4.2.6.E, 4.2.6.G Lot Width, minimum 100 
feet 75 feet 70 feet 60 feet 100 
feet 100 
feet - 80 feet 35 feet 25 feet 150 
feet Front Yard, minimum 20 feet * 50 feet - 20 feet ** Side Yard, minimum 10 feet 25 feet - 10 feet 25 feet Rear Yard, minimum 20 percent of lot depth, 
not to exceed 50 feet 25 feet - 20 percent of lot 
depth, not to exceed 
50 feet 25 feet Accessory Building Setback (side or rear yard) 10 feet Height, maximum 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 50 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 25 feet Land Area per Principal Dwelling, minimum square feet or acres 15,000 10,000 8,000 6,000 1 acre 3 acres - 6,000 3,500 2,500 3,600 Open Space, minimum percentage - - - - - - 20% 40% 40% 40% 40% 20%  
    * RS-6 See 4.1.3.A    ** RML, RMH See 4.1.3.A 
4.2.2.   Minimum Unit Size.
    Every new dwelling unit shall have minimum gross floor area of 450 square feet. 
4.2.3.   Minimum Building Separation.
    Where there is more than one primary structure on a single lot of record, there shall be at least 15 feet between one-story structures and at least 20 feet between two-story or taller structures and any other structure. The Building Official may reduce this required separation where no public safety concerns exist. 
4.2.4.   Underground Wiring.
    When there is a conflict between the ordinance and an existing franchise agreement, the City Manager or his designee will determine whether the utilities are installed aboveground or belowground. The following applies as long as there is no conflict with an existing franchise agreement between the City and the service provider. Any new electric service lines to multifamily structures or manufactured home parks shall be installed underground. Electric service lines to a new single-family dwelling shall be installed underground. New electric distribution lines shall be placed underground. All new wiring for telephone, cable, or any other purpose shall also be installed underground. In some circumstances, it may not be reasonable, technically feasible, or economically practical to install new wiring underground. In these instances, permission to install the utilities aboveground may be requested. If deemed appropriate, the City Manager or his designee may grant permission to install the utilities aboveground. The undergrounding requirement does not apply to any wiring related to maintenance, repair, or upgrades of existing aboveground facilities, and it does not apply to the placement of any aboveground facilities, such as cabinets and pedestals, that are necessary for provision of service using the underground facilities. 
4.2.5.   Parking of Recreational, Oversize, and Emergency Vehicles.
A.  Recreational Vehicles. A recreational vehicle (including motor homes, travel or camper trailers, pickup campers, boats, and boat trailers) may be parked or stored on any lot in a residential zoning district in accordance with the following standards. 
1.  On an interior lot, the recreational vehicle is parked in an enclosed building, or in the rear yard, or in the side yard not projecting beyond the front of the roof line of the principal dwelling on the lot. 
2.  On a corner lot, the recreational vehicle is parked in an enclosed building, or in the rear yard, or in the side yard not projecting beyond the front of the roof line of the principal dwelling on the lot; if parked in the rear or side yard, the recreational vehicle must be completely screened by evergreen vegetation from view from all streets that run along the rear yard or side yard in which it is parked. 
3.  The recreational vehicle is parked or stored entirely on the residential lot in a safe and orderly condition, and if parked or stored on a driveway, it shall not be a hazard to persons or vehicles entering or exiting the driveway, persons passing on the sidewalk, or persons in vehicles passing on any adjoining street. 
4.  The combined total number of recreational vehicles and oversized vehicles permitted pursuant to 4.2.5.B so parked or stored on any residential lot shall be limited to three, not including those kept in a garage or other enclosed building. 
5.  A recreational vehicle may be parked anywhere on a residential lot for a period not to exceed 24 hours for the purposes of loading and unloading. 
6.  A recreational vehicle shall not be used for the purposes of permanent human habitation while parked or stored on any residential lot. Temporary storage or parking of a recreational vehicle for housing of temporary guests shall be permitted for a period not to exceed two consecutive weeks during any one calendar year. 
B.  Oversize Vehicles Other Than Recreational Vehicles. 
1.  Any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding 26,000 pounds Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR), or any vehicle designed to transport 16 or more passengers including the driver, or any vehicle placarded for hazardous materials shall be prohibited in a residential zone except to allow deliveries or provide services to residents. 
2.  Any vehicle which has an overall vehicle length exceeding 22.5 feet in length or 8 feet in height, excluding trailer hitches, winches, handicapped accessories, roof racks, etc. must be located and screened in the same manner as a recreational vehicle as set forth at 4.2.5.A. The total combined number of these oversize vehicles and recreational vehicles permitted pursuant to 4.2.5.A parked or stored on any residential lot shall be limited to three. 
3.  No such vehicle may be parked on a lot in a residential zone unless the lot is occupied by a single-family dwelling and the vehicle is operated by the occupant of the dwelling. 
4.  This section shall not apply to (1) any vehicle kept in a garage or other enclosed building, or (2) horse-related vehicles in the Horse District or RSS zones. 
C.  Emergency Vehicles. One emergency vehicle may be located on a lot occupied by a single-family dwelling as long as the vehicle complies with the standards for recreational vehicles at 4.2.5.A, and the vehicle does not use its siren or flashing lights while on the lot. Emergency vehicles may be located in a multi-family or attached single-family residential project in an area screened from view. For the purposes of this section, an emergency vehicle is an ambulance or a tow truck displaying a decal in a prominent location verifying that it is licensed by the State of South Carolina to provide emergency road service. (Ord. 09102001A) (Ord. 08112003) 
4.2.6.   Planned Residential Projects.
A.  Location. Land in the Horse District or listed on the Aiken Historic Register may not be zoned PR. 
B.  Approval of Concept Plan. 
1.  Concurrent with the zoning of land to PR, a concept plan must be approved by City Council in accordance with 6.2.16 and the design criteria below. 
2.  Prior to submission of an application for the concept plan, the potential applicant shall meet at least once with Planning Department staff to review a preliminary proposed concept plan which shall include the following: 
a.  existing roads and utilities; 
b.  natural features including steep slopes, open areas, wooded areas with a general description of varieties and sizes of trees, location of streams and ponds, wetland areas, and soil types; 
c.  the location of proposed structures; 
d.  the location and types of dwelling units; 
e.  the location and amount of open space; 
f.  how the roads, trails, and pathways connect to surrounding areas; and 
g.  if the subject property is in the City limits, a description of how the design of the project will relate to the surrounding area. 
3.  Staff shall provide written comments to the potential applicant within 10 business days after the meeting. 
4.  Each concept plan is subject to detailed review by City Council, and there shall be no entitlement to either the maximum permitted density or minimum required open space. City Council may require additional special conditions to ensure compatibility with surrounding development, preservation of natural or historic features, provision of adequate infrastructure, and creativity of design. Where a use permitted in a PR project is considered a conditional or special exception use, City Council shall consider the specific use standards in Chapter 3, Article 3. 
C.  Tract Size. The minimum size of any tract or parcel to be developed for a Planned Residential project shall be four acres and the tract shall have permanent paved access to a paved public road or a road to be paved and dedicated to the public. 
D.  Lot Size and Width. There shall be no minimum lot size, no minimum percentage of lot coverage, and no minimum lot width. 
E.  Building Setbacks, Separation, and Height. 
1.  No building may be closer than 10 feet to the perimeter of the PR project. 
2.  Except for accessory buildings, no single-story building shall be erected within 15 feet of any other single-story building, and no multi-story building shall be erected within 20 feet of any other building except for encroachments permitted by 4.1.3.C. 
3.  Any accessory building must be at least three feet from any side or rear property line. 
4.  There shall be a maximum building height of 50 feet in nonresidential areas and 35 feet in residential areas. 
5.  Maximum structure heights and buildable area shall be shown on all subdivision plats submitted for the PR project, and each plat shall be annotated to inform purchasers of the City's requirements for building separation within the PR project. 
F.  Streets and Off-Street Parking. 
1.  Private streets shall be allowed only if the development would not pose an obstacle to the creation of public roads and may not be permitted if the proposed development would be too large. If internal streets are intended to remain private, City Council may require additional right-of-way (including either additional streets or additional right-of-way width) to ensure that future interconnection with other City streets can be accommodated. 
2.  All streets shall conform with the requirements of the Land Development Regulations, and streets shall be acceptable to the City Engineer. 
3.  Off-street parking shall be provided for each individual land use in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 4, Article 5. 
G.  Design Standards. 
1.  General. All PR developments shall be designed to meet or exceed the following criteria. 
a.  An arrangement of proposed uses on the site that properly considers significant natural features and drainage patterns, roadway access, and surrounding land uses; 
b.  Clustering of development sites so as to preserve natural or historic features and provide usable common open space; 
c.  Design and sizing of streets, drainage, and utility systems to accommodate the overall service demand of the Planned Residential project; 
d.  Design of buildings and structures that is appropriate and compatible with surrounding development. (Ord. 05142007A) 
2.  Land in the City Being Rezoned to PR. For land in the City limits being rezoned to PR, the project should relate appropriately to surrounding development in site and architectural design, dwelling unit density, and the types of buffers, walls, and fences. 
3.  Residential. 
a.  The maximum dwelling unit density of the PR project shall be 12 units per acre. (Ord. 09122011C) 
b.  Every dwelling unit shall have access to a public or private street, common court or walkway, or other area dedicated to public or common use. 
c.  City Council may limit the length of any building. (Ord. 04082013) 
d.  Measures shall be taken to provide reasonable visual and acoustical privacy for dwelling units. 
4.  Commercial and Institutional 
a.  A maximum of five percent of the total area of ten acres or larger is permitted to be devoted to uses other than residential and open space, but there is no entitlement to any commercial or institutional use. 
b.  Commercial development shall be designed primarily to serve the residents of the Planned Residential project. Location of commercial development should follow one of two possible patterns. 
i.  Central to the PR project to provide convenient pedestrian access to goods and services for residents of the PR project. 
ii.  On the periphery of the PR project such that residents pass the commercial use as they enter or exit the PR project. 
c.  City Council may place restrictions on signs for commercial development at the time of concept plan approval or revision. 
5.  Open Space. 
a.  All open space areas shall be held in common for the enjoyment of the residents of the development or dedicated to the City for the use and enjoyment of the general public. 
i.  A minimum of one-half of the required open space area shall be improved for passive and active recreational use. 
ii.  Required open space shall be in addition to any required landscape, buffer, or setback areas required for individual uses with the development. 
b.  The portion of the project composed predominantly of detached single-family dwelling units must have at least 20 percent open space. The portion of the project composed predominantly of multifamily residential units must have at least 40 percent open space. The portion of the project composed predominantly of nonresidential development must have at least the open space required in the PC District. City Council may vary the standards of this section to allow for creative design. (Ord. 09122011C) 
c.  Common open space required by these regulations shall be developed in accordance with the following. 
i.  The amount of open space required shall not include land area devoted to other uses, including buildings, except for recreational structures. 
ii.  Common open space shall be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses proposed for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the development considering its size, density, expected population, topography, and the number and type of dwellings to be provided. 
iii.  Common open space is intended to serve as a community amenity, providing focal points for the development (including squares, plazas, or greenways), as well as passive and active recreational space that serves the needs of the residents. Residential development within the PR project is intended to have a close visual relationship to the provided open space. 
iv.  Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use, but common open space containing natural features, existing trees, and groundcover worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. 
v.  The site planning of the PR project shall provide open space which provides for internal connectivity and is useable by the residents. For the purposes of this Section, parcels under 25 feet in width or located without access by residents shall not be counted as open space. 
vi.  Open space should connect with similar open spaces on adjacent properties in order promote an interconnected network of greenways and trails. 
vii.  The buildings, structures, and improvements proposed in the common areas shall conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space. 
viii.  Proposed development staging shall provide for coordination of the improvement of the common open space and the construction of dwelling units in the PR project. 
ix.  Legal instruments as provided under the Horizontal Property Act of South Carolina shall govern the permanent retention and maintenance of any common open space not dedicated to the City. A description of such lands shall be recorded with the proper authorities. 
H.  Public Uses. City Council may require the PR project to reserve land for the location of public uses including, but not limited to, Public Safety stations, parks, and regional detention/ retention ponds. 
I.  Buffers. City Council may require buffers or other open space wherever necessary to protect nearby property. Council may require the buffer to be left in its natural state or to have additional vegetation and may restrict encroachments into it. This buffer may be included as part of the required open space, and the City shall inspect the buffer prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for each section or phase. 
J.  Revision of Plans after Final Approval. Changes to an approved concept plan not considered significant may be approved by the Planning Director. Any change in the approved concept plan that affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, or similar changes shall require approval by City Council after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission regarding the changes. A request for a revision of the concept plan shall be supported by a written statement explaining why the revisions are necessary or desirable and shall follow the approval procedure at 6.2.16. Review of a concept plan may be required if no building permits have been issued in the previous five years. (Ord. 11082004A) (Ord. 02132006A) 
4.2.7.   Manufactured Home Subdivisions (RSM District).
A.  A manufactured housing subdivision shall contain a minimum of ten acres. 
B.  All housing located in any subdivision in the RSM District shall meet the following standards. 
1.  The unit shall be the only habitable structure upon the lot on which it is placed. 
2.  The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 21/2 feet for every 12 feet of horizontal run. 
3.  The roof shall have eaves that project a minimum of 12 inches from the exterior wall. 
4.  The home shall have a label or documents certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
5.  The wheels, axles, tongue, towing apparatus, and transporting lights shall be removed prior to final installation of the unit. 
6.  The unit shall be placed on a permanent foundation consisting of masonry or concrete and constructed to local building code standards. 
7.  Skirting or a curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access door, shall be installed and maintained so that it encloses the area under the structure. The skirting or foundation must be a continuous, complete, opaque, and rigid surface that lends permanency to the appearance of the unit and totally screens the crawl space under the unit. The foundation skirting or curtain wall shall be of brick or stucco only. Material used for the skirting shall be erected so as not to create a fire hazard and maintained in a good state of repair. 
8.  Crawl space shall be provided under each unit with access and ventilation as required by the Council of American Building Officials (CABO) Code, latest edition as adopted by the City of Aiken. 
9.  The unit shall be located so that its longer dimension is parallel to the street upon which the lot fronts. 
10.  Steps to the ground level with handrails and a permanent landing shall be provided at each outside doorway in compliance with the requirements of the Council of American Building Officials (CABO) Code, latest edition as adopted by the City of Aiken. 
11.  All electrical service equipment shall be mounted on the structure in compliance with the conditions imposed by Exceptions No. 1 and No. 2 under Section 550-23(a) of the National Electric Code (NEC), latest edition, as adopted by the City of Aiken. 
4.2.8.   Manufactured Home Parks (RMP District).
    Any construction or alteration of a Manufactured Home Park shall meet the following requirements. 
A.  Manufactured Housing Construction. No home without a label or documents certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 shall be admitted to any Manufactured Home Park unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of the Mobile Home Manufacturers Association Mobile Home Standards for Plumbing, Heating and Electrical Systems, or of any state or locally administered code insuring equal or better plumbing, heating, or electrical installations. 
B.  Hazardous Conditions. No Manufactured Home Park shall be so located as to be subjected to hazardous conditions, including, but not limited to, flooding, poor soil conditions, and poor drainage. 
C.  Water Supply and Sewage Disposal. Every Manufactured Home Park created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be connected to a public water supply and a public sewage disposal system. 
D.  Site Design. 
1.  Streets. Streets shall be privately owned, constructed, and maintained. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography, to safe movement of traffic, and to adequate control of surface water, ground water, and drainage. All streets shall conform to the Land Development Regulations. 
2.  Pedestrian Access. Pedestrian walkways, three feet wide for individual lots and four feet wide for common space, shall be provided for safe pedestrian access between individual homes and between homes and service buildings within the Park. No walkway shall be so constructed as to be inundated or isolated during heavy rainfall or storms. Such walkways shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or gravel, and shall be graded to prevent standing water. 
3.  Manufactured Home Spaces. 
a.  Spaces for single-wide manufactured home units shall have an area of not less than 3,600 square feet with a minimum width at all points of 40 feet. 
b.  Spaces for double-wide manufactured home units shall have an area of not less than 6,000 square feet with a minimum width at all points of 60 feet. 
c.  Each space shall have all corners clearly marked. 
d.  Each space shall be directly accessible from an approved internal Park street. No direct access to spaces from public streets shall be permitted. 
e.  Homes shall be separated from each other by not less than 15 feet end-to-end, 20 feet side-to-side, and 36 feet on opposite sides of an internal street. 
f.  No home shall be located less than 50 feet from the Park boundary. 
g.  Each space shall be provided with a concrete patio, wooden deck, or similar structure of at least 100 square feet which shall be convenient to the entrance of the manufactured home. An awning may be placed over such patio, but no structure shall be placed thereon. This requirement may be waived in consideration of special design alternatives proposed by Park developers and approved by the Building Official. 
h.  All homes shall be completely skirted. 
i.  All steps providing access to homes shall be permanent and include a handrail. 
j.  Expandable rooms on homes shall be deemed an integral part of the home and shall meet all requirements stated herein. 
k.  Each space shall provide closed, watertight, weatherproof storage facilities, exclusive of space within the home, of not more than 70 square feet. No storage shall be permitted on the space other than in closed storage facilities, in completely skirted and closed spaces beneath homes, or within homes. 
4.  Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the minimum rates of 11/2 spaces for each home space. Such parking shall be conveniently located to spaces for which it is so provided. Each parking space shall be at least 9 feet by 18 feet. Parking may be on the space or in off-street parking bays. 
5.  Illumination. Adequate illumination on all streets and sidewalks shall be provided to insure the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night. Such illumination shall create no direct glare into surrounding residential areas. 
E.  Open Space Standards. Common open space as required at 4.2.1 shall be developed in accordance with the following. 
1.  The amount of open space required shall not include land area devoted to other uses including buildings except for recreational structures. 
2.  Common open space shall be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses proposed for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the development considering its size, topography, and the number of dwellings to be provided. 
3.  Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use, but common open space containing natural features, existing trees, and groundcover worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. 
4.  The site planning of the development shall provide open space which provides for internal connectivity and is useable by the residents of the park. Parcels under 25 feet in width or located without access by residents shall not be counted as open space. 
5.  The buildings, structures, and improvements proposed in the common areas shall conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space. 
6.  Where a manufactured home park abuts land that is zoned or used for residential purposes, a permanent open space at least 25 feet wide, or greater if deemed necessary by City Council, shall be provided along the property lines. City Council may require such open space along all property lines if it is deemed desirable. This open space area shall be left in its natural state or additional vegetation may be required; and no driveway or off-street parking shall be permitted in such open space. This buffer may be included as part of the required open space, and the City shall inspect the buffer prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for each section or phase to ensure there is adequate vegetation to create an effective perimeter buffer. The required perimeter buffer shall be appropriately landscaped and planted so as to provide a pleasing appearance to surrounding property. 
7.  Ground cover in the form of grass or other vegetation shall be provided throughout every manufactured home park so as to provide pleasant, and, insofar as practicable, dust-free conditions. 
8.  Legal instruments as provided under the Horizontal Property Act of South Carolina shall govern the permanent retention and maintenance of the commonly-owned open space not dedicated to the City. A description of such lands shall be recorded with the proper authorities. 
F.  Recreation. Not less than ten percent of the total area of every Manufactured Home Park shall be reserved and developed for a recreation area. Such area shall be conveniently located within each Park and shall contain individual areas which shall be equipped for passive adult recreation, children's play, and a fenced tot lot. If a swimming pool is furnished, it shall be separated from all other uses by a fence having a latched gate. Required setbacks shall not be counted as part of the required recreation area. 
G.  Building Code Standards. 
1.  Electrical Installation. All new electrical service shall be located underground. All electrical installations external to manufactured homes shall meet all requirements of the latest locally adopted codes. All transformers and other equipment shall be ground-mounted and screened from public view. 
2.  Plumbing Installation. All plumbing external to homes shall be installed in accordance with the latest locally adopted codes. 
3.  Gas Installation. All natural or liquefied petroleum gas installations shall be installed in accordance with the latest locally adopted codes or codes enforceable by the South Carolina State Fire Marshal, whichever are more stringent. 
4.  Fuel Oil System. 
a.  All fuel oil supply systems provided for homes, service buildings, and other structures shall be properly installed and maintained. 
b.  All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to homes shall be properly installed and securely fastened in place. 
c.  All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath the home or less than five feet away from any home exit. 
d.  Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against physical damage. 
5.  Utility Connections. All lot utility ground connections shall be rodent and vermin proof. 
6.  Buildings. All buildings of whatever kind constructed in a Manufactured Home Park that are not manufactured homes shall be constructed in accordance with the Southern Standard Building Code, latest edition adopted by the City of Aiken. 
7.  Fire Protection. 
a.  All Parks shall be equipped with fire protection equipment as required by the latest locally adopted codes. 
b.  Park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish, and other flammable materials. 
c.  Portable fire extinguishers of an approved type shall be kept in service buildings and at all other appropriate locations and shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
d.  Standard fire hydrants shall be located within 500 feet of each home or service building unless waived by the Building Official. 
e.  Fires shall be ignited only in stoves and other equipment intended for such purposes. 
H.  Refuse Disposal. 
1.  The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in a Manufactured Home Park shall be so managed as to eliminate health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution. 
2.  All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be located within 100 feet of every home space unless an alternative arrangement is approved by the City Engineer. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
I.  Insect and Rodent Control. 
1.  Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control vermin and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the Aiken County Health Department. 
2.  Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, and other pests. 
3.  Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage. Lumber, pipe, and other building materials shall be stored at least four inches above ground. 
4.  Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. 
5.  The growth of brush, weeds, and grass shall be controlled. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
J.  Common Storage Facilities. 
1.  Storage facilities shall be provided in a centralized common facility located convenient to the home spaces. Not less than five percent of the total area of every Manufactured Home Park shall be reserved for a common storage area. 
2.  Such storage facilities shall be completely screened from view of all homes and from view of public streets. 
3.  Such facilities shall be located within a fence having a gate that is capable of remaining closed. Each home shall have a designated storage space within this area of not less than 300 square feet. 
K.  Recreational Vehicles. Travel trailers, campers, motor homes, or other recreational vehicles shall not be permitted on any manufactured home space or area reserved for manufactured home usage. 
L.  Transfer of Parks. A Manufactured Home Park owner shall give notice in writing to the City within 30 days after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any such Park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the new owner of such Park. 
4.2.9.   Attached Single-Family Residential Projects.
A.  Approval of a Concept Plan . Prior to issuance of a building permit for any attached single-family residential units, a concept plan including a site plan and architectural elevations must be approved by City Council in accordance with 6.2.16 and the design standards below. Council may impose conditions on the approval of a concept plan. Council may also waive any provisions of the Zoning Ordinance through approval of a concept plan. 
B.  Street Layout, Off-Street Parking, and Driveways. 
1.  Street Layout and Off-Street Parking. If off-street parking and driveways are to be accessed directly from the primary street, one of the following must be provided as determined by City Council: (1) a landscaped median at least 20 feet in width, or (2) open space in excess of the minimum of 20 percent required by 4.2.9.D to be used as a recreation area. Otherwise, off-street parking spaces shall be accessed from an alley off of the primary street; such parking may not be closer to the primary street than the wall of any residential building and shall be screened from view from the principal street in accordance with 4.6.7.B.2. Required off-street parking does not have to be on the same lot as the dwelling unit but shall be within a reasonable distance. Any parking structure shall have the same architectural style as the dwelling units. 
2.  Driveways. Where driveways from the primary street are allowed, there shall be no more than one driveway per lot. Any driveway on a lot of 30 feet or less in width may not exceed 12 feet in width. Any driveway on a lot of more than 30 feet may have a driveway no more than 18 feet in width. 
C.  Design Standards for Buildings. The following are intended to promote variation in appearance of the units from the primary street on which the unit fronts. 
1.  Façade Variation. 
a.  No building may be longer than 150 feet or appear to consist of more than six units. 
b.  Façades should be varied to avoid long, flat building fronts by using such features as projections, porches, bay windows, and dormers, and by staggering the front walls so that no more than two abutting units are substantially the same and no more than four units in a group are substantially the same. 
c.  There may be no more than three dwelling units in a row without a variation in the front façade of at least one foot in depth. 
2.  Roofline Variation. There may be no more than three dwelling units in a row without a variation in the roofline of at least one foot in height. 
3.  Roof Pitch and Eaves. Each one-story building must have a minimum roof pitch of 7:12 except that a building of at least two stories may have a flat roof. Eaves shall project a minimum of one foot from the exterior wall. 
4.  Garages. No more than 30 percent of the units may have a garage facing the primary street, and such a garage may not project beyond the front wall closest to the street. 
5.  Building Materials. Materials shall be those commonly used in single-family detached dwellings in the Aiken area. 
6.  Building Setback. Setbacks shall be as determined by City Council through approval of the concept plan except that no building shall be closer than 10 feet to a property line on the perimeter of the project excluding a street right-of-way. 
7.  Building Separation. Except for accessory buildings, no single-story building shall be erected within 15 feet of any other single-story building, and no multi-story building shall be erected within 20 feet of any other building except for encroachments permitted by 4.1.3.C. Attached dwelling units shall be considered one building. 
8.  Building Height. The maximum building height shall be 35 feet in the RSA zone. 
D.  Open Space. A minimum of 20 percent of the gross area of the project shall be in open space held in common by the property owners. City Council may require that open space above the minimum be provided including, but not limited to, that provided in lieu of a landscaped median pursuant to 4.2.9.B.1. 
E.  Tree Preservation, Buffers, and Landscaping. 
1.  Tree Preservation. The project must comply with the tree provisions at 4.6.4. 
2.  Landscaping. Trees and shrubbery shall be provided between driveways along the primary street. 
3.  Buffers. The project must comply with the buffer provisions at 4.6.7.E where it abuts land occupied by single-family dwellings or zoned in a single-family category. The buffer must be owned and maintained by the homeowners association. This provision shall not apply to land abutting a street right-of-way. 
(Ord. 06112007A; Ord. No. 04252016 , § 1, 4-25-2016) 
4.2.2. - Minimum Unit Size. 
    Every new dwelling unit shall have minimum gross floor area of 450 square feet. 
4.2.3. - Minimum Building Separation. 
    Where there is more than one primary structure on a single lot of record, there shall be at least 15 feet between one-story structures and at least 20 feet between two-story or taller structures and any other structure. The Building Official may reduce this required separation where no public safety concerns exist. 
4.2.4. - Underground Wiring. 
    When there is a conflict between the ordinance and an existing franchise agreement, the City Manager or his designee will determine whether the utilities are installed aboveground or belowground. The following applies as long as there is no conflict with an existing franchise agreement between the City and the service provider. Any new electric service lines to multifamily structures or manufactured home parks shall be installed underground. Electric service lines to a new single-family dwelling shall be installed underground. New electric distribution lines shall be placed underground. All new wiring for telephone, cable, or any other purpose shall also be installed underground. In some circumstances, it may not be reasonable, technically feasible, or economically practical to install new wiring underground. In these instances, permission to install the utilities aboveground may be requested. If deemed appropriate, the City Manager or his designee may grant permission to install the utilities aboveground. The undergrounding requirement does not apply to any wiring related to maintenance, repair, or upgrades of existing aboveground facilities, and it does not apply to the placement of any aboveground facilities, such as cabinets and pedestals, that are necessary for provision of service using the underground facilities. 
4.2.5. - Parking of Recreational, Oversize, and Emergency Vehicles. 
A.  Recreational Vehicles. A recreational vehicle (including motor homes, travel or camper trailers, pickup campers, boats, and boat trailers) may be parked or stored on any lot in a residential zoning district in accordance with the following standards. 
1.  On an interior lot, the recreational vehicle is parked in an enclosed building, or in the rear yard, or in the side yard not projecting beyond the front of the roof line of the principal dwelling on the lot. 
2.  On a corner lot, the recreational vehicle is parked in an enclosed building, or in the rear yard, or in the side yard not projecting beyond the front of the roof line of the principal dwelling on the lot; if parked in the rear or side yard, the recreational vehicle must be completely screened by evergreen vegetation from view from all streets that run along the rear yard or side yard in which it is parked. 
3.  The recreational vehicle is parked or stored entirely on the residential lot in a safe and orderly condition, and if parked or stored on a driveway, it shall not be a hazard to persons or vehicles entering or exiting the driveway, persons passing on the sidewalk, or persons in vehicles passing on any adjoining street. 
4.  The combined total number of recreational vehicles and oversized vehicles permitted pursuant to 4.2.5.B so parked or stored on any residential lot shall be limited to three, not including those kept in a garage or other enclosed building. 
5.  A recreational vehicle may be parked anywhere on a residential lot for a period not to exceed 24 hours for the purposes of loading and unloading. 
6.  A recreational vehicle shall not be used for the purposes of permanent human habitation while parked or stored on any residential lot. Temporary storage or parking of a recreational vehicle for housing of temporary guests shall be permitted for a period not to exceed two consecutive weeks during any one calendar year. 
B.  Oversize Vehicles Other Than Recreational Vehicles. 
1.  Any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding 26,000 pounds Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR), or any vehicle designed to transport 16 or more passengers including the driver, or any vehicle placarded for hazardous materials shall be prohibited in a residential zone except to allow deliveries or provide services to residents. 
2.  Any vehicle which has an overall vehicle length exceeding 22.5 feet in length or 8 feet in height, excluding trailer hitches, winches, handicapped accessories, roof racks, etc. must be located and screened in the same manner as a recreational vehicle as set forth at 4.2.5.A. The total combined number of these oversize vehicles and recreational vehicles permitted pursuant to 4.2.5.A parked or stored on any residential lot shall be limited to three. 
3.  No such vehicle may be parked on a lot in a residential zone unless the lot is occupied by a single-family dwelling and the vehicle is operated by the occupant of the dwelling. 
4.  This section shall not apply to (1) any vehicle kept in a garage or other enclosed building, or (2) horse-related vehicles in the Horse District or RSS zones. 
C.  Emergency Vehicles. One emergency vehicle may be located on a lot occupied by a single-family dwelling as long as the vehicle complies with the standards for recreational vehicles at 4.2.5.A, and the vehicle does not use its siren or flashing lights while on the lot. Emergency vehicles may be located in a multi-family or attached single-family residential project in an area screened from view. For the purposes of this section, an emergency vehicle is an ambulance or a tow truck displaying a decal in a prominent location verifying that it is licensed by the State of South Carolina to provide emergency road service. (Ord. 09102001A) (Ord. 08112003) 
4.2.6. - Planned Residential Projects. 
A.  Location. Land in the Horse District or listed on the Aiken Historic Register may not be zoned PR. 
B.  Approval of Concept Plan. 
1.  Concurrent with the zoning of land to PR, a concept plan must be approved by City Council in accordance with 6.2.16 and the design criteria below. 
2.  Prior to submission of an application for the concept plan, the potential applicant shall meet at least once with Planning Department staff to review a preliminary proposed concept plan which shall include the following: 
a.  existing roads and utilities; 
b.  natural features including steep slopes, open areas, wooded areas with a general description of varieties and sizes of trees, location of streams and ponds, wetland areas, and soil types; 
c.  the location of proposed structures; 
d.  the location and types of dwelling units; 
e.  the location and amount of open space; 
f.  how the roads, trails, and pathways connect to surrounding areas; and 
g.  if the subject property is in the City limits, a description of how the design of the project will relate to the surrounding area. 
3.  Staff shall provide written comments to the potential applicant within 10 business days after the meeting. 
4.  Each concept plan is subject to detailed review by City Council, and there shall be no entitlement to either the maximum permitted density or minimum required open space. City Council may require additional special conditions to ensure compatibility with surrounding development, preservation of natural or historic features, provision of adequate infrastructure, and creativity of design. Where a use permitted in a PR project is considered a conditional or special exception use, City Council shall consider the specific use standards in Chapter 3, Article 3. 
C.  Tract Size. The minimum size of any tract or parcel to be developed for a Planned Residential project shall be four acres and the tract shall have permanent paved access to a paved public road or a road to be paved and dedicated to the public. 
D.  Lot Size and Width. There shall be no minimum lot size, no minimum percentage of lot coverage, and no minimum lot width. 
E.  Building Setbacks, Separation, and Height. 
1.  No building may be closer than 10 feet to the perimeter of the PR project. 
2.  Except for accessory buildings, no single-story building shall be erected within 15 feet of any other single-story building, and no multi-story building shall be erected within 20 feet of any other building except for encroachments permitted by 4.1.3.C. 
3.  Any accessory building must be at least three feet from any side or rear property line. 
4.  There shall be a maximum building height of 50 feet in nonresidential areas and 35 feet in residential areas. 
5.  Maximum structure heights and buildable area shall be shown on all subdivision plats submitted for the PR project, and each plat shall be annotated to inform purchasers of the City's requirements for building separation within the PR project. 
F.  Streets and Off-Street Parking. 
1.  Private streets shall be allowed only if the development would not pose an obstacle to the creation of public roads and may not be permitted if the proposed development would be too large. If internal streets are intended to remain private, City Council may require additional right-of-way (including either additional streets or additional right-of-way width) to ensure that future interconnection with other City streets can be accommodated. 
2.  All streets shall conform with the requirements of the Land Development Regulations, and streets shall be acceptable to the City Engineer. 
3.  Off-street parking shall be provided for each individual land use in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 4, Article 5. 
G.  Design Standards. 
1.  General. All PR developments shall be designed to meet or exceed the following criteria. 
a.  An arrangement of proposed uses on the site that properly considers significant natural features and drainage patterns, roadway access, and surrounding land uses; 
b.  Clustering of development sites so as to preserve natural or historic features and provide usable common open space; 
c.  Design and sizing of streets, drainage, and utility systems to accommodate the overall service demand of the Planned Residential project; 
d.  Design of buildings and structures that is appropriate and compatible with surrounding development. (Ord. 05142007A) 
2.  Land in the City Being Rezoned to PR. For land in the City limits being rezoned to PR, the project should relate appropriately to surrounding development in site and architectural design, dwelling unit density, and the types of buffers, walls, and fences. 
3.  Residential. 
a.  The maximum dwelling unit density of the PR project shall be 12 units per acre. (Ord. 09122011C) 
b.  Every dwelling unit shall have access to a public or private street, common court or walkway, or other area dedicated to public or common use. 
c.  City Council may limit the length of any building. (Ord. 04082013) 
d.  Measures shall be taken to provide reasonable visual and acoustical privacy for dwelling units. 
4.  Commercial and Institutional 
a.  A maximum of five percent of the total area of ten acres or larger is permitted to be devoted to uses other than residential and open space, but there is no entitlement to any commercial or institutional use. 
b.  Commercial development shall be designed primarily to serve the residents of the Planned Residential project. Location of commercial development should follow one of two possible patterns. 
i.  Central to the PR project to provide convenient pedestrian access to goods and services for residents of the PR project. 
ii.  On the periphery of the PR project such that residents pass the commercial use as they enter or exit the PR project. 
c.  City Council may place restrictions on signs for commercial development at the time of concept plan approval or revision. 
5.  Open Space. 
a.  All open space areas shall be held in common for the enjoyment of the residents of the development or dedicated to the City for the use and enjoyment of the general public. 
i.  A minimum of one-half of the required open space area shall be improved for passive and active recreational use. 
ii.  Required open space shall be in addition to any required landscape, buffer, or setback areas required for individual uses with the development. 
b.  The portion of the project composed predominantly of detached single-family dwelling units must have at least 20 percent open space. The portion of the project composed predominantly of multifamily residential units must have at least 40 percent open space. The portion of the project composed predominantly of nonresidential development must have at least the open space required in the PC District. City Council may vary the standards of this section to allow for creative design. (Ord. 09122011C) 
c.  Common open space required by these regulations shall be developed in accordance with the following. 
i.  The amount of open space required shall not include land area devoted to other uses, including buildings, except for recreational structures. 
ii.  Common open space shall be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses proposed for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the development considering its size, density, expected population, topography, and the number and type of dwellings to be provided. 
iii.  Common open space is intended to serve as a community amenity, providing focal points for the development (including squares, plazas, or greenways), as well as passive and active recreational space that serves the needs of the residents. Residential development within the PR project is intended to have a close visual relationship to the provided open space. 
iv.  Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use, but common open space containing natural features, existing trees, and groundcover worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. 
v.  The site planning of the PR project shall provide open space which provides for internal connectivity and is useable by the residents. For the purposes of this Section, parcels under 25 feet in width or located without access by residents shall not be counted as open space. 
vi.  Open space should connect with similar open spaces on adjacent properties in order promote an interconnected network of greenways and trails. 
vii.  The buildings, structures, and improvements proposed in the common areas shall conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space. 
viii.  Proposed development staging shall provide for coordination of the improvement of the common open space and the construction of dwelling units in the PR project. 
ix.  Legal instruments as provided under the Horizontal Property Act of South Carolina shall govern the permanent retention and maintenance of any common open space not dedicated to the City. A description of such lands shall be recorded with the proper authorities. 
H.  Public Uses. City Council may require the PR project to reserve land for the location of public uses including, but not limited to, Public Safety stations, parks, and regional detention/ retention ponds. 
I.  Buffers. City Council may require buffers or other open space wherever necessary to protect nearby property. Council may require the buffer to be left in its natural state or to have additional vegetation and may restrict encroachments into it. This buffer may be included as part of the required open space, and the City shall inspect the buffer prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for each section or phase. 
J.  Revision of Plans after Final Approval. Changes to an approved concept plan not considered significant may be approved by the Planning Director. Any change in the approved concept plan that affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, or similar changes shall require approval by City Council after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission regarding the changes. A request for a revision of the concept plan shall be supported by a written statement explaining why the revisions are necessary or desirable and shall follow the approval procedure at 6.2.16. Review of a concept plan may be required if no building permits have been issued in the previous five years. (Ord. 11082004A) (Ord. 02132006A) 
4.2.7. - Manufactured Home Subdivisions (RSM District). 
A.  A manufactured housing subdivision shall contain a minimum of ten acres. 
B.  All housing located in any subdivision in the RSM District shall meet the following standards. 
1.  The unit shall be the only habitable structure upon the lot on which it is placed. 
2.  The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 21/2 feet for every 12 feet of horizontal run. 
3.  The roof shall have eaves that project a minimum of 12 inches from the exterior wall. 
4.  The home shall have a label or documents certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
5.  The wheels, axles, tongue, towing apparatus, and transporting lights shall be removed prior to final installation of the unit. 
6.  The unit shall be placed on a permanent foundation consisting of masonry or concrete and constructed to local building code standards. 
7.  Skirting or a curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access door, shall be installed and maintained so that it encloses the area under the structure. The skirting or foundation must be a continuous, complete, opaque, and rigid surface that lends permanency to the appearance of the unit and totally screens the crawl space under the unit. The foundation skirting or curtain wall shall be of brick or stucco only. Material used for the skirting shall be erected so as not to create a fire hazard and maintained in a good state of repair. 
8.  Crawl space shall be provided under each unit with access and ventilation as required by the Council of American Building Officials (CABO) Code, latest edition as adopted by the City of Aiken. 
9.  The unit shall be located so that its longer dimension is parallel to the street upon which the lot fronts. 
10.  Steps to the ground level with handrails and a permanent landing shall be provided at each outside doorway in compliance with the requirements of the Council of American Building Officials (CABO) Code, latest edition as adopted by the City of Aiken. 
11.  All electrical service equipment shall be mounted on the structure in compliance with the conditions imposed by Exceptions No. 1 and No. 2 under Section 550-23(a) of the National Electric Code (NEC), latest edition, as adopted by the City of Aiken. 
4.2.8. - Manufactured Home Parks (RMP District). 
    Any construction or alteration of a Manufactured Home Park shall meet the following requirements. 
A.  Manufactured Housing Construction. No home without a label or documents certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 shall be admitted to any Manufactured Home Park unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of the Mobile Home Manufacturers Association Mobile Home Standards for Plumbing, Heating and Electrical Systems, or of any state or locally administered code insuring equal or better plumbing, heating, or electrical installations. 
B.  Hazardous Conditions. No Manufactured Home Park shall be so located as to be subjected to hazardous conditions, including, but not limited to, flooding, poor soil conditions, and poor drainage. 
C.  Water Supply and Sewage Disposal. Every Manufactured Home Park created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be connected to a public water supply and a public sewage disposal system. 
D.  Site Design. 
1.  Streets. Streets shall be privately owned, constructed, and maintained. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography, to safe movement of traffic, and to adequate control of surface water, ground water, and drainage. All streets shall conform to the Land Development Regulations. 
2.  Pedestrian Access. Pedestrian walkways, three feet wide for individual lots and four feet wide for common space, shall be provided for safe pedestrian access between individual homes and between homes and service buildings within the Park. No walkway shall be so constructed as to be inundated or isolated during heavy rainfall or storms. Such walkways shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or gravel, and shall be graded to prevent standing water. 
3.  Manufactured Home Spaces. 
a.  Spaces for single-wide manufactured home units shall have an area of not less than 3,600 square feet with a minimum width at all points of 40 feet. 
b.  Spaces for double-wide manufactured home units shall have an area of not less than 6,000 square feet with a minimum width at all points of 60 feet. 
c.  Each space shall have all corners clearly marked. 
d.  Each space shall be directly accessible from an approved internal Park street. No direct access to spaces from public streets shall be permitted. 
e.  Homes shall be separated from each other by not less than 15 feet end-to-end, 20 feet side-to-side, and 36 feet on opposite sides of an internal street. 
f.  No home shall be located less than 50 feet from the Park boundary. 
g.  Each space shall be provided with a concrete patio, wooden deck, or similar structure of at least 100 square feet which shall be convenient to the entrance of the manufactured home. An awning may be placed over such patio, but no structure shall be placed thereon. This requirement may be waived in consideration of special design alternatives proposed by Park developers and approved by the Building Official. 
h.  All homes shall be completely skirted. 
i.  All steps providing access to homes shall be permanent and include a handrail. 
j.  Expandable rooms on homes shall be deemed an integral part of the home and shall meet all requirements stated herein. 
k.  Each space shall provide closed, watertight, weatherproof storage facilities, exclusive of space within the home, of not more than 70 square feet. No storage shall be permitted on the space other than in closed storage facilities, in completely skirted and closed spaces beneath homes, or within homes. 
4.  Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the minimum rates of 11/2 spaces for each home space. Such parking shall be conveniently located to spaces for which it is so provided. Each parking space shall be at least 9 feet by 18 feet. Parking may be on the space or in off-street parking bays. 
5.  Illumination. Adequate illumination on all streets and sidewalks shall be provided to insure the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night. Such illumination shall create no direct glare into surrounding residential areas. 
E.  Open Space Standards. Common open space as required at 4.2.1 shall be developed in accordance with the following. 
1.  The amount of open space required shall not include land area devoted to other uses including buildings except for recreational structures. 
2.  Common open space shall be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses proposed for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the development considering its size, topography, and the number of dwellings to be provided. 
3.  Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use, but common open space containing natural features, existing trees, and groundcover worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. 
4.  The site planning of the development shall provide open space which provides for internal connectivity and is useable by the residents of the park. Parcels under 25 feet in width or located without access by residents shall not be counted as open space. 
5.  The buildings, structures, and improvements proposed in the common areas shall conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space. 
6.  Where a manufactured home park abuts land that is zoned or used for residential purposes, a permanent open space at least 25 feet wide, or greater if deemed necessary by City Council, shall be provided along the property lines. City Council may require such open space along all property lines if it is deemed desirable. This open space area shall be left in its natural state or additional vegetation may be required; and no driveway or off-street parking shall be permitted in such open space. This buffer may be included as part of the required open space, and the City shall inspect the buffer prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for each section or phase to ensure there is adequate vegetation to create an effective perimeter buffer. The required perimeter buffer shall be appropriately landscaped and planted so as to provide a pleasing appearance to surrounding property. 
7.  Ground cover in the form of grass or other vegetation shall be provided throughout every manufactured home park so as to provide pleasant, and, insofar as practicable, dust-free conditions. 
8.  Legal instruments as provided under the Horizontal Property Act of South Carolina shall govern the permanent retention and maintenance of the commonly-owned open space not dedicated to the City. A description of such lands shall be recorded with the proper authorities. 
F.  Recreation. Not less than ten percent of the total area of every Manufactured Home Park shall be reserved and developed for a recreation area. Such area shall be conveniently located within each Park and shall contain individual areas which shall be equipped for passive adult recreation, children's play, and a fenced tot lot. If a swimming pool is furnished, it shall be separated from all other uses by a fence having a latched gate. Required setbacks shall not be counted as part of the required recreation area. 
G.  Building Code Standards. 
1.  Electrical Installation. All new electrical service shall be located underground. All electrical installations external to manufactured homes shall meet all requirements of the latest locally adopted codes. All transformers and other equipment shall be ground-mounted and screened from public view. 
2.  Plumbing Installation. All plumbing external to homes shall be installed in accordance with the latest locally adopted codes. 
3.  Gas Installation. All natural or liquefied petroleum gas installations shall be installed in accordance with the latest locally adopted codes or codes enforceable by the South Carolina State Fire Marshal, whichever are more stringent. 
4.  Fuel Oil System. 
a.  All fuel oil supply systems provided for homes, service buildings, and other structures shall be properly installed and maintained. 
b.  All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to homes shall be properly installed and securely fastened in place. 
c.  All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath the home or less than five feet away from any home exit. 
d.  Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against physical damage. 
5.  Utility Connections. All lot utility ground connections shall be rodent and vermin proof. 
6.  Buildings. All buildings of whatever kind constructed in a Manufactured Home Park that are not manufactured homes shall be constructed in accordance with the Southern Standard Building Code, latest edition adopted by the City of Aiken. 
7.  Fire Protection. 
a.  All Parks shall be equipped with fire protection equipment as required by the latest locally adopted codes. 
b.  Park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish, and other flammable materials. 
c.  Portable fire extinguishers of an approved type shall be kept in service buildings and at all other appropriate locations and shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
d.  Standard fire hydrants shall be located within 500 feet of each home or service building unless waived by the Building Official. 
e.  Fires shall be ignited only in stoves and other equipment intended for such purposes. 
H.  Refuse Disposal. 
1.  The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in a Manufactured Home Park shall be so managed as to eliminate health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution. 
2.  All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be located within 100 feet of every home space unless an alternative arrangement is approved by the City Engineer. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
I.  Insect and Rodent Control. 
1.  Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control vermin and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the Aiken County Health Department. 
2.  Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, and other pests. 
3.  Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage. Lumber, pipe, and other building materials shall be stored at least four inches above ground. 
4.  Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. 
5.  The growth of brush, weeds, and grass shall be controlled. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
J.  Common Storage Facilities. 
1.  Storage facilities shall be provided in a centralized common facility located convenient to the home spaces. Not less than five percent of the total area of every Manufactured Home Park shall be reserved for a common storage area. 
2.  Such storage facilities shall be completely screened from view of all homes and from view of public streets. 
3.  Such facilities shall be located within a fence having a gate that is capable of remaining closed. Each home shall have a designated storage space within this area of not less than 300 square feet. 
K.  Recreational Vehicles. Travel trailers, campers, motor homes, or other recreational vehicles shall not be permitted on any manufactured home space or area reserved for manufactured home usage. 
L.  Transfer of Parks. A Manufactured Home Park owner shall give notice in writing to the City within 30 days after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any such Park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the new owner of such Park. 
4.2.9. - Attached Single-Family Residential Projects. 
A.  Approval of a Concept Plan . Prior to issuance of a building permit for any attached single-family residential units, a concept plan including a site plan and architectural elevations must be approved by City Council in accordance with 6.2.16 and the design standards below. Council may impose conditions on the approval of a concept plan. Council may also waive any provisions of the Zoning Ordinance through approval of a concept plan. 
B.  Street Layout, Off-Street Parking, and Driveways. 
1.  Street Layout and Off-Street Parking. If off-street parking and driveways are to be accessed directly from the primary street, one of the following must be provided as determined by City Council: (1) a landscaped median at least 20 feet in width, or (2) open space in excess of the minimum of 20 percent required by 4.2.9.D to be used as a recreation area. Otherwise, off-street parking spaces shall be accessed from an alley off of the primary street; such parking may not be closer to the primary street than the wall of any residential building and shall be screened from view from the principal street in accordance with 4.6.7.B.2. Required off-street parking does not have to be on the same lot as the dwelling unit but shall be within a reasonable distance. Any parking structure shall have the same architectural style as the dwelling units. 
2.  Driveways. Where driveways from the primary street are allowed, there shall be no more than one driveway per lot. Any driveway on a lot of 30 feet or less in width may not exceed 12 feet in width. Any driveway on a lot of more than 30 feet may have a driveway no more than 18 feet in width. 
C.  Design Standards for Buildings. The following are intended to promote variation in appearance of the units from the primary street on which the unit fronts. 
1.  Façade Variation. 
a.  No building may be longer than 150 feet or appear to consist of more than six units. 
b.  Façades should be varied to avoid long, flat building fronts by using such features as projections, porches, bay windows, and dormers, and by staggering the front walls so that no more than two abutting units are substantially the same and no more than four units in a group are substantially the same. 
c.  There may be no more than three dwelling units in a row without a variation in the front façade of at least one foot in depth. 
2.  Roofline Variation. There may be no more than three dwelling units in a row without a variation in the roofline of at least one foot in height. 
3.  Roof Pitch and Eaves. Each one-story building must have a minimum roof pitch of 7:12 except that a building of at least two stories may have a flat roof. Eaves shall project a minimum of one foot from the exterior wall. 
4.  Garages. No more than 30 percent of the units may have a garage facing the primary street, and such a garage may not project beyond the front wall closest to the street. 
5.  Building Materials. Materials shall be those commonly used in single-family detached dwellings in the Aiken area. 
6.  Building Setback. Setbacks shall be as determined by City Council through approval of the concept plan except that no building shall be closer than 10 feet to a property line on the perimeter of the project excluding a street right-of-way. 
7.  Building Separation. Except for accessory buildings, no single-story building shall be erected within 15 feet of any other single-story building, and no multi-story building shall be erected within 20 feet of any other building except for encroachments permitted by 4.1.3.C. Attached dwelling units shall be considered one building. 
8.  Building Height. The maximum building height shall be 35 feet in the RSA zone. 
D.  Open Space. A minimum of 20 percent of the gross area of the project shall be in open space held in common by the property owners. City Council may require that open space above the minimum be provided including, but not limited to, that provided in lieu of a landscaped median pursuant to 4.2.9.B.1. 
E.  Tree Preservation, Buffers, and Landscaping. 
1.  Tree Preservation. The project must comply with the tree provisions at 4.6.4. 
2.  Landscaping. Trees and shrubbery shall be provided between driveways along the primary street. 
3.  Buffers. The project must comply with the buffer provisions at 4.6.7.E where it abuts land occupied by single-family dwellings or zoned in a single-family category. The buffer must be owned and maintained by the homeowners association. This provision shall not apply to land abutting a street right-of-way. 
(Ord. 06112007A; Ord. No. 04252016 , § 1, 4-25-2016) 
ARTICLE 3. - NONRESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS 

4.3.1. - Table of Nonresidential Design Standards. 
STANDARD LP/LB O GB PC PI DB LM LI I HD District Size, minimum - - - 5 acres - - - - - - Lot Area, minimum sq. ft. or acres 5,000 7,000 6,000 - - - 15,000 15,000 15,000 10 acres Lot Width, minimum 60 ft 60 ft 60 ft 150 ft - - 75 ft 75 ft 100 ft 100 ft Front Yard, minimum 20 ft 30 ft 30 ft 30 ft - - 30 ft 30 ft 30 ft 30 ft Side Yard, minimum 10 ft 10 ft 10 ft 25 ft - - 20 ft 20 ft 20 ft 20 ft Rear Yard, minimum 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 75 ft - - 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft Height, maximum 35 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 35 55 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft Open Space, minimum 30% 20% 20% 25% * ** - 20% 20% 20% - Land Area per Dwelling Unit, minimum square feet 4,000 3,000 3,000 3,000 - - 3,000 3,000 3,000 -  
  ** less than 5 acres, 20%; 5 acres or more, 25%    * lots less than 5 acres see 4.3.8.C.3 
(Ord. No. 10262015B , § 1, 10-26-2015) 
4.3.2.   Nonresidential Development in LP and LB Districts.
A.  Applicability of Standards. 
1.  The standards in this Section shall not apply to new or expanded detached single-family residential development. 
2.  For the purposes of this Section, the term "new construction" shall include expansion of existing, conforming nonresidential structures. Nonconforming structures shall be subject to the provisions in Chapter 8. 
B.  Maximum Building Footprint. All new construction in the LP and LB Districts shall result in a maximum building footprint that does not exceed 20 percent of the total lot size. 
C.  Maximum Building Size. All new construction on a lot in the LP and LB Districts shall not result in a total floor area exceeding 5,000 square feet. 
D.  Minimum Open Space. All nonresidential construction in the LP and LB Districts shall provide minimum open space in accordance with 4.3.1. 
E.  Required Buffer. Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
F.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking for any use other than detached single-family residential shall not be permitted in any front yard. 
G.  Expansion of Existing Buildings. No expansion of an existing building in the LP or LB District shall cause the standards of this Section to be exceeded. 
H.  Residential Character Required. All nonresidential construction, expansion, or renovation in the LP or LB Districts shall be residential in character, including such architectural features, bulk, and scale as are commonly found in the surrounding area. Architectural details include roof pitch, window size and shape, and exterior materials. 
I.  Hours of Operation. All nonresidential development in the LP or LB Districts shall limit the hours of public operation during which customers or clients are present on the site to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
4.3.3.   Outdoor Storage.
A.  Screening Fence or Wall Required. Outdoor storage of merchandise, equipment or materials (excluding vehicle, boat, and similar sales) that is essential or incidental to the use and is not on temporary display for the purpose of being immediately available for sale to the public, and all outdoor storage in loading dock areas, shall be screened by a solid wall or fence at least seven feet high located to prevent visibility of the area from adjacent residential areas or the public right-of-way. Such fence or wall shall not be used for advertising purposes. 
B.  Prohibited Storage. Outdoor storage not essential or accessory to the principal use shall not be permitted. No container primarily included for the shipment of freight or other materials on a boat, truck, or other vehicle may be used for storage except in the LI, LM, and I zones. (Ord. 10242005B) 
C.  Temporary . Trailers, storage containers, or temporary portable buildings, collectively referred to herein as "temporary storage units," may be conditionally permitted in writing by the Planning Director for a period not to exceed three days in a calendar year except that shipping containers may be conditionally permitted by the Planning Director for the entire period of November 1 to January 15 each year in a total number determined appropriate for the proposed space and after approval by the Director of Public Safety. 
Additionally, shipping containers may be permitted in writing by the Planning Director for the entire period of September 1 to October 31 within the General Business (GB), Light Industrial (LI), Industrial (I), and Limited Manufacturing (LM), and within the commercial components of Planned Commercial (PC) or Planned Residential (PR) zoning districts, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Businesses with 20,000 square feet or less conditioned space may be permitted no more than one shipping container. 
2.  Businesses in excess of 20,000 square feet or less conditioned space may be permitted one shipping container per 20,000 square feet of conditioned space; however the maximum number of temporary storage units may not exceed ten units from August 1 to October 31 annually; 
3.  Temporary storage units utilized from September 1 to October 31 must be screened to the maximum extent feasible from public right-of-way; 
4.  The number and location of shipping containers must be approved by the Director of Public Safety. 
A site plan depicting the type, number, and exact location of the units shall be submitted to the Planning Director. Such shipping containers may not be stacked more than two high and, if so, must be interlocked. Temporary storage units shall be sited in such a way as to not create a negative impact on parking or circulation on the subject property as determined by the Planning Director. 
(Ord. 06242013C; Ord. No. 07102017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-2017) 
4.3.4.   Commercial Trailer Parking.
    The overnight parking of commercial trailers, except those trailers actively delivering goods, shall be prohibited in all districts except for the LI, LM, and I Districts. 
4.3.5.   Above-Ground Storage Tanks.
    Above-ground tanks that are accessory to a permitted use and have a capacity exceeding 660 gallons for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids or chemicals are prohibited in all districts except LI and I. All such above-ground storage tanks, regardless of capacity or location, shall comply with all applicable federal and State laws and regulations and all City ordinances, regulations, and codes, including the Standard Fire Prevention Code, latest edition as adopted by the City of Aiken. 
4.3.6.   Underground Wiring.
    When there is a conflict between the ordinance and an existing franchise agreement, the City Manager or his designee will determine whether the utilities are installed aboveground or belowground. The following applies as long as there is no conflict with an existing franchise agreement between the City and the service provider. Any new electrical service lines to nonresidential structures shall be installed underground. New electric distribution lines shall be placed underground. All new wiring for telephone, cable, or any other purpose shall also be installed underground. In some circumstances, it may not be reasonable, technically feasible, or economically practical to install new wiring underground. In these instances, permission to install the utilities aboveground may be requested. If deemed appropriate, the City Manager or his designee may grant permission to install the utilities aboveground. The undergrounding requirement does not apply to any wiring related to maintenance, repair, or upgrades of existing aboveground facilities, and it does not apply to the placement of any aboveground facilities, such as cabinets and pedestals, that are necessary for provision of service using the underground facilities. Any disputes arising with underground wiring will be resolved by the City Manager. 
4.3.7.   Vehicle Repair or Service Facilities.
    Secondary use activities such as wrecker service or storage of inoperable vehicles may be included on the same site as vehicle repair or service activity, provided such secondary uses are conducted within an area no greater than one acre in size. Landscaped buffers shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E along all property lines. Only currently registered and licensed vehicles awaiting repair or service shall be permitted on the site. 
4.3.8.   Planned Commercial Projects.
A.  Approval of Concept Plan. Concurrent with the annexation of land to be zoned Planned Commercial (PC), or a rezoning to PC, (Ord. 09122011C) a concept plan must be approved by City Council in accordance with 6.2.16 and the following design criteria. Each concept plan is subject to detailed review by City Council, and there shall be no entitlement to the use (Ord. 09122011C), the intensity of use, density, signage, (Ord. 09122011C) or minimum required open space. City Council may require additional special conditions to ensure compatibility with surrounding development, preservation of natural or historic features, provision of adequate infrastructure, and creativity of design and may waive any provision of the Zoning Ordinance excluding anything in 4.3.8 or the Use Table at 4.3.1. (Ord. 09122011C) 
B.  General Design Criteria. Commercial projects in the PC District shall meet the following design standards to the maximum feasible extent. 
1.  The proposed arrangement of uses on the site properly considers significant natural features and drainage patterns, roadway access, and surrounding land uses. 
2.  A completely interconnected circulation system integrated with surrounding access and circulation patterns is provided. The project should rely on a limited number of major access points to adjacent arterials. Project outparcels should share these access points and be connected internally to the remainder of the project. Similarly, curb cuts may be limited, and shared parking is encouraged, provided it meets the standards of 4.5.2. 
3.  Circulation patterns should be designed to minimize conflicts between pedestrian, vehicular, and service traffic. 
4.  Streets, drainage, and utility systems should be designed to accommodate the overall service demand of the PC. 
5.  There must be provision for the ownership and maintenance of common space. 
C.  Area Limitations. 
1.  Minimum Size of Tract. The minimum size of any tract or parcel to be developed for a Planned Commercial development shall be five acres and the tract shall have permanent paved access to a paved public road or a road to be paved and dedicated to the public. 
2.  Maximum Residential Component. Residential development incorporated in the design of a Planned Commercial development shall not exceed the maximum amount determined by City Council in approval of the Concept Plan. 
3.  Open Space. A minimum of 25 percent of any tract or parcel of five acres or more to be developed shall be open space not covered by buildings or pavement of any type. Any lot less than five acres may have a minimum of 20 percent open space. 
D.  Lot and Building Size Requirements. The following requirements shall apply in a PC. 
1.  Structure Separation. No structure or encroachment of any kind shall be erected within 15 feet of any other single-story structure or group of structures and no multi-story structure or encroachment of any kind, except roof overhangs, shall be erected within 20 feet of any other structure or group of structures. 
2.  Building Length. City Council may limit the length of any building. (Ord. 04082013) 
E.  Development Requirements. 
1.  Projects shall be subject to review for issues related to building design and orientation, building spacing, and general site layout. (Ord. 05142007A) 
2.  Waste containers and utilities shall be appropriately located and screened from public view. 
3.  Buildings do not need to be set back from internal property lines unless required by City Council as part of the approved concept plan. (Ord. 09122011C) 
4.  Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
5.  Planting strips along internal property lines are not required unless they are part of the approved concept plan. (Ord. 09122011C) 
6.  The project including outparcels may be treated as one entity for the purpose of determining off-street parking. (Ord. 09122011C) 
7.  A traffic study shall be submitted if required by the Traffic Management Ordinance. (Ord. 04232012A) 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. 
1.  General. All lighting shall be designed to minimize the amount of ambient light perceptible from adjacent properties or that would impair the vision of motorists. 
2.  Fixture Design. 
a.  Each fixture shall be a full cut-off, down-directional lighting fixture whose source is recessed within an opaque housing. 
b.  Each fixture under a building canopy shall be flush-mount with a flat lens. 
c.  Electricity levels per fixture shall not exceed the following: 
i.  on a pole, 420 watts. 
ii.  in a wall-pack, 250 watts. 
iii.  under a canopy, 400 watts. 
d.  The cone of light from any fixture shall not be directed at a property line. 
e.  Only incandescent, fluorescent, metal halide, mercury vapor, high-pressure sodium, LED or other sources approved by the Director of Engineering and Utilities may be used generating either white or off-white light. 
3.  Pole Height. No pole may exceed 42 feet in height including the base except that no pole within 100 feet of any property zoned or used residentially shall exceed 25 feet. 
4.  Maximum Lighting Levels. Maximum lighting levels in footcandles shall not exceed the following: 
Location or Type of Lighting Minimum Average Maximum Parking Lots .6 2.4 10 Outdoor Display of Merchandise .5 1 15 Landscape and Decorative 0 .5 5 Walkways and Driveways .2 1 10 Canopies 20 25 30  
5.  Maximum Spillover. Light intensity shall not exceed two footcandles at the property line adjacent to a street right-of-way or property zoned to allow commercial use and .5 footcandle at the property line adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially. 
6.  Underground Connections. All wiring and service connections for lighting must be underground. 
7.  Site Lighting Plan. A plan depicting the proposed lighting shall be submitted in conjunction with the concept plan at a minimum scale of 1" = 20' and include the following: 
a.  the location, design, type of lamp, distribution, manufacturer's photometric data (including number of lumens and wattage), and mounting information for each light fixture including those under a canopy; 
b.  the location and height of each light standard; 
c.  light intensity levels in footcandles at points on a ten-foot grid and the minimum average and maximum footcandle calculations excluding the area of any buildings; 
d.  a notation that all requirements of the lighting provisions will be met. 
8.  Reduced Lighting After Closing. Lighting levels shall be reduced to 50 percent of the full operational levels within 30 minutes after the close of business but no later than 11:00 p.m., whichever is earlier, by turning off and/or dimming lights except that a business open 24 hours a day shall not be subject to this provision. However, security lighting shall be maintained at night on the grounds of any property at a minimum of .2 footcandle measured horizontally at the surface of the ground whether the structures on the property are occupied or not. 
9.  City Council Discretion. City Council may limit the extent and intensity of lighting to any degree through the approval of a concept plan for a project in the Planned Commercial or Planned Residential zoning districts. 
10.  Zoning Official Discretion. After the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for a project, the Zoning Official may require changes to fixtures to bring the lighting levels into compliance with these provisions or to alleviate particular impacts on residential areas or motorists. 
11.  Compliance by Existing Projects. Any existing Large Retail Project shall come into compliance with these provisions if the cost of any renovation or expansion in any one-year period exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value of the development as set by the Aiken County Tax Assessor, the South Carolina Tax Commission, or any other State or local government entity or official with authority to do so, or by the Building Official for developments that are tax-exempt. For a development composed of individual lots, the determination of whether the aforesaid limit has been exceeded shall be based on the appraised value of the individual lot or lots on which the proposed improvement or improvements will be located and not on the appraised value of the entire development. 
12.  Lights from Vehicles. To prevent vehicle lights from affecting adjacent property zoned or used residentially, parking areas and driveways shall be screened from such property by evergreen shrubbery planted at least five feet on center and three feet high at the time of planting after pruning or by a berm at least three feet high. The Planning Director may waive this provision if it is not necessary because of topography or other reasons. 
13.  Lights Intended to Attract Attention . Searchlights, flashing lights, or other lights used to attract attention to a site are prohibited except for lights used for emergency purposes approved by the Department of Public Safety. 
14.  Lighting During Construction. All site lighting during construction must be full cut-off or directionally shielded fixtures that are aimed and controlled so the directed light is substantially confined to the object intended to be illuminated. A building is considered no longer under construction once exterior walls and windows are installed and permanent lighting replaces temporary lighting as the primary source of lighting for the building. 
15.  Exemptions. Holiday lighting displays and neon lighting used to outline a structure are exempt though such lighting may not extend above the roofline. 
16.  Variances. Where appropriate, a request for a variance from the lighting provisions shall be accompanied by a report from a qualified engineer explaining the additional impact the granting of the variance would have on surrounding properties. 
G.  Revision of Plans after Final Approval. Changes to an approved concept plan not considered significant may be approved by the Planning Director. Any change in the approved concept plan that affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, or similar changes shall require approval by City Council after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 02132006A) A request for a revision of the concept plan shall be supported by a written statement explaining why the revisions are necessary or desirable and shall follow the approval procedure at 6.2.16. Review of a concept plan may be required if no building permits have been issued in the previous five years. (Ord. 02132006A) 
H.  Redevelopment of Sites Constructed Prior to Creation of Planned Commercial. Changes to a development in the Planned Commercial zone constructed prior to creation of that zoning classification require approval of a concept plan in accordance with this section. (Ord. 09122011C) 
(Ord. No. 05122014B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-12-2014; Ord. No. 06222015C , § 1(Exh. A), 6-22-2015) 
4.3.9.   Planned Institutional Projects.
A.  Approval of Concept Plan. Concurrent with the annexation of land to be zoned Planned Institutional (PI), a concept plan must be approved by City Council in accordance with 6.2.16 and the following design criteria. Each concept plan is subject to detailed review by City Council, and there shall be no entitlement to either the intensity of uses, density, or minimum required open space. City Council may require additional special conditions to ensure compatibility with surrounding development, preservation of natural or historic features, provision of adequate infrastructure, and creativity of design. Where a use permitted in a PI is considered a conditional or special exception use, City Council shall consider the specific use standards in Chapter 3, Article 3 in approving the PI and any accompanying site plans. 
B.  General Design Criteria. Nonresidential projects in the PI District shall meet the following design standards to the maximum feasible extent. 
1.  The proposed arrangement of uses on the site properly considers significant natural features and drainage patterns, roadway access, and surrounding land uses. 
2.  A completely interconnected circulation system integrated with surrounding access and circulation patterns is provided. The project should rely on a limited number of major access points to adjacent arterials. Project outparcels should share these access points and be connected internally to the remainder of the project. Similarly, curb cuts may be limited, and shared parking is encouraged, provided it meets the standards of 4.5.2. 
3.  Circulation patterns should be designed to minimize conflicts between pedestrian, vehicular, and service traffic. 
4.  Streets, drainage, and utility systems should be designed to accommodate the overall service demand of the PI. 
5.  There must be provision for the ownership and maintenance of common space. 
C.  Area Limitations. 
1.  Minimum Size of Tract. There shall be no minimum size. 
2.  Maximum Residential Component. Residential development incorporated in the design of a Planned Institutional development shall not exceed 50 percent of the total gross land area of the project. 
3.  Open Space. A minimum of 25 percent of any tract or parcel of five acres or more to be developed shall be open space not covered by buildings or pavement of any type. Any lot less than five acres may have a minimum of 20 percent open space. Portions of the development used for single-family residential purposes shall not be counted in meeting this requirement unless the land is in common ownership to be preserved as open space. 
D.  Lot and Building Size Requirements. The following requirements shall apply in a PI. 
1.  Structure Separation. No building or encroachment of any kind shall be erected within 15 feet of any other single-story buildings or group of buildings and no multi-story building or encroachment of any kind, except roof overhangs, shall be erected within 20 feet of any other building or group of buildings. 
2.  Building Length. City Council may limit the length of any building. (Ord. 04082013) 
E.  Development Requirements. 
1.  Projects shall be subject to review for issues related to building design and orientation, building spacing, and general site layout. 
2.  Waste containers and utilities shall be appropriately located and screened from public view. 
3.  Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
4.  If a traffic study is not required by the Traffic Management Ordinance, the Planning Commission or City Council may require a study. 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. A project in the PI zone shall comply with the lighting provisions for the Planned Commercial zone at 4.3.8.F. 
G.  Revision of Plans after Final Approval. Changes to an approved concept plan not considered significant may be approved by the Planning Director. Any change in the approved concept plan that affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, or similar changes shall require approval by City Council after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission. A request for a revision of the concept plan shall be supported by a written statement explaining why the revisions are necessary or desirable and shall follow the approval procedure at 6.2.16. Review of a concept plan may be required if no building permits have been issued in the previous five years. 
4.3.2. - Nonresidential Development in LP and LB Districts. 
A.  Applicability of Standards. 
1.  The standards in this Section shall not apply to new or expanded detached single-family residential development. 
2.  For the purposes of this Section, the term "new construction" shall include expansion of existing, conforming nonresidential structures. Nonconforming structures shall be subject to the provisions in Chapter 8. 
B.  Maximum Building Footprint. All new construction in the LP and LB Districts shall result in a maximum building footprint that does not exceed 20 percent of the total lot size. 
C.  Maximum Building Size. All new construction on a lot in the LP and LB Districts shall not result in a total floor area exceeding 5,000 square feet. 
D.  Minimum Open Space. All nonresidential construction in the LP and LB Districts shall provide minimum open space in accordance with 4.3.1. 
E.  Required Buffer. Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
F.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking for any use other than detached single-family residential shall not be permitted in any front yard. 
G.  Expansion of Existing Buildings. No expansion of an existing building in the LP or LB District shall cause the standards of this Section to be exceeded. 
H.  Residential Character Required. All nonresidential construction, expansion, or renovation in the LP or LB Districts shall be residential in character, including such architectural features, bulk, and scale as are commonly found in the surrounding area. Architectural details include roof pitch, window size and shape, and exterior materials. 
I.  Hours of Operation. All nonresidential development in the LP or LB Districts shall limit the hours of public operation during which customers or clients are present on the site to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
4.3.3. - Outdoor Storage. 
A.  Screening Fence or Wall Required. Outdoor storage of merchandise, equipment or materials (excluding vehicle, boat, and similar sales) that is essential or incidental to the use and is not on temporary display for the purpose of being immediately available for sale to the public, and all outdoor storage in loading dock areas, shall be screened by a solid wall or fence at least seven feet high located to prevent visibility of the area from adjacent residential areas or the public right-of-way. Such fence or wall shall not be used for advertising purposes. 
B.  Prohibited Storage. Outdoor storage not essential or accessory to the principal use shall not be permitted. No container primarily included for the shipment of freight or other materials on a boat, truck, or other vehicle may be used for storage except in the LI, LM, and I zones. (Ord. 10242005B) 
C.  Temporary . Trailers, storage containers, or temporary portable buildings, collectively referred to herein as "temporary storage units," may be conditionally permitted in writing by the Planning Director for a period not to exceed three days in a calendar year except that shipping containers may be conditionally permitted by the Planning Director for the entire period of November 1 to January 15 each year in a total number determined appropriate for the proposed space and after approval by the Director of Public Safety. 
Additionally, shipping containers may be permitted in writing by the Planning Director for the entire period of September 1 to October 31 within the General Business (GB), Light Industrial (LI), Industrial (I), and Limited Manufacturing (LM), and within the commercial components of Planned Commercial (PC) or Planned Residential (PR) zoning districts, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Businesses with 20,000 square feet or less conditioned space may be permitted no more than one shipping container. 
2.  Businesses in excess of 20,000 square feet or less conditioned space may be permitted one shipping container per 20,000 square feet of conditioned space; however the maximum number of temporary storage units may not exceed ten units from August 1 to October 31 annually; 
3.  Temporary storage units utilized from September 1 to October 31 must be screened to the maximum extent feasible from public right-of-way; 
4.  The number and location of shipping containers must be approved by the Director of Public Safety. 
A site plan depicting the type, number, and exact location of the units shall be submitted to the Planning Director. Such shipping containers may not be stacked more than two high and, if so, must be interlocked. Temporary storage units shall be sited in such a way as to not create a negative impact on parking or circulation on the subject property as determined by the Planning Director. 
(Ord. 06242013C; Ord. No. 07102017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-2017) 
4.3.4. - Commercial Trailer Parking. 
    The overnight parking of commercial trailers, except those trailers actively delivering goods, shall be prohibited in all districts except for the LI, LM, and I Districts. 
4.3.5. - Above-Ground Storage Tanks. 
    Above-ground tanks that are accessory to a permitted use and have a capacity exceeding 660 gallons for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids or chemicals are prohibited in all districts except LI and I. All such above-ground storage tanks, regardless of capacity or location, shall comply with all applicable federal and State laws and regulations and all City ordinances, regulations, and codes, including the Standard Fire Prevention Code, latest edition as adopted by the City of Aiken. 
4.3.6. - Underground Wiring. 
    When there is a conflict between the ordinance and an existing franchise agreement, the City Manager or his designee will determine whether the utilities are installed aboveground or belowground. The following applies as long as there is no conflict with an existing franchise agreement between the City and the service provider. Any new electrical service lines to nonresidential structures shall be installed underground. New electric distribution lines shall be placed underground. All new wiring for telephone, cable, or any other purpose shall also be installed underground. In some circumstances, it may not be reasonable, technically feasible, or economically practical to install new wiring underground. In these instances, permission to install the utilities aboveground may be requested. If deemed appropriate, the City Manager or his designee may grant permission to install the utilities aboveground. The undergrounding requirement does not apply to any wiring related to maintenance, repair, or upgrades of existing aboveground facilities, and it does not apply to the placement of any aboveground facilities, such as cabinets and pedestals, that are necessary for provision of service using the underground facilities. Any disputes arising with underground wiring will be resolved by the City Manager. 
4.3.7. - Vehicle Repair or Service Facilities. 
    Secondary use activities such as wrecker service or storage of inoperable vehicles may be included on the same site as vehicle repair or service activity, provided such secondary uses are conducted within an area no greater than one acre in size. Landscaped buffers shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E along all property lines. Only currently registered and licensed vehicles awaiting repair or service shall be permitted on the site. 
4.3.8. - Planned Commercial Projects. 
A.  Approval of Concept Plan. Concurrent with the annexation of land to be zoned Planned Commercial (PC), or a rezoning to PC, (Ord. 09122011C) a concept plan must be approved by City Council in accordance with 6.2.16 and the following design criteria. Each concept plan is subject to detailed review by City Council, and there shall be no entitlement to the use (Ord. 09122011C), the intensity of use, density, signage, (Ord. 09122011C) or minimum required open space. City Council may require additional special conditions to ensure compatibility with surrounding development, preservation of natural or historic features, provision of adequate infrastructure, and creativity of design and may waive any provision of the Zoning Ordinance excluding anything in 4.3.8 or the Use Table at 4.3.1. (Ord. 09122011C) 
B.  General Design Criteria. Commercial projects in the PC District shall meet the following design standards to the maximum feasible extent. 
1.  The proposed arrangement of uses on the site properly considers significant natural features and drainage patterns, roadway access, and surrounding land uses. 
2.  A completely interconnected circulation system integrated with surrounding access and circulation patterns is provided. The project should rely on a limited number of major access points to adjacent arterials. Project outparcels should share these access points and be connected internally to the remainder of the project. Similarly, curb cuts may be limited, and shared parking is encouraged, provided it meets the standards of 4.5.2. 
3.  Circulation patterns should be designed to minimize conflicts between pedestrian, vehicular, and service traffic. 
4.  Streets, drainage, and utility systems should be designed to accommodate the overall service demand of the PC. 
5.  There must be provision for the ownership and maintenance of common space. 
C.  Area Limitations. 
1.  Minimum Size of Tract. The minimum size of any tract or parcel to be developed for a Planned Commercial development shall be five acres and the tract shall have permanent paved access to a paved public road or a road to be paved and dedicated to the public. 
2.  Maximum Residential Component. Residential development incorporated in the design of a Planned Commercial development shall not exceed the maximum amount determined by City Council in approval of the Concept Plan. 
3.  Open Space. A minimum of 25 percent of any tract or parcel of five acres or more to be developed shall be open space not covered by buildings or pavement of any type. Any lot less than five acres may have a minimum of 20 percent open space. 
D.  Lot and Building Size Requirements. The following requirements shall apply in a PC. 
1.  Structure Separation. No structure or encroachment of any kind shall be erected within 15 feet of any other single-story structure or group of structures and no multi-story structure or encroachment of any kind, except roof overhangs, shall be erected within 20 feet of any other structure or group of structures. 
2.  Building Length. City Council may limit the length of any building. (Ord. 04082013) 
E.  Development Requirements. 
1.  Projects shall be subject to review for issues related to building design and orientation, building spacing, and general site layout. (Ord. 05142007A) 
2.  Waste containers and utilities shall be appropriately located and screened from public view. 
3.  Buildings do not need to be set back from internal property lines unless required by City Council as part of the approved concept plan. (Ord. 09122011C) 
4.  Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
5.  Planting strips along internal property lines are not required unless they are part of the approved concept plan. (Ord. 09122011C) 
6.  The project including outparcels may be treated as one entity for the purpose of determining off-street parking. (Ord. 09122011C) 
7.  A traffic study shall be submitted if required by the Traffic Management Ordinance. (Ord. 04232012A) 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. 
1.  General. All lighting shall be designed to minimize the amount of ambient light perceptible from adjacent properties or that would impair the vision of motorists. 
2.  Fixture Design. 
a.  Each fixture shall be a full cut-off, down-directional lighting fixture whose source is recessed within an opaque housing. 
b.  Each fixture under a building canopy shall be flush-mount with a flat lens. 
c.  Electricity levels per fixture shall not exceed the following: 
i.  on a pole, 420 watts. 
ii.  in a wall-pack, 250 watts. 
iii.  under a canopy, 400 watts. 
d.  The cone of light from any fixture shall not be directed at a property line. 
e.  Only incandescent, fluorescent, metal halide, mercury vapor, high-pressure sodium, LED or other sources approved by the Director of Engineering and Utilities may be used generating either white or off-white light. 
3.  Pole Height. No pole may exceed 42 feet in height including the base except that no pole within 100 feet of any property zoned or used residentially shall exceed 25 feet. 
4.  Maximum Lighting Levels. Maximum lighting levels in footcandles shall not exceed the following: 
Location or Type of Lighting Minimum Average Maximum Parking Lots .6 2.4 10 Outdoor Display of Merchandise .5 1 15 Landscape and Decorative 0 .5 5 Walkways and Driveways .2 1 10 Canopies 20 25 30  
5.  Maximum Spillover. Light intensity shall not exceed two footcandles at the property line adjacent to a street right-of-way or property zoned to allow commercial use and .5 footcandle at the property line adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially. 
6.  Underground Connections. All wiring and service connections for lighting must be underground. 
7.  Site Lighting Plan. A plan depicting the proposed lighting shall be submitted in conjunction with the concept plan at a minimum scale of 1" = 20' and include the following: 
a.  the location, design, type of lamp, distribution, manufacturer's photometric data (including number of lumens and wattage), and mounting information for each light fixture including those under a canopy; 
b.  the location and height of each light standard; 
c.  light intensity levels in footcandles at points on a ten-foot grid and the minimum average and maximum footcandle calculations excluding the area of any buildings; 
d.  a notation that all requirements of the lighting provisions will be met. 
8.  Reduced Lighting After Closing. Lighting levels shall be reduced to 50 percent of the full operational levels within 30 minutes after the close of business but no later than 11:00 p.m., whichever is earlier, by turning off and/or dimming lights except that a business open 24 hours a day shall not be subject to this provision. However, security lighting shall be maintained at night on the grounds of any property at a minimum of .2 footcandle measured horizontally at the surface of the ground whether the structures on the property are occupied or not. 
9.  City Council Discretion. City Council may limit the extent and intensity of lighting to any degree through the approval of a concept plan for a project in the Planned Commercial or Planned Residential zoning districts. 
10.  Zoning Official Discretion. After the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for a project, the Zoning Official may require changes to fixtures to bring the lighting levels into compliance with these provisions or to alleviate particular impacts on residential areas or motorists. 
11.  Compliance by Existing Projects. Any existing Large Retail Project shall come into compliance with these provisions if the cost of any renovation or expansion in any one-year period exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value of the development as set by the Aiken County Tax Assessor, the South Carolina Tax Commission, or any other State or local government entity or official with authority to do so, or by the Building Official for developments that are tax-exempt. For a development composed of individual lots, the determination of whether the aforesaid limit has been exceeded shall be based on the appraised value of the individual lot or lots on which the proposed improvement or improvements will be located and not on the appraised value of the entire development. 
12.  Lights from Vehicles. To prevent vehicle lights from affecting adjacent property zoned or used residentially, parking areas and driveways shall be screened from such property by evergreen shrubbery planted at least five feet on center and three feet high at the time of planting after pruning or by a berm at least three feet high. The Planning Director may waive this provision if it is not necessary because of topography or other reasons. 
13.  Lights Intended to Attract Attention . Searchlights, flashing lights, or other lights used to attract attention to a site are prohibited except for lights used for emergency purposes approved by the Department of Public Safety. 
14.  Lighting During Construction. All site lighting during construction must be full cut-off or directionally shielded fixtures that are aimed and controlled so the directed light is substantially confined to the object intended to be illuminated. A building is considered no longer under construction once exterior walls and windows are installed and permanent lighting replaces temporary lighting as the primary source of lighting for the building. 
15.  Exemptions. Holiday lighting displays and neon lighting used to outline a structure are exempt though such lighting may not extend above the roofline. 
16.  Variances. Where appropriate, a request for a variance from the lighting provisions shall be accompanied by a report from a qualified engineer explaining the additional impact the granting of the variance would have on surrounding properties. 
G.  Revision of Plans after Final Approval. Changes to an approved concept plan not considered significant may be approved by the Planning Director. Any change in the approved concept plan that affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, or similar changes shall require approval by City Council after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 02132006A) A request for a revision of the concept plan shall be supported by a written statement explaining why the revisions are necessary or desirable and shall follow the approval procedure at 6.2.16. Review of a concept plan may be required if no building permits have been issued in the previous five years. (Ord. 02132006A) 
H.  Redevelopment of Sites Constructed Prior to Creation of Planned Commercial. Changes to a development in the Planned Commercial zone constructed prior to creation of that zoning classification require approval of a concept plan in accordance with this section. (Ord. 09122011C) 
(Ord. No. 05122014B , § 1(Exh. A), 5-12-2014; Ord. No. 06222015C , § 1(Exh. A), 6-22-2015) 
4.3.9.   Planned Institutional Projects.
A.  Approval of Concept Plan. Concurrent with the annexation of land to be zoned Planned Institutional (PI), a concept plan must be approved by City Council in accordance with 6.2.16 and the following design criteria. Each concept plan is subject to detailed review by City Council, and there shall be no entitlement to either the intensity of uses, density, or minimum required open space. City Council may require additional special conditions to ensure compatibility with surrounding development, preservation of natural or historic features, provision of adequate infrastructure, and creativity of design. Where a use permitted in a PI is considered a conditional or special exception use, City Council shall consider the specific use standards in Chapter 3, Article 3 in approving the PI and any accompanying site plans. 
B.  General Design Criteria. Nonresidential projects in the PI District shall meet the following design standards to the maximum feasible extent. 
1.  The proposed arrangement of uses on the site properly considers significant natural features and drainage patterns, roadway access, and surrounding land uses. 
2.  A completely interconnected circulation system integrated with surrounding access and circulation patterns is provided. The project should rely on a limited number of major access points to adjacent arterials. Project outparcels should share these access points and be connected internally to the remainder of the project. Similarly, curb cuts may be limited, and shared parking is encouraged, provided it meets the standards of 4.5.2. 
3.  Circulation patterns should be designed to minimize conflicts between pedestrian, vehicular, and service traffic. 
4.  Streets, drainage, and utility systems should be designed to accommodate the overall service demand of the PI. 
5.  There must be provision for the ownership and maintenance of common space. 
C.  Area Limitations. 
1.  Minimum Size of Tract. There shall be no minimum size. 
2.  Maximum Residential Component. Residential development incorporated in the design of a Planned Institutional development shall not exceed 50 percent of the total gross land area of the project. 
3.  Open Space. A minimum of 25 percent of any tract or parcel of five acres or more to be developed shall be open space not covered by buildings or pavement of any type. Any lot less than five acres may have a minimum of 20 percent open space. Portions of the development used for single-family residential purposes shall not be counted in meeting this requirement unless the land is in common ownership to be preserved as open space. 
D.  Lot and Building Size Requirements. The following requirements shall apply in a PI. 
1.  Structure Separation. No building or encroachment of any kind shall be erected within 15 feet of any other single-story buildings or group of buildings and no multi-story building or encroachment of any kind, except roof overhangs, shall be erected within 20 feet of any other building or group of buildings. 
2.  Building Length. City Council may limit the length of any building. (Ord. 04082013) 
E.  Development Requirements. 
1.  Projects shall be subject to review for issues related to building design and orientation, building spacing, and general site layout. 
2.  Waste containers and utilities shall be appropriately located and screened from public view. 
3.  Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
4.  If a traffic study is not required by the Traffic Management Ordinance, the Planning Commission or City Council may require a study. 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. A project in the PI zone shall comply with the lighting provisions for the Planned Commercial zone at 4.3.8.F. 
G.  Revision of Plans after Final Approval. Changes to an approved concept plan not considered significant may be approved by the Planning Director. Any change in the approved concept plan that affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, or similar changes shall require approval by City Council after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission. A request for a revision of the concept plan shall be supported by a written statement explaining why the revisions are necessary or desirable and shall follow the approval procedure at 6.2.16. Review of a concept plan may be required if no building permits have been issued in the previous five years. 
4.3.9. - Planned Institutional Projects. 
A.  Approval of Concept Plan. Concurrent with the annexation of land to be zoned Planned Institutional (PI), a concept plan must be approved by City Council in accordance with 6.2.16 and the following design criteria. Each concept plan is subject to detailed review by City Council, and there shall be no entitlement to either the intensity of uses, density, or minimum required open space. City Council may require additional special conditions to ensure compatibility with surrounding development, preservation of natural or historic features, provision of adequate infrastructure, and creativity of design. Where a use permitted in a PI is considered a conditional or special exception use, City Council shall consider the specific use standards in Chapter 3, Article 3 in approving the PI and any accompanying site plans. 
B.  General Design Criteria. Nonresidential projects in the PI District shall meet the following design standards to the maximum feasible extent. 
1.  The proposed arrangement of uses on the site properly considers significant natural features and drainage patterns, roadway access, and surrounding land uses. 
2.  A completely interconnected circulation system integrated with surrounding access and circulation patterns is provided. The project should rely on a limited number of major access points to adjacent arterials. Project outparcels should share these access points and be connected internally to the remainder of the project. Similarly, curb cuts may be limited, and shared parking is encouraged, provided it meets the standards of 4.5.2. 
3.  Circulation patterns should be designed to minimize conflicts between pedestrian, vehicular, and service traffic. 
4.  Streets, drainage, and utility systems should be designed to accommodate the overall service demand of the PI. 
5.  There must be provision for the ownership and maintenance of common space. 
C.  Area Limitations. 
1.  Minimum Size of Tract. There shall be no minimum size. 
2.  Maximum Residential Component. Residential development incorporated in the design of a Planned Institutional development shall not exceed 50 percent of the total gross land area of the project. 
3.  Open Space. A minimum of 25 percent of any tract or parcel of five acres or more to be developed shall be open space not covered by buildings or pavement of any type. Any lot less than five acres may have a minimum of 20 percent open space. Portions of the development used for single-family residential purposes shall not be counted in meeting this requirement unless the land is in common ownership to be preserved as open space. 
D.  Lot and Building Size Requirements. The following requirements shall apply in a PI. 
1.  Structure Separation. No building or encroachment of any kind shall be erected within 15 feet of any other single-story buildings or group of buildings and no multi-story building or encroachment of any kind, except roof overhangs, shall be erected within 20 feet of any other building or group of buildings. 
2.  Building Length. City Council may limit the length of any building. (Ord. 04082013) 
E.  Development Requirements. 
1.  Projects shall be subject to review for issues related to building design and orientation, building spacing, and general site layout. 
2.  Waste containers and utilities shall be appropriately located and screened from public view. 
3.  Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. 
4.  If a traffic study is not required by the Traffic Management Ordinance, the Planning Commission or City Council may require a study. 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. A project in the PI zone shall comply with the lighting provisions for the Planned Commercial zone at 4.3.8.F. 
G.  Revision of Plans after Final Approval. Changes to an approved concept plan not considered significant may be approved by the Planning Director. Any change in the approved concept plan that affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, or similar changes shall require approval by City Council after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission. A request for a revision of the concept plan shall be supported by a written statement explaining why the revisions are necessary or desirable and shall follow the approval procedure at 6.2.16. Review of a concept plan may be required if no building permits have been issued in the previous five years. 
ARTICLE 4. - SIGNS 

4.4.1. - Applicability. 
    The regulations of this Article shall apply only to signs visible from any point on a street right-of-way in all zoning districts. 
4.4.2. - Signs Not Requiring a Permit. 
    A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration, or reconstruction of any sign, except the following. 
1.  Any legal notice or public traffic directional/safety sign issued and required to be posted by any federal, State, county or municipal government or an official sign as so designated by resolution of City Council. 
2.  Any private street name sign or an on-site traffic directional/safety sign where the sign face does not exceed four square feet per sign face, has no more than 25 percent of the sign face devoted to commercial copy or graphics, and is no greater than three feet in height. 
3.  Seasonal decorations which do not cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or vehicle drivers or create a nuisance to adjacent properties. 
4.  Permanent signs in residential areas that advertise a security company provided they do not exceed one square foot in size and are located no further than five feet from the primary entrance to the structure. 
5.  A banner conforming with 4.4.8.B. 
6.  Signs required for insurance purposes, providing they do not exceed five square feet in size. 
7.  Any sign that, in the Planning Director's opinion, is to be viewed from the inside of a building only. 
8.  Temporary signs at 4.4.9. (Ord. 05102010) 
4.4.3. - Design Standards. 
A.  All signs shall conform to the provisions for Signs and Outdoor Displays, Southern Standard Building Code, and ordinances of the City. 
B.  No sign or sign structure shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, window, door, opening, or any means of ingress and/or egress used for fire-fighting purposes. 
C.  Illuminated signs shall be so placed and so shielded that glare from the sign does not adversely affect any residential district or use nor interfere with the operation of a vehicle on any public right-of-way. 
D.  No sign shall exceed the building height limit of the Zoning District in which it is located. 
4.4.4. - Sign Measurement. 
A.  Sign Area. The square footage of a sign face shall be the area enclosed within a perimeter consisting of a series of straight lines at right angles enclosing all parts of the sign face. The area of a freestanding sign includes the area of the sign face on one side only. The certification of measurements by a licensed professional engineer, the sign manufacturer, or other professional may be accepted for irregularly shaped or uniquely shaped signs, subject to review and approval by the Planning Director. 

B.  Height. The height of a sign shall be measured from the edge of the pavement of the street abutting or closest to the sign structure to the top of the sign or sign structure, whichever is higher. 
C.  Federal or State Mandated Requirements. Signs or components of signs that are expressly mandated to be of a specific required minimum size by federal or State laws or regulations are exempt from the sign area limitations, but only to the extent of such minimum requirements. 
4.4.5. - Prohibited Signs and Exceptions. 
    The following signs are prohibited in any district. 
1.  Off-Site Signs. No sign identifying or advertising a business or use shall be permitted other than on the premises of such building or use, except as permitted by 4.4.9.I. (Ord. 05102010) 
2.  Electronic Signs Except Readerboards . An electronic sign shall not be permitted except as readerboard on a freestanding sign pursuant to 4.4.7.E. 
3.  Signs Imitating Warning Signals. No sign shall display intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, nor shall any sign use the words "stop", "danger", or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner that might mislead or confuse any vehicle driver, except for temporary construction signs and lights indicating a hazard. 
4.  Certain Attached and Painted Signs. Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, and telephone or other utility poles; signs painted on or attached to rocks or other natural features; or signs painted on the roofs of buildings. 
5.  Flashing, Pulsating, and Moving Signs . Signs which blink, flash, pulsate, fluctuate, animate, or have moving panels. 
6.  Mobile or Portable Signs. Signs and sign structures which are not attached to a permanent foundation, except those banners permitted in 4.4.8.B. and portable signs in the DB zone as permitted by 4.4.9.I. 
7.  Ribbons, Streamers, and Similar Materials or Devices. Any ribbon, streamer, pennant, spinner, or similar object or material, whether moving or not. 
8.  Signs Within Street or Highway Right-of-Way. No sign, sign structure, or obstruction of any character shall be erected in the street right-of-way except: 
a.  One newspaper box per family. 
b.  Standard highway signs and markers that the South Carolina State Department of Transportation and the City may authorize. 
c.  Historical, commemorative and other monuments and memorials approved by City Council with recommendation from the Design Review Board. (Ord. 10242005C) 
d.  Temporary signs and banners for public events and projects provided they are approved by City Council and placed so as not to interfere with traffic circulation and public safety (see 4.4.9.F). 
e.  Subdivision Entrance or Identification Signs, including those at the entrance to a Planned Residential or Planned Commercial development, which meet the standards of 4.4.8.A and are approved by the City Engineer. 
f.  Portable Signs in the DB zoning district as allowed by 4.4.9.I. 
(Ord. No. 04142014B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-14-2014) 
4.4.6. - Wall or Projecting Signs. 
A.  Wall Signs. Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs, and projecting signs) shall meet the following requirements. 
1.  Signs on the Front Surface of a Building. The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed 20 percent of that surface. 
2.  Signs on the Side and Rear Surface of a Building. The total area of signs on the exterior side or rear surface of a building shall not exceed 25 percent of that surface. 
3.  Depth of Wall Signs. Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than 18 inches from the wall. 
B.  Projecting Signs. A projecting sign perpendicular to the wall of a building may be substituted for a wall sign. A projecting signs shall be placed a minimum of eight feet above any sidewalk and may project a maximum of six feet. Total area of projecting signs shall not exceed 10 percent of front surface area of building. 

4.4.7. - Freestanding Signs. 
A.  General. 
1.  A freestanding sign is a sign not attached to a building and containing a sign face on one or more sides. 
2.  Freestanding signs shall not project into any street or highway right-of-way. 
B.  Number of Signs. 
1.  Not more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot, except where the lot fronts on two major arterials as determined by the Planning Director, in which case an additional freestanding sign may be permitted with no more than one such sign located along each arterial. 
2.  In the DB District, one freestanding sign shall be permitted per street frontage. A building on a corner lot may have an additional freestanding sign on its second frontage if that frontage is at least 50 feet and has a building setback of at least five feet. 
C.  Monument Signs. The structure supporting a ground-level, freestanding monument sign shall not be included in calculating the area of the sign permitted by this Article. The area of the supporting structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the total combined area of the sign and supporting structure. Any pedestal on which a sign rests shall be at least 67 percent of width of the entire sign. 

D.  Pole Signs in the DB District. A decorative, fluted, tapered, or turned pole shall be used to support any freestanding pole sign in the DB District. A shingle cantilevered from a pole may be substituted for a pole sign in the DB District. 
E.  Readerboards . 
1.  Up to 60 percent of the area of a freestanding sign may be a readerboard (with changeable copy). 
2.  Electronic readerboards are subject to the following: 
a.  Such signs are allowed in the GB, LI, I, LM zones by right and in the Planned Commercial, Planned Institutional, and Planned Residential zones through approval of a Concept Plan by City Council. A school, church, government entity, or tax-exempt entity in any residential zone may have one electronic readerboard as long as the sign is on a major arterial and complies with 4.4.7.C. 
b.  The message may not change more than once every ten seconds in an instantaneous manner with no flashing, scrolling, animation, or movement of any sort. 
c.  Each electronic sign must have a photocell to automatically adjust the brightness of the lights to no more than 0.3 foot-candle above ambient light as measured using a foot-candle meter at a distance from the sign derived by taking the square root of the product of the area of the sign times 100. 
d.  Each electronic sign must contain a mechanism to turn the sign off in the event of a malfunction. 
e.  An electronic readerboard may not be added to a nonconforming sign. 
F.  Shopping Center Signs. 
1.  Signs identifying the name of the shopping center as well as the individual stores shall be consolidated on one monument sign standard. 
2.  Not more than one such sign standard shall be permitted per shopping center except where a shopping center fronts on two major arterials as determined by the Planning Director. If a shopping center fronts on two major arterials with more than 150 feet of frontage on each, one additional sign standard shall be permitted with no more than one such standard being placed on each such arterial. 
(Ord. No. 04142014B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-14-2014) 
4.4.8. - Miscellaneous Sign Types. 
A.  Entrance, Identification or Institutional Signs. For subdivision entrance or identification signs or institutional signs for such uses as schools and churches, one single or double sign shall be permitted for each entrance to the project or use. If a double sign is proposed, the total area of the faces of both signs shall not exceed the maximum permitted sign area for a single sign. All such signs shall be ground-mounted, monument-type signs. If erected as an institutional sign, no additional freestanding sign shall be permitted. Where approved by the Planning Director, such signs may be located in a landscaped median in the right-of-way (see 4.4.5.7.e). 
B.  Miscellaneous Sign Types. 
1.  Commercial Banners. 
a.  Location. Each business may have one banner per street frontage on the lot on which the business is located. The banner may be installed only on the building, canopy, or fence attached to the main building. The banner shall not extend above the roof line of the structure to which it is attached and may not be attached to a freestanding sign, between a freestanding sign and a canopy, or between a canopy and a building. 
b.  Size. The banner may not exceed 60 square feet. 
c.  Text. The banner may include the name of the business as long as it is not the only text. 
d.  Duration. A banner may stay up indefinitely as long as it is in good condition, as determined by the Planning Director, unless it promotes a specific event, in which case it must be removed within 48 hours of the end of the event. If a special event banner is not removed within 48 hours, the Zoning Official may remove the banner and bill the business owner for the cost. 
e.  Condition of the Banner. The banner must be securely fastened and remain in good condition, as determined by the Planning Director. The banner shall not flutter except to allow minor movement by the wind. 
2.  Banners for Governmental or Civic Organizations. Banners for governmental or civic organizations are allowed at the entity's main location or at the location of the activity promoted on the banner. Such banners at other locations including street rights-of-way may be approved by City Council (see 4.4.5.7.d.) (Ord. 10242005C) 
C.  Flags. A maximum of three flags may be displayed on each lot of record zoned any category other than single-family residential. There are no restrictions on flags displayed on a lot zoned for single-family residential use unless the lot is used for another purpose. 
D.  Canopy or Awning Signs. Canopy or awning signs in place of wall or projecting signs are allowed in the LP, LB, O, GB, PC, PI, DB, LI, and I Districts and commercial areas within a PR in accordance with the following provisions. 
1.  Canopies or awnings extending over the sidewalk or walkway may display one business identification sign at each building entrance with a combined area not to exceed 20 percent of the surface of the awning or canopy. 
2.  Canopy or awning signs shall not project beyond the curb line of the adjacent street or alley. 
3.  One business identification sign not exceeding 11/2 square feet is permitted to hang underneath the awning or canopy, in addition to the sign displayed on the canopy. 
4.4.9. - Temporary Signs. 
A.  Signs on New Projects Under Construction. One non-illuminated sign, not exceeding 32 square feet in nonresidential areas and 16 square feet in residential areas, displaying the name of the building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, and the financial, selling, and development agencies, is permitted upon the premises of any project under construction, alteration, or relocation. Such sign shall be removed from the site within 30 days after substantial completion of the project. 
B.  Subdivision Signs. Temporary signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area announcing a land subdivision development are permitted only on the premises of the land subdivision. They shall be set back not less than ten feet from the right-of-way of any street or from any boundary line of the subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than 300 feet apart and shall be removed when 75 percent of the lots have been conveyed. 
C.  Infill Construction, Remodeling and Other Signs. Signs not exceeding 5 square feet in size identifying the contractor involved in new residential construction on a single lot, remodeling, re-roofing, landscaping or other similar service are permitted provided they are removed within 10 days after substantial completion of the project. 
D.  Real Estate Signs. Any real estate sign advertising a property for sale or lease is permitted provided it conforms to each of the following standards. 
1.  Size shall not exceed 5 square feet in any residential district or for a single-family residential unit in a PR and 16 square feet in any other district, including all peripheral attachments; 
2.  Copy shall be limited to: (1) the name of the owner or the listing agent, (2) the real estate company, (3) the type of offering, and (4) telephone numbers; 
3.  The quantity shall be limited to one per street frontage of the affected premises; 
4.  A freestanding sign shall be mounted so that its top edge is no higher than four feet above grade, and the top of a facade-mounted sign shall be mounted no higher than eight feet above grade; 
5.  The sign shall not be illuminated; 
6.  A second sign announcing an open house that is no larger than the primary sign or a smaller sign attached to the primary sign may be erected for a period not to exceed 48 hours on the subject property; and 
7.  Signs offering tenant space shall not be freestanding, but may be placed as a tenant panel on a permitted directory sign or in the window of the tenant space being offered. 
E.  Political Signs. Political signs in residential districts and the PR, PI, LP and LB Districts shall not exceed three square feet in area. Political signs in all other districts shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Such signs shall be removed within 15 days after the election to which they pertain, or the sign will be removed by City at the candidate's expense. 
F.  Temporary Signs and Banners for Public Events or Public/Civic Projects. Temporary signs and banners for public events or public projects may be approved by City Council provided they are placed so as not to interfere with traffic circulation and public safety. City Council shall set a time limit on such signs. Council may also adopt a list of entities for which the Planning Director may approve such signs. (Ord. 10242005C) 
G.  Other Temporary Signs. The Planning Director may approve other temporary signs not in a street right-of-way for events sponsored by (1) public or non-profit entities or (2) for-profit organizations dedicated to public service or culture on a case-by-case basis. Depending on the character of the surrounding area, the maximum size of such signs shall be 5 square feet in area and 5 feet in height in residential areas and 16 square feet in area and 6 feet in height elsewhere. Such signs may only be up one week before the event and must be removed the day after the end of the event. The Planning Director may also approve temporary signs for emergency purposes. (Ord. 10242005C) 
H.  Grand Opening Signs. A banner is permitted in addition to the banners referred to in 4.4.8.B for the grand opening of a retail establishment for a period not to exceed 21 days. One banner not to exceed 75 square feet in size may be allowed on the facade of the building. Additionally, there may be a non-illuminated balloon or balloons on the business property so long as the size of the balloon or balloons does not exceed 50 feet in total diameter. This regulation shall not be construed to regulate the use of small balloons. 
I.  Portable Signs in the Downtown Business Zone. For each business in the Downtown Business (DB) zone, one portable sign may be located either on (1) the lot on which the business is located or (2) the public sidewalk immediately in front of the building in which the business is located in compliance with the following. 
1.  When placed on the public sidewalk, no part of this sign shall be further than 28 inches from the exterior wall of the building in which the business is located. 
2.  The sign must 
a.  be freestanding and not attached to another structure or have attachments; 
b.  be limited to two sides; 
c.  be no taller than four feet including legs, no wider than two feet, and no more than six square feet in area; 
d.  contain the name of the business; 
e.  be heavy enough or otherwise weighted to prevent being blown over; and 
f.  not be illuminated. 
3.  The width of the open walking space of the sidewalk shall be at least four feet, and no exit discharge from any doorway shall be obstructed in violation of the International Fire Code. 
4.  All signs must be brought inside when the business is closed. 
A sign allowed by this section shall not be regulated by other provisions of this Article regarding freestanding signs. Enforcement of the provisions regarding signs in the right-of-way permitted by this section shall be the responsibility of the Department of Public Safety. 
4.4.10. - Signs Permitted in Residential Districts. 
A.  Locations. All signs shall be located on the subject premises. 
B.  Sign Types Allowed Without a Permit. The following sign types shall be allowed in residential districts without a permit. 
1.  Signs exempt from permit requirements in accordance with 4.4.2. 
2.  For a Type 2 Home Occupation, one home occupation sign not exceeding 1.5 square feet in area for each lot of record in a residential district mounted against the wall of the principal building. 
3.  For a Type 2 Home Occupation in a Bed and Breakfast Inn or Bed and Breakfast Meeting Facility, one sign not exceeding 1.5 square feet in area mounted against the wall of the principal building. 
4.  Temporary signs in accordance with 4.4.9.A through G. 
C.  Sign Types Requiring a Permit. Subdivision entrance or identification signs in accordance with 4.4.8.A and the table below. 
District/Use Maximum Sign Area Maximum Sign Height RS-15, RS-10, RS-8, RS-6, RSH, RSS, RSM 24 square feet 8 feet RSA, RML, RMH, RMP 
 Fewer than 8 units 
8 or more units   
20 square feet 
32 square feet   
8 feet 
6 feet  
D.  Illumination. Signs in residential districts shall be illuminated only by external incandescent lighting except for an electronic readerboard included in a PR Concept Plan approved by City Council or for a school, church, governmental or tax-exempt entity as permitted by 4.4.7.E.2. 
(Ord. No. 04142014B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-14-2014) 
4.4.11.   Signs Permitted in Nonresidential Districts.
A.  Locations. All signs shall be located on the subject premises. 
B.  Sign Types Allowed Without a Permit. The following sign types shall be permitted in the all of the nonresidential districts, except the HD District (see paragraph F below). 
1.  Signs exempt from permit requirements in accordance with 4.4.2. 
2.  Temporary signs in accordance with 4.4.9. 
3.  Banners and Flags in accordance with 4.4.8.B and 4.4.8.C. 
C.  Sign Types Requiring a Permit. 
1.  Subdivision entrance or identification signs in accordance with 4.4.8.A and the table below. If a double sign is proposed, the total area of the faces of both signs shall not exceed the maximum permitted sign area for a single sign. Entrance signs in the LP and LB Districts shall be permitted only in place of, not in addition to, a freestanding sign. 
District/Use Maximum Sign Area Max. Sign Height LP and LB Districts 9 square feet 8 feet LI, LM and I Districts:
 Industrial Park 50 square feet, plus 10 square feet for each industry in the park; maximum 120 square feet 10 feet  
2.  Wall or projecting signs in accordance with 4.4.6. 
3.  Canopy or awning signs in place of wall or projecting signs in accordance with 4.4.8.D are permitted in the LP, LB, O, GB, PC, PI, DB, LI, and I Districts and commercial areas within a PR only. 
4.  Freestanding signs in accordance with 4.4.7 and the following table. 
District/Use Maximum Sign Area Max. Sign Height LP and LB Districts 9 square feet for first 2 tenants, plus 5 additional SF for each tenant over 2; maximum 24 square feet 8 feet O District 32 square feet for first 2 tenants, plus 5 additional SF for each tenant over 2; maximum 60 square feet 12 feet GB District:
 Single Use 
  2-Lane Frontage   
  
50 square feet 11 feet; 18 feet allowed at an intersection of two 2-lane streets to avoid visibility problems, subject to approval by the Planning Director   4-Lane Frontage 75 square feet 18 feet GB District:
 Office   
60 square feet 8 feet on 2-lane; 
12 feet on 4-lane GB District:
 Shopping Center 
(see 4.4.7.F) 60 SF for first two tenants, additional 10 SF for each additional tenant over 2; maximum 120 SF 8 feet on 2-lane; 
12 feet on 4-lane DB District
 Monument Sign 32 SF for first 2 tenants; additional 4 SF for each tenant over 2; maximum 48 SF 7 feet   Pole Sign 16 SF for first 2 tenants; additional 2 SF for each tenant over 2; maximum 24 SF 7 feet LI, LM and I Districts:
 Single Industry 
 2-Lane Frontage 
 4-Lane Frontage   
  
40 square feet 
50 square feet   
  
10 feet 
10 feet  
D.  Signs Permitted in Planned Commercial (PC) and Planned Institutional (PI) Districts. Signs allowed for each Planned Commercial and Planned Institutional development shall be based on the signs that would be permitted for a similar district and use as provided above, as determined by the Planning Director except that each sign shall be a ground-mounted monument sign. (Ordinance 05102004B) See also 1. City Council shall have the authority to modify any proposed signage as part of the concept plan approval. Electronic readerboard signs may be allowed through approval of the Concept Plan by City Council and shall comply with 4.4.7.E. 
E.  Signs Permitted in the Planned Residential (PR) District. Signs allowed for each use in a PR shall be based on the sign that would be permitted for a similar (Ordinance 05102004B) district and use as provided above, as determined by the Planning Director except that each sign shall be a ground mounted monument sign. The entrance identification signs allowed for a PR shall be based on the signs allowed for the district or use that corresponds with the predominant use of the PR as determined by the Planning Director. City Council shall have the authority to modify any proposed signage as part of the concept plan approval. Electronic readerboard signs may be allowed through approval of the Concept Plan by City Council and shall comply with 4.4.7.E. 
F.  Signs Permitted in the Horse District (HD) and Open Space (OS) District. 
1.  Freestanding signs shall have wooden faces. For each lot, the combined area of all freestanding signs visible from a street shall not exceed 24 square feet. The top of any part of a freestanding sign, including its face and supporting structure, must not be more than eight feet from the surface of the ground. 
2.  On each lot, wooden signs with a maximum combined area of 24 square feet may be attached to buildings, fences, and gates. Signs not visible from a public street right-of-way shall not be considered when determining whether signage exceeds the limit. 
3.  No internal illumination shall be permitted. 
G.  Signs for Unlisted Uses. Signs for uses permitted in zoning districts not expressly provided for above shall be governed by the provisions in those paragraphs most suitable for that use and area as determined by the Planning Director. 
H.  Illumination. 
1.  Except for the LP, LB, and DB Districts, signs in nonresidential districts may be illuminated, subject to requirements contained in this Ordinance, and other applicable City codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
2.  Signs in the LP, LB, and PI Districts shall be illuminated only by external incandescent lighting. 
3.  In the DB District, externally illuminated signs are preferred; however, if an internally illuminated sign is used, then one of the following types of signs is required. 
a.  Individual back-lit letters silhouetted against a softly illuminated wall; 
b.  Individual letters with translucent faces with soft lighting elements within each letter; or 
c.  Metal-faced box signs with cut-out letters and soft glow internal lighting. 
If an internally illuminated, plastic-face sign is to be used, the light source must use cool white or soft-glow bulbs and not exceed 60 watts. 
(Ord. No. 04142014B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-14-2014) 
4.4.11. - Signs Permitted in Nonresidential Districts. 
A.  Locations. All signs shall be located on the subject premises. 
B.  Sign Types Allowed Without a Permit. The following sign types shall be permitted in the all of the nonresidential districts, except the HD District (see paragraph F below). 
1.  Signs exempt from permit requirements in accordance with 4.4.2. 
2.  Temporary signs in accordance with 4.4.9. 
3.  Banners and Flags in accordance with 4.4.8.B and 4.4.8.C. 
C.  Sign Types Requiring a Permit. 
1.  Subdivision entrance or identification signs in accordance with 4.4.8.A and the table below. If a double sign is proposed, the total area of the faces of both signs shall not exceed the maximum permitted sign area for a single sign. Entrance signs in the LP and LB Districts shall be permitted only in place of, not in addition to, a freestanding sign. 
District/Use Maximum Sign Area Max. Sign Height LP and LB Districts 9 square feet 8 feet LI, LM and I Districts:
 Industrial Park 50 square feet, plus 10 square feet for each industry in the park; maximum 120 square feet 10 feet  
2.  Wall or projecting signs in accordance with 4.4.6. 
3.  Canopy or awning signs in place of wall or projecting signs in accordance with 4.4.8.D are permitted in the LP, LB, O, GB, PC, PI, DB, LI, and I Districts and commercial areas within a PR only. 
4.  Freestanding signs in accordance with 4.4.7 and the following table. 
District/Use Maximum Sign Area Max. Sign Height LP and LB Districts 9 square feet for first 2 tenants, plus 5 additional SF for each tenant over 2; maximum 24 square feet 8 feet O District 32 square feet for first 2 tenants, plus 5 additional SF for each tenant over 2; maximum 60 square feet 12 feet GB District:
 Single Use 
  2-Lane Frontage   
  
50 square feet 11 feet; 18 feet allowed at an intersection of two 2-lane streets to avoid visibility problems, subject to approval by the Planning Director   4-Lane Frontage 75 square feet 18 feet GB District:
 Office   
60 square feet 8 feet on 2-lane; 
12 feet on 4-lane GB District:
 Shopping Center 
(see 4.4.7.F) 60 SF for first two tenants, additional 10 SF for each additional tenant over 2; maximum 120 SF 8 feet on 2-lane; 
12 feet on 4-lane DB District
 Monument Sign 32 SF for first 2 tenants; additional 4 SF for each tenant over 2; maximum 48 SF 7 feet   Pole Sign 16 SF for first 2 tenants; additional 2 SF for each tenant over 2; maximum 24 SF 7 feet LI, LM and I Districts:
 Single Industry 
 2-Lane Frontage 
 4-Lane Frontage   
  
40 square feet 
50 square feet   
  
10 feet 
10 feet  
D.  Signs Permitted in Planned Commercial (PC) and Planned Institutional (PI) Districts. Signs allowed for each Planned Commercial and Planned Institutional development shall be based on the signs that would be permitted for a similar district and use as provided above, as determined by the Planning Director except that each sign shall be a ground-mounted monument sign. (Ordinance 05102004B) See also 1. City Council shall have the authority to modify any proposed signage as part of the concept plan approval. Electronic readerboard signs may be allowed through approval of the Concept Plan by City Council and shall comply with 4.4.7.E. 
E.  Signs Permitted in the Planned Residential (PR) District. Signs allowed for each use in a PR shall be based on the sign that would be permitted for a similar (Ordinance 05102004B) district and use as provided above, as determined by the Planning Director except that each sign shall be a ground mounted monument sign. The entrance identification signs allowed for a PR shall be based on the signs allowed for the district or use that corresponds with the predominant use of the PR as determined by the Planning Director. City Council shall have the authority to modify any proposed signage as part of the concept plan approval. Electronic readerboard signs may be allowed through approval of the Concept Plan by City Council and shall comply with 4.4.7.E. 
F.  Signs Permitted in the Horse District (HD) and Open Space (OS) District. 
1.  Freestanding signs shall have wooden faces. For each lot, the combined area of all freestanding signs visible from a street shall not exceed 24 square feet. The top of any part of a freestanding sign, including its face and supporting structure, must not be more than eight feet from the surface of the ground. 
2.  On each lot, wooden signs with a maximum combined area of 24 square feet may be attached to buildings, fences, and gates. Signs not visible from a public street right-of-way shall not be considered when determining whether signage exceeds the limit. 
3.  No internal illumination shall be permitted. 
G.  Signs for Unlisted Uses. Signs for uses permitted in zoning districts not expressly provided for above shall be governed by the provisions in those paragraphs most suitable for that use and area as determined by the Planning Director. 
H.  Illumination. 
1.  Except for the LP, LB, and DB Districts, signs in nonresidential districts may be illuminated, subject to requirements contained in this Ordinance, and other applicable City codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
2.  Signs in the LP, LB, and PI Districts shall be illuminated only by external incandescent lighting. 
3.  In the DB District, externally illuminated signs are preferred; however, if an internally illuminated sign is used, then one of the following types of signs is required. 
a.  Individual back-lit letters silhouetted against a softly illuminated wall; 
b.  Individual letters with translucent faces with soft lighting elements within each letter; or 
c.  Metal-faced box signs with cut-out letters and soft glow internal lighting. 
If an internally illuminated, plastic-face sign is to be used, the light source must use cool white or soft-glow bulbs and not exceed 60 watts. 
(Ord. No. 04142014B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-14-2014) 
ARTICLE 5. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

4.5.1. - Parking Spaces to be Provided. 
A.  Spaces Required. Off-street parking in the City of Aiken for all structures and uses of land shall conform to the requirements shown in the table below. The Planning Director may accept a different number of spaces in accordance with 4.5.2. 
Use Minimum Spaces Required RESIDENTIAL USES Single-Family 2 spaces per dwelling unit Multifamily 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit Housing for the Elderly 0.5 space per dwelling unit Nursing Home 1.5 spaces for each 2 patient beds Rooming or Boarding House 1 space for each 2 sleeping rooms PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES Golf Course Clubhouse 1 space per 100 SF of retail sales uses, plus 1 space per 300 SF office uses, plus 1 space per 3 seats for restaurant uses Places of Public Assembly 1 space per each 3 persons at maximum occupancy Religious Institution * 1 space for each 5 seats in the main assembly room School, Elementary or Middle 2 spaces per classroom School, High School 6 spaces per classroom plus 1 space per 8 seats in auditorium COMMERCIAL USES Auto Sales and Repair 1 space for each 2 employees, plus 2 spaces for each 300 SF gross floor area Bed and Breakfast 1 space for the owner/operator plus 1 space per guest room Bowling Alley 5 spaces for each lane Bus Terminal 2 spaces for each bay Furniture Retail Sales 2 spaces for each 1,000 SF of gross floor area Hotel or Motel 1 space for each sleeping room Medical or Dental Offices 1 space per 250 SF gross floor area Mortuary 1 space for each 400 square feet excluding chapel plus one space for each 3 seats in chapel Office (non-medical) and Financial Institutions 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area Restaurants 1 space per each 3 seats Retail Sales and Service 1 space for each 200 SF gross floor area Shopping Center, Discount Store, Department Store, Superstore, or Power Center or Single-Use Retail exceeding 20,000 s.f. gross leasable 4.0 spaces per 1,000 SF of gross leasable floor area 
(See Section 4.5.1.B.4 for maximum off-street parking) 
(Ord. 11252002A) INDUSTRIAL USES Industrial 1 space for each 2 employees at maximum shift Warehousing and Storage Areas 1 space for each 1,500 SF of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 200 SF of office area Wholesale Business 1 space for each 2 employees  
 * See also 4.5.3, Off-Site Parking for Religious Institutions. 
B.  Calculation of Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
1.  When calculating the minimum number of off-street parking spaces in accordance with the table above, calculations shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
2.  Calculation of required off-street parking for any eating establishment shall include all seating areas located outdoors. 
3.  The City may limit parking to not more than 110 percent of the amount required where necessary to maximize the number of replacement trees on a site in accordance with 4.6.4.B.2.c.v. 
4.  For Shopping Center, Discount Store, Department Store, Superstore, Power Center or Single-Use Retail uses exceeding 20,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area, off-street parking shall not exceed 4.5 spaces per 1000 square feet of leasable floor area unless documentation is provided clearly demonstrating that additional parking is essential to the proposed use in which case the Planning Director may allow up to 5.5 spaces per 1000 square feet of gross leasable floor area. (Ord. 11252002A) 
C.  Parking for Uses not in Table. Parking for uses not expressly provided for above shall be governed by the provisions in those paragraphs most suitable for that use as determined by the Planning Director. 
D.  Exemption for DB District. 
1.  Off-street parking is not required for uses located in the Central Business District of the DB Zone District. 

2.  On-street parking in the vicinity of the use may count toward the required parking as determined by the Planning Director. 
3.  Off-street parking is not required for religious institutions located in any Historic District listed on the Aiken Historic Register. 
4.5.2. - Developer-Submitted Parking Data. 
1.  The Planning Director may accept a higher or lower number of parking spaces than required in 4.5.1 (or a specific number of spaces for a use not listed) based on developer-submitted parking data such as a shared parking analysis or appropriate standards from another accepted source. (See 4.5.1.B.4) (Ord. 11252002A) 
2.  If the Planning Director accepts a lower number of parking spaces than is required in 4.5.1, the site may be required to accommodate the higher number of spaces in case of future need. The design and location of these additional parking spaces shall meet the site design standards at 4.5.4 and the following. 
a.  The area necessary to accommodate these spaces shall not be included as part of the site's minimum open space requirement. 
b.  The area necessary to accommodate these spaces shall be included in the impervious coverage for the site and accounted for in the drainage design. 
c.  Until or unless such spaces are needed, as determined by the Planning Director, the area shall be maintained as open space, and the clearing of trees in that area and subsequent tree replacement shall not occur until or unless such additional parking is required to be constructed. 
3.  Any shared parking analysis shall follow the guidelines of the Urban Land Institute's SHARED PARKING or an acceptable alternative source approved by the Planning Director. Any off-site parking to be utilized shall require the recording of a perpetual easement, in form and substance acceptable to the Planning Director, in the office of the Registrar of Mesne Conveyance of Aiken County. 
4.5.3. - Off-Site Parking for Religious Institutions. 
A.  Written Authorization Required. Parking spaces on privately owned land located within 1500 feet of the nearest portion of the main assembly room building of a religious institution may be counted in meeting up to 50 percent of the parking requirement of this Article where either of the following is provided. 
1.  Written authorization is provided by the owner of property on which the off-site parking is located stating the number of parking spaces that may be used during the time of the main services and the duration of such authorization; or 
2.  An easement or other document is recorded with the Registrar of Mesne Conveyance for Aiken County by the owner of the private property on which such spaces are located granting a permanent easement or permission for such parking meeting the requirements of this provision. 
B.  Expiration of Authorization. A written commitment must be provided by the church that should such authorization, easement, or permission expire or be withdrawn, adequate off-street parking complying with this Article will be provided within 180 days. 
4.5.4. - Off-Street Parking Design Standards. 
A.  General Design Standards. Every parcel of land developed as or changed to a parking area shall be developed in accordance with the following design standards. 
1.  Any public parking area shall be paved or have equivalent surfacing subject to the approval of the Director of Engineering/Public Works. 
2.  Driveways and parking areas shall be designed to limit the removal of Significant and Grand trees to the maximum extent feasible. See 4.6.4. 
3.  Landscaped buffers adjacent to any property zoned or used residentially shall be provided in accordance with 4.6.7.E. No parking shall be permitted in required side yards adjacent to any residential district or use. Any light used to illuminate said parking area shall be directed away from any property zoned or used residentially. 
4.  All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of access to street, alley, or maneuvering area. 
5.  Each required parking space shall be at least 9 feet in width by 18 feet in length. 
B.  Parking Fronting Arterials. All off-street parking in conjunction with development fronting on an arterial street shall be designed so that vehicles can turn around within the parking facility without backing into the street. 
C.  Driving Aisle Width. The width of all driving aisles between individual parking spaces shall be in accordance with the requirements specified below. Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in driving aisles serving single-row parking spaces placed at an angle other than 90 degrees. 

Parking Angle Minimum Aisle Width 60 degrees 18 feet 90 degrees 24 feet Driving Aisle without Parking 20 feet  
D.  Wheel Stops Required. 
1.  Secured wheel stops shall be provided in all parking facilities without curbing. The vehicle side of the wheel stop shall be no less than 18 inches from the end of the parking space. 
2.  Where sidewalks or other walkways occur in parking facilities, parked vehicles shall not overhang or extend over the sidewalk. In these parking facilities, wheel stops shall be provided even if the parking facility has curbing. 
4.5.5.   Driveway Standards.
1.  All driveways shall comply with South Carolina Department of Transportation standards for separation. 
2.  No driveway or curb cuts into a public parking area in any district shall exceed 30 feet in width. For the purposes of this paragraph, the width of any landscaped median shall not be included in determining driveway width. 

3.  No driveway serving a nonresidential use shall be permitted through a residential district or use, and no driveway serving a multifamily use shall be permitted through a single-family district or use. 
4.  Detailed plans shall be submitted to the Director of Engineering/Public Works for approval of all driveway openings or curb cuts before a permit may be obtained. 
4.5.6.   Off-Street Loading Space.
A.  General. Whenever the normal operation of any development requires that goods, merchandise, or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from that development, a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area must be provided in accordance with this Section to accommodate the delivery or shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner. Determination of the applicability of this Section shall be made by the Planning Director. 
B.  Exemption for DB District. This Section shall not apply in the Downtown Business (DB) District. 
C.  Typical Loading Area Requirements. The following table indicates the number and size of spaces that normally shall satisfy the standard set forth in this subsection. However, the Planning Director may require more or fewer spaces if necessary to satisfy the intent of this standard, upon evaluation of adequate data submitted by the applicant. 
Gross Floor Area in Structure Number of Loading Spaces 0 to 25,000 SF 1 25,001 to 40,000 SF 2 40,001 to 100,000 SF 3 100,001 to 160,000 SF 4 Over 160,000 SF 4 plus 1 space for each additional 
80,000 SF above 160,000 SF  
D.  Design Standards. 
1.  Minimum dimensions for each space shall be 12 by 40 feet. Additional length or width may be required by the Planning Director if deemed necessary for a given expected type of vehicle use. An overhead clearance of 14 feet from pavement grade shall be required. 
2.  Loading areas shall be so located and designed that the vehicles intended to use them can maneuver safely and conveniently to and from a street right-of-way and complete loading and unloading operations without obstructing or interfering with any public right-of-way, parking space, or parking lot aisle. No backing into the street shall be permitted. 
3.  No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading and unloading facilities. Detached single-family dwellings are not subject to this requirement. 
E.  Exceptions. Whenever there exists a lot that meets all of the requirements below, then the developer need only comply with this Section to the extent reasonably possible. 
1.  One or more structures on the lot were constructed before the effective date of this Ordinance; and 
2.  A change in use is proposed that does not involve any enlargement of a structure; and 
3.  The loading area requirements of this Section cannot be satisfied because there is insufficient area available on the lot that can practically be used for loading and unloading. 
4.5.5. - Driveway Standards. 
1.  All driveways shall comply with South Carolina Department of Transportation standards for separation. 
2.  No driveway or curb cuts into a public parking area in any district shall exceed 30 feet in width. For the purposes of this paragraph, the width of any landscaped median shall not be included in determining driveway width. 

3.  No driveway serving a nonresidential use shall be permitted through a residential district or use, and no driveway serving a multifamily use shall be permitted through a single-family district or use. 
4.  Detailed plans shall be submitted to the Director of Engineering/Public Works for approval of all driveway openings or curb cuts before a permit may be obtained. 
4.5.6. - Off-Street Loading Space. 
A.  General. Whenever the normal operation of any development requires that goods, merchandise, or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from that development, a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area must be provided in accordance with this Section to accommodate the delivery or shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner. Determination of the applicability of this Section shall be made by the Planning Director. 
B.  Exemption for DB District. This Section shall not apply in the Downtown Business (DB) District. 
C.  Typical Loading Area Requirements. The following table indicates the number and size of spaces that normally shall satisfy the standard set forth in this subsection. However, the Planning Director may require more or fewer spaces if necessary to satisfy the intent of this standard, upon evaluation of adequate data submitted by the applicant. 
Gross Floor Area in Structure Number of Loading Spaces 0 to 25,000 SF 1 25,001 to 40,000 SF 2 40,001 to 100,000 SF 3 100,001 to 160,000 SF 4 Over 160,000 SF 4 plus 1 space for each additional 
80,000 SF above 160,000 SF  
D.  Design Standards. 
1.  Minimum dimensions for each space shall be 12 by 40 feet. Additional length or width may be required by the Planning Director if deemed necessary for a given expected type of vehicle use. An overhead clearance of 14 feet from pavement grade shall be required. 
2.  Loading areas shall be so located and designed that the vehicles intended to use them can maneuver safely and conveniently to and from a street right-of-way and complete loading and unloading operations without obstructing or interfering with any public right-of-way, parking space, or parking lot aisle. No backing into the street shall be permitted. 
3.  No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading and unloading facilities. Detached single-family dwellings are not subject to this requirement. 
E.  Exceptions. Whenever there exists a lot that meets all of the requirements below, then the developer need only comply with this Section to the extent reasonably possible. 
1.  One or more structures on the lot were constructed before the effective date of this Ordinance; and 
2.  A change in use is proposed that does not involve any enlargement of a structure; and 
3.  The loading area requirements of this Section cannot be satisfied because there is insufficient area available on the lot that can practically be used for loading and unloading. 
ARTICLE 6. - LANDSCAPING AND TREE PRESERVATION 

4.6.1. - Purposes. 
    This Article is intended to promote the preservation and installation of high quality trees and other plant material for the purposes of implementing the policies of the Comprehensive Plan and protecting public safety, health, and welfare through the benefits such vegetation provides, including, but not limited to the following. 
1.  Absorbing carbon dioxide and returning oxygen. 
2.  Precipitating unwanted particles from the air, thereby reducing air pollution. 
3.  Providing shade and making outdoor areas more habitable in summer. 
4.  Reducing soil erosion and increasing infiltration. 
5.  Reducing noise levels. 
6.  Improving City appearance and retaining its character, promoting civic pride, emotional health, and the local economy, including property values and tourism. 
7.  Providing wildlife habitat, thus helping to control insects. 
4.6.2. - Jurisdiction. 
    This Article shall apply to all lands within the corporate limits of the City of Aiken, and may apply, as required or approved by City Council, to land outside the City limits granted City water, sanitary sewer, or other services by the City. The Planning Director may waive any provision in this article that would conflict with a requirement of the Public Safety Department. 
4.6.3. - Removal of Existing Trees on Land Not Being Developed. 
A.  The natural landscape, including existing trees, shall be preserved wherever possible. On land zoned to permit any use other than single-family residential (except land zoned Planned Residential for which a concept plan depicting single-family residential use has been approved), no Significant or Grand Tree may be removed unless one or more of the following can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Director after consultation with appropriate city staff members including but not limited to the City Horticulturist. 
It is in the interest of good forestry management. 
The tree is diseased, dying, or dead. 
The tree causes a safety hazard to nearby buildings or pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
The tree is a Pine, Pecan, or Magnolia that is dropping debris or sap that is significantly affecting vehicles in a parking lot though any such tree removed will have to be replaced with an equal number of caliper inches or, if there is not room, an amount placed into the Tree Fund in accordance with 4.6.4.B.2.d. 
The tree is causing significant structural damage to a building or other structure that reasonable maintenance cannot prevent. 
The tree is interfering with an existing underground utility line or overhead wiring. 
It is necessary to allow construction of a road essential for access to the site, subject to the requirement that the inches of Grand and Significant trees removed therefore shall be replaced when the site is developed. 
B.  If trees are removed on land zoned single-family residential, no application for rezoning to a commercial or multifamily residential zoning classification will be considered for two years after City staff determines that such removal has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 12142015C , § 1(Exh. A), 12-14-2015) 
4.6.4. - Removal of Trees Associated With Development. 
    Prior to issuance of a building permit for a nonresidential or multifamily residential project, a landscape plan must be approved in accordance with 6.2.10 and the following provisions. Prior to issuance of a building permit for any portion of a project consisting of attached single-family or duplex residential units, the following provisions must be met. (Ord. 12122005A) Issuance of a building permit for a detached single-family dwelling in a commercial or multifamily residential zone shall be conditioned on a stipulation that, if Significant or Grand Trees are removed, no building permit for a permitted use other than detached single-family residential shall be issued for three years from the date of issuance of the permit. (Ord. 03132006) 
A.  Tree Survey. 
1.  For every project one of the following shall be submitted. 
a.  A detailed tree survey of the entire site depicting the DBH, variety, and location of all Significant and Grand trees including the information listed in 6.2.10.D; or 
b.  A detailed tree survey depicting the DBH, variety, and location of the Grand Trees on the entire site and the Significant Trees in the yard including the information listed in 6.2.10.D and a listing of all Significant Trees in the buildable area including DBH and variety, and, if required by the Planning Director, a tree survey of selected areas or other additional information where it is necessary to make a determination about the feasibility of saving Significant Trees. 
2.  Information required by paragraph 1 shall be prepared by a licensed engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, forester, arborist or other person with demonstrated experience in preparing accurate tree surveys as determined by the Planning Director. Such information shall not be more than two years old on the date of submission of the application for landscape plan approval. 
B.  Tree Protection Areas. 
1.  Planting Strip Along Street Rights-of-Way. 
a.  Depth. A planting strip shall be provided parallel and adjacent to each street right-of-way the depth of which shall be based on the following table. The maximum required depth under this provision shall be 25 feet, but a deeper planting strip may be provided. 
Lot Depth Planting Strip Depth Up to 200 feet 10 feet 200 to 500 feet 5 percent of lot depth More than 500 feet 25 feet  
b.  Protection of Significant and Grand Trees. Within the planting strip, all Grand and Significant trees shall remain unless their preservation would prevent the installation of a necessary driveway, sidewalk, permitted sign, or essential utility. All such driveways, sidewalks, signs, and utilities shall be located so as to preserve the maximum number of Grand and Significant Trees as determined by the Planning Director. To insure tree survival, a protected area pursuant to 4.6.5.B shall be provided around each tree as required by the Planning Director. 
c.  Minimum Number of Trees. Existing trees may be counted in meeting the requirement for trees in the planting strip at 4.6.7.B. To be counted, a tree must have a DBH of two inches. The type and condition of such trees are subject to approval by the Planning Director for that purpose and must be depicted on the landscape plan. If existing trees do not satisfy the requirement, a sufficient number must be planted to comply with 4.6.7.B. 
2.  Entire Site. 
a.  Removal. No Grand Tree may be removed unless the Planning Director determines there is absolutely no alternative because of unavoidable grading or because of the required configuration of paving, essential utilities, or buildings. No more than 80 percent of the DBH inches of Significant Trees may be removed unless the Planning Director determines there is absolutely no alternative because of unavoidable grading or because of the required configuration of paving, essential utilities, or buildings. 
b.  Location of Saved Trees. No more than 25 percent of saved trees may be located in the rear yard unless there are not enough trees on other parts of the site to meet this requirement. 
c.  Replacement. 
i.  Grand and Significant DBH inches removed shall be replaced, except for trees removed (1) pursuant to the requirements of City ordinances and regulations, (2) after determination by the City Horticulturist to be diseased, dying, or dead, or (3) in conjunction with construction of athletic fields at a public or private school required by the South Carolina State Department of Education or other licensing or accreditation organizations for such schools. 
ii.  The cumulative caliper of replacement trees shall at least equal the cumulative DBH of the Grand and Significant Trees removed except that the DBH of any Grand or Significant Trees on the Approved Tree List saved or approved trees newly planted may count as double replacement inches under this provision. 
iii.  Trees planted to meet other requirements of this Article may be counted as replacement trees. The minimum caliper for a replacement tree shall be two inches and be from the Approved Tree List. 
iv.  The Planning Director shall approve the type, size, and location of each replacement tree. 
v.  Where the Planning Director determines that planting the required number of trees on the site will result in an unacceptable density of trees based upon good forestry management, the Planning Director may reduce that number; provided, however, that off street parking shall be limited to no more than ten percent over the minimum number of parking spaces required by 4.5.1 if necessary to maximize the number of replacement trees to be planted on the site. 
d.  Tree Fund. If there is not sufficient room on the site to plant the required replacement DBH inches, a payment-in-lieu-of-planting shall be made to the Tree Fund to be used for the planting of trees on City property. The amount shall be determined by the City Horticulturist based on the retail value of the trees, but in no case shall the total amount exceed $500 per acre of the site. 
4.6.5.   Tree Protection During and After Development.
A.  Standards. Trees that are to remain or are planted shall be protected in accordance with standards provided in paragraph B below and the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual. The standards in the Manual shall provide for protective barriers around trees, the prevention of compaction or other disturbance within the protected area as set forth at 4.6.5.B, and the installation of utilities. 
B.  Protected Areas. During grading and construction, a protected area equal to one foot radius for every inch of DBH of each tree shall be provided within which paving, grading, or the storage of dirt, building materials, debris, or any other materials or any other equipment shall not be allowed. Each protected area shall be enclosed by a barrier constructed in a manner required and approved by the Planning Director prior to issuance of a grading permit. Failure to maintain barriers may result in revocation of the building and/or grading permit. For projects not requiring a grading permit, installation of the required barriers shall be approved by the Planning Director prior to issuance of a building permit. Protective barriers shall be maintained until issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The protected area shall be permanent and maintained by the property owner. No pavement shall be installed in the protected area. The Planning Director may reduce the protected area or allow intrusions into it if such actions would not adversely affect the survival and health of the tree. 
C.  Tree Maintenance. The following tree maintenance provisions shall apply to all trees on the subject site included in the Protected Tree List or Approved Tree List in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual (Ord. 11222010A), not just those planted pursuant to this Article except for trees on a lot occupied by a dwelling unit in an attached single-family or duplex residential project. (Ord. 12122005A) No matter what pruning methods are used, no more than one-fourth of the crown should be removed in any one growing season. 
1.  Where necessary to improve visibility for public safety purposes, suckers or limbs below seven feet in height may be removed through proper crown raising or elevating. 
2.  Maintenance of trees shall take their natural shape and growth patterns into account. Trees that are intended to grow full to the ground, such as Magnolias, shall not be limbed up. 
3.  No topping or heading back shall be permitted which involves the cutting of limbs back to a stub, bud, or lateral branch not large enough to assume the terminal role. Crown reduction shall be used to reduce the size of a tree and is best accomplished by cutting limbs back to laterals that are at least one-third the diameter of the parent limb. 
D.  Approved Landscape Plan To Be On Site. During construction and until issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, a copy of the approved landscape plan must be kept on the site. 
4.6.6.   Removal of Trees After Development.
A.  After issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for a commercial or multifamily residential project located in a zoning district, no Significant or Grand Tree may be removed unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Director after consultation with appropriate city staff members including but not limited to the City Horticulturist that one or more of the conditions at 4.6.3.A(1-7) exists. 
B.  The Planning Director may also allow the removal of a Significant or Grand tree that has been planted as a requirement of this ordinance, or a supplementary tree planted after development, if it can be demonstrated that the tree is affecting the primary approval use of the subject property. 
The cumulative caliper of the trees removed shall be replaced on-site from the Approved Tree List if possible as determined by the City Horticulturist. If applicable, a revised landscape plan may be required to be submitted to the Planning Department for review. 
C.  This provision shall also apply to the common areas of an attached single-family or duplex residential project in any zoning district. (Ord. 12122005A) Portions of any golf course associated with play such as fairways, tee boxes, greens, rough, and practice areas shall be exempt from this provision. (Ord. 09272004) Public parks and recreational facilities are also exempt from this provision. 
(Ord. No. 07142014D , § 1(Exh. A), 7-14-2014; Ord. No. 10132014B , § 1(Exh. A), 10-13-2014; Ord. No. 12142015C , § 1(Exh. A), 12-14-2015) 
4.6.7.   Landscaping Requirements.
A.  Area Required to be Landscaped. Where not expressly set forth in 4.2.1 or 4.3.1, the minimum required landscaped area shall be 20 percent of the site for commercial uses and 40 percent of the site for multifamily residential uses. The planting strip may be included in calculating the required landscaped area. Where a portion of a larger undeveloped tract is being developed, only landscaped area reasonably associated with the project as determined by the Planning Director shall be counted in meeting the requirements of this provision. 
B.  Plantings in Strip Along the Street Frontage. 
1.  Trees. 
a.  Number, Size and Spacing. With respect to the approval of a site/landscape plan for a new development, the maximum number of trees must be planted in the planting strip, required by 4.6.4.B.1, as determined by the Planning Director taking into account the size of the trees at maturity except, to allow for the location of a freestanding sign, there may be a gap of no more than 40 feet where Small Trees are planted and 60 feet where Large Trees are planted (Ord. 11222010A). The Planning Director shall approve the type, size, and location of replacement trees. Subject to the approval of the Planning Director, any combination of large and small trees may be planted to meet the minimum required number. Any area in the planting strip beyond the minimum required by this Article shall not be included in determining the number of trees required to be planted. Each tree planted in the planting strip shall have a minimum caliper of two inches and be selected from the Approved Tree List. Where necessary, trees may be limbed up to allow visibility for motorists in accordance with 4.6.5.C.1. The Planning Director may allow a smaller tree to be planted in the planting strip where overhead power lines would interfere with the growth of a larger tree. 
b.  Existing Trees. As provided in 4.6.4.B.1.c, an existing tree may be counted towards meeting the requirements of this Article provided that the tree has a DBH of at least two inches and the type and condition of the tree are approved for that purpose by the Planning Director. Such trees must be depicted on the landscape plan. 
2.  Shrubbery or Planted Berms. Evergreen shrubbery or a planted berm is required in the planting strip to screen the fronts of vehicles. The shrubbery must be at least three feet high after pruning at the time of planting and be planted no more than five feet on center. A berm must be at least three feet high and be planted with ground cover. 
C.  Planting Areas along Side and Rear Property Lines. Planting areas at least five feet in depth shall be provided along the entire side and rear property lines or site boundaries not located adjacent to a street right-of-way. The maximum possible number of trees must be planted therein as determined by the Planning Director taking into account the size of the trees at maturity based on the required minimum depth of five feet. The Planning Director shall approve the type, size, and location of the trees. Existing trees may be counted towards meeting the requirements of this provision in the same manner as provided in 4.6.4.B.1.c and 4.6.7.B.1.b. Trees on adjacent property that may conflict with planting new trees should be depicted on the landscape plan. These planting areas are required in addition to the planting strip along the street frontage and shall be considered part of the yard area. Where a joint driveway is proposed to serve two lots which would reduce the number of curb cuts, the Planning Director may modify the provisions of this section. 
D.  Landscaping in Vehicular Use Areas. 
1.  Perimeter Planting Areas. Each parking area should be defined by linear landscaped areas to delineate driveways and control traffic flow. Such linear landscaped areas should be at least eight feet in width and include canopy trees as determined by the Planning Director unless such trees would interfere with traffic movement in which case other types of trees may be used. 
2.  Islands Between Parking Spaces. In a parking area with more than one double bay of parking spaces, no more than 10 spaces are allowed in a row without a landscaped island of at least 300 square feet excluding curbing and having a minimum width of eight feet. Each such island shall have at least one canopy tree allowed in parking lots as set forth in the Approved Tree List. Such islands must be offset so that they are evenly distributed in the parking area and are not in straight lines. 
3.  Islands at End of Row. A landscaped island of at least 100 square feet in area shall be provided at the end of each single row of parking spaces closest to a building; each such island shall have a berm two feet high planted with ground cover, or, where there are two such islands together totaling at least 200 square feet, at least one small tree allowed in parking lots as set forth in the Approved Tree List. A landscaped island of at least 150 square feet shall be provided at the end of each single row of parking spaces nearest the street frontage; where there are two such islands together totaling at least 300 square feet, there shall be at least one canopy tree. The islands shall be designed and maintained so as not to obstruct visibility for motorists. The Planning Director may modify or waive this provision if compliance would not be practical. 
4.  Trees in Islands. Islands shall be located to preserve the maximum number of existing trees. The maximum number of trees must be planted as determined by the Planning Director taking into account the size of the trees at maturity. The Planning Director shall approve the size, type, and location of the trees. Any combination of large and small trees may be planted to meet the minimum number required by this provision with the approval of the Planning Director. 
5.  Screening of Dumpsters. Dumpsters, utility boxes, and similar structures must be screened by evergreen shrubbery at least three feet high after pruning at the time of planting. 
E.  Buffer or Screening Device. A landscaped buffer strip shall be required for any nonresidential or multifamily residential use where it abuts an area zoned or used residentially or for any attached single-family or duplex residential project where it abuts land occupied by single-family dwellings or zoned in a single-family residential category. (Ord. 12122005A) The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 10 feet in depth and be undisturbed. Additional evergreen vegetation shall be planted to form an effective screen; such vegetation shall be at least three feet high after pruning at time of planting and a height of at least seven feet at maturity with spacing as required by the City. Where deemed necessary by the Planning Director, additional measures may be required to provide an effective screen. Any screening buffer area shall be maintained in good order at all times by the owner of the property. 
F.  Detention Ponds and Lakes. A detention pond may be counted as landscaped area unless it is unable to support healthy trees as determined by the City Engineer and Planning Director. Each detention pond shall be screened for aesthetic purposes pursuant to the standards in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual provided for by 4.6.9 or as otherwise directed by the Planning Director to accomplish the purposes of this Article. A lake shall be counted as landscaped area if approved by the City Engineer and Planning Director as effecting the purposes of this Article. 
G.  Design of Project Landscaping. Landscaping installed during development should meet the following design guidelines. 
1.  Landscaping should be designed for the long term; the size of plants at maturity should be considered when selecting plant material and designing its installation. 
2.  Landscaping should continue thematic elements, if any, found in the surrounding area, including plant types and planting patterns. 
3.  Landscaping should be designed to be functional (reducing the heat island effect of impervious surfaces, helping to control runoff, etc.), as well as beautiful. 
4.  Crape Myrtles may not be planted along street rights-of-way unless necessitated by overhead wiring or other reason associated with the particular location as approved by the Planning Director. 
H.  Irrigation. An automatic irrigation system must be installed to water all new landscaped areas. The system must remain operational and have a timer set to water plantings to keep them alive. 
4.6.8.   Completion and Maintenance of Landscaping.
A.  Completion. 
1.  All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the approved landscape plan unless substitutions are approved by the Planning Director and noted in writing on the plan. A Certificate of Compliance, Certificate of Occupancy or business license for any business or use on a site with such an approved plan shall not be issued until the installation of the required landscaping is approved by the Planning Director or a cash or equivalent performance guarantee is posted with the Planning Director in the minimum amount of 110 percent of the total cost of the required uncompleted landscaping, including the labor, as determined by the Planning Director. A site not requiring a Certificate of Occupancy may not be used until the required landscaping is installed or a guarantee posted. 
2.  The guarantee shall be in a form approved by the Planning Director and shall be released and returned to the party posting the guarantee upon installation of all required landscaping and acceptance by the Planning Director of such installation. The landscaping shall be installed within three months of the posting of the performance guarantee with the Planning Director. However, the Planning Director may extend the time period for installation of landscaping for a maximum of an additional three months if weather conditions are not suitable for such installation or trees are not available during the initial three-month period. If the landscaping is not installed within the required period, the guarantee shall be forfeited to and used by the City to complete the approved landscaping with any remaining funds being returned to the party who posted the guarantee. For a project in an unincorporated area receiving City services and for which a landscape plan has been approved, the use of those services may not commence until the requirements of this Article are met. 
B.  Maintenance. The property owners, occupants, and tenants or their agents shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping. All landscaping required by or installed pursuant to landscaping plans approved under this Article or prior ordinances shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance; shall be kept free of refuse, debris, and dead, diseased, or severely damaged plants or vegetation; and shall contain at all times the number, variety, and location of plants and trees required thereby. 
4.6.9.   Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual.
    The City Horticulturist shall promulgate mandatory standards for the installation, maintenance, survival, health and protection of trees and landscaping required to be retained, planted, installed, or maintained by this Article or prior ordinances. Those standards shall promote and effect the purposes set forth in 4.6.1 and be compiled in a Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual including compliance with the most recent version of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). (Ord. 11222010A) The Manual shall also establish an Approved Tree List setting forth trees allowed to be planted including those permitted in parking lots. 
4.6.5. - Tree Protection During and After Development. 
A.  Standards. Trees that are to remain or are planted shall be protected in accordance with standards provided in paragraph B below and the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual. The standards in the Manual shall provide for protective barriers around trees, the prevention of compaction or other disturbance within the protected area as set forth at 4.6.5.B, and the installation of utilities. 
B.  Protected Areas. During grading and construction, a protected area equal to one foot radius for every inch of DBH of each tree shall be provided within which paving, grading, or the storage of dirt, building materials, debris, or any other materials or any other equipment shall not be allowed. Each protected area shall be enclosed by a barrier constructed in a manner required and approved by the Planning Director prior to issuance of a grading permit. Failure to maintain barriers may result in revocation of the building and/or grading permit. For projects not requiring a grading permit, installation of the required barriers shall be approved by the Planning Director prior to issuance of a building permit. Protective barriers shall be maintained until issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The protected area shall be permanent and maintained by the property owner. No pavement shall be installed in the protected area. The Planning Director may reduce the protected area or allow intrusions into it if such actions would not adversely affect the survival and health of the tree. 
C.  Tree Maintenance. The following tree maintenance provisions shall apply to all trees on the subject site included in the Protected Tree List or Approved Tree List in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual (Ord. 11222010A), not just those planted pursuant to this Article except for trees on a lot occupied by a dwelling unit in an attached single-family or duplex residential project. (Ord. 12122005A) No matter what pruning methods are used, no more than one-fourth of the crown should be removed in any one growing season. 
1.  Where necessary to improve visibility for public safety purposes, suckers or limbs below seven feet in height may be removed through proper crown raising or elevating. 
2.  Maintenance of trees shall take their natural shape and growth patterns into account. Trees that are intended to grow full to the ground, such as Magnolias, shall not be limbed up. 
3.  No topping or heading back shall be permitted which involves the cutting of limbs back to a stub, bud, or lateral branch not large enough to assume the terminal role. Crown reduction shall be used to reduce the size of a tree and is best accomplished by cutting limbs back to laterals that are at least one-third the diameter of the parent limb. 
D.  Approved Landscape Plan To Be On Site. During construction and until issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, a copy of the approved landscape plan must be kept on the site. 
4.6.6. - Removal of Trees After Development. 
A.  After issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for a commercial or multifamily residential project located in a zoning district, no Significant or Grand Tree may be removed unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Director after consultation with appropriate city staff members including but not limited to the City Horticulturist that one or more of the conditions at 4.6.3.A(1-7) exists. 
B.  The Planning Director may also allow the removal of a Significant or Grand tree that has been planted as a requirement of this ordinance, or a supplementary tree planted after development, if it can be demonstrated that the tree is affecting the primary approval use of the subject property. 
The cumulative caliper of the trees removed shall be replaced on-site from the Approved Tree List if possible as determined by the City Horticulturist. If applicable, a revised landscape plan may be required to be submitted to the Planning Department for review. 
C.  This provision shall also apply to the common areas of an attached single-family or duplex residential project in any zoning district. (Ord. 12122005A) Portions of any golf course associated with play such as fairways, tee boxes, greens, rough, and practice areas shall be exempt from this provision. (Ord. 09272004) Public parks and recreational facilities are also exempt from this provision. 
(Ord. No. 07142014D , § 1(Exh. A), 7-14-2014; Ord. No. 10132014B , § 1(Exh. A), 10-13-2014; Ord. No. 12142015C , § 1(Exh. A), 12-14-2015) 
4.6.7. - Landscaping Requirements. 
A.  Area Required to be Landscaped. Where not expressly set forth in 4.2.1 or 4.3.1, the minimum required landscaped area shall be 20 percent of the site for commercial uses and 40 percent of the site for multifamily residential uses. The planting strip may be included in calculating the required landscaped area. Where a portion of a larger undeveloped tract is being developed, only landscaped area reasonably associated with the project as determined by the Planning Director shall be counted in meeting the requirements of this provision. 
B.  Plantings in Strip Along the Street Frontage. 
1.  Trees. 
a.  Number, Size and Spacing. With respect to the approval of a site/landscape plan for a new development, the maximum number of trees must be planted in the planting strip, required by 4.6.4.B.1, as determined by the Planning Director taking into account the size of the trees at maturity except, to allow for the location of a freestanding sign, there may be a gap of no more than 40 feet where Small Trees are planted and 60 feet where Large Trees are planted (Ord. 11222010A). The Planning Director shall approve the type, size, and location of replacement trees. Subject to the approval of the Planning Director, any combination of large and small trees may be planted to meet the minimum required number. Any area in the planting strip beyond the minimum required by this Article shall not be included in determining the number of trees required to be planted. Each tree planted in the planting strip shall have a minimum caliper of two inches and be selected from the Approved Tree List. Where necessary, trees may be limbed up to allow visibility for motorists in accordance with 4.6.5.C.1. The Planning Director may allow a smaller tree to be planted in the planting strip where overhead power lines would interfere with the growth of a larger tree. 
b.  Existing Trees. As provided in 4.6.4.B.1.c, an existing tree may be counted towards meeting the requirements of this Article provided that the tree has a DBH of at least two inches and the type and condition of the tree are approved for that purpose by the Planning Director. Such trees must be depicted on the landscape plan. 
2.  Shrubbery or Planted Berms. Evergreen shrubbery or a planted berm is required in the planting strip to screen the fronts of vehicles. The shrubbery must be at least three feet high after pruning at the time of planting and be planted no more than five feet on center. A berm must be at least three feet high and be planted with ground cover. 
C.  Planting Areas along Side and Rear Property Lines. Planting areas at least five feet in depth shall be provided along the entire side and rear property lines or site boundaries not located adjacent to a street right-of-way. The maximum possible number of trees must be planted therein as determined by the Planning Director taking into account the size of the trees at maturity based on the required minimum depth of five feet. The Planning Director shall approve the type, size, and location of the trees. Existing trees may be counted towards meeting the requirements of this provision in the same manner as provided in 4.6.4.B.1.c and 4.6.7.B.1.b. Trees on adjacent property that may conflict with planting new trees should be depicted on the landscape plan. These planting areas are required in addition to the planting strip along the street frontage and shall be considered part of the yard area. Where a joint driveway is proposed to serve two lots which would reduce the number of curb cuts, the Planning Director may modify the provisions of this section. 
D.  Landscaping in Vehicular Use Areas. 
1.  Perimeter Planting Areas. Each parking area should be defined by linear landscaped areas to delineate driveways and control traffic flow. Such linear landscaped areas should be at least eight feet in width and include canopy trees as determined by the Planning Director unless such trees would interfere with traffic movement in which case other types of trees may be used. 
2.  Islands Between Parking Spaces. In a parking area with more than one double bay of parking spaces, no more than 10 spaces are allowed in a row without a landscaped island of at least 300 square feet excluding curbing and having a minimum width of eight feet. Each such island shall have at least one canopy tree allowed in parking lots as set forth in the Approved Tree List. Such islands must be offset so that they are evenly distributed in the parking area and are not in straight lines. 
3.  Islands at End of Row. A landscaped island of at least 100 square feet in area shall be provided at the end of each single row of parking spaces closest to a building; each such island shall have a berm two feet high planted with ground cover, or, where there are two such islands together totaling at least 200 square feet, at least one small tree allowed in parking lots as set forth in the Approved Tree List. A landscaped island of at least 150 square feet shall be provided at the end of each single row of parking spaces nearest the street frontage; where there are two such islands together totaling at least 300 square feet, there shall be at least one canopy tree. The islands shall be designed and maintained so as not to obstruct visibility for motorists. The Planning Director may modify or waive this provision if compliance would not be practical. 
4.  Trees in Islands. Islands shall be located to preserve the maximum number of existing trees. The maximum number of trees must be planted as determined by the Planning Director taking into account the size of the trees at maturity. The Planning Director shall approve the size, type, and location of the trees. Any combination of large and small trees may be planted to meet the minimum number required by this provision with the approval of the Planning Director. 
5.  Screening of Dumpsters. Dumpsters, utility boxes, and similar structures must be screened by evergreen shrubbery at least three feet high after pruning at the time of planting. 
E.  Buffer or Screening Device. A landscaped buffer strip shall be required for any nonresidential or multifamily residential use where it abuts an area zoned or used residentially or for any attached single-family or duplex residential project where it abuts land occupied by single-family dwellings or zoned in a single-family residential category. (Ord. 12122005A) The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 10 feet in depth and be undisturbed. Additional evergreen vegetation shall be planted to form an effective screen; such vegetation shall be at least three feet high after pruning at time of planting and a height of at least seven feet at maturity with spacing as required by the City. Where deemed necessary by the Planning Director, additional measures may be required to provide an effective screen. Any screening buffer area shall be maintained in good order at all times by the owner of the property. 
F.  Detention Ponds and Lakes. A detention pond may be counted as landscaped area unless it is unable to support healthy trees as determined by the City Engineer and Planning Director. Each detention pond shall be screened for aesthetic purposes pursuant to the standards in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual provided for by 4.6.9 or as otherwise directed by the Planning Director to accomplish the purposes of this Article. A lake shall be counted as landscaped area if approved by the City Engineer and Planning Director as effecting the purposes of this Article. 
G.  Design of Project Landscaping. Landscaping installed during development should meet the following design guidelines. 
1.  Landscaping should be designed for the long term; the size of plants at maturity should be considered when selecting plant material and designing its installation. 
2.  Landscaping should continue thematic elements, if any, found in the surrounding area, including plant types and planting patterns. 
3.  Landscaping should be designed to be functional (reducing the heat island effect of impervious surfaces, helping to control runoff, etc.), as well as beautiful. 
4.  Crape Myrtles may not be planted along street rights-of-way unless necessitated by overhead wiring or other reason associated with the particular location as approved by the Planning Director. 
H.  Irrigation. An automatic irrigation system must be installed to water all new landscaped areas. The system must remain operational and have a timer set to water plantings to keep them alive. 
4.6.8. - Completion and Maintenance of Landscaping. 
A.  Completion. 
1.  All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the approved landscape plan unless substitutions are approved by the Planning Director and noted in writing on the plan. A Certificate of Compliance, Certificate of Occupancy or business license for any business or use on a site with such an approved plan shall not be issued until the installation of the required landscaping is approved by the Planning Director or a cash or equivalent performance guarantee is posted with the Planning Director in the minimum amount of 110 percent of the total cost of the required uncompleted landscaping, including the labor, as determined by the Planning Director. A site not requiring a Certificate of Occupancy may not be used until the required landscaping is installed or a guarantee posted. 
2.  The guarantee shall be in a form approved by the Planning Director and shall be released and returned to the party posting the guarantee upon installation of all required landscaping and acceptance by the Planning Director of such installation. The landscaping shall be installed within three months of the posting of the performance guarantee with the Planning Director. However, the Planning Director may extend the time period for installation of landscaping for a maximum of an additional three months if weather conditions are not suitable for such installation or trees are not available during the initial three-month period. If the landscaping is not installed within the required period, the guarantee shall be forfeited to and used by the City to complete the approved landscaping with any remaining funds being returned to the party who posted the guarantee. For a project in an unincorporated area receiving City services and for which a landscape plan has been approved, the use of those services may not commence until the requirements of this Article are met. 
B.  Maintenance. The property owners, occupants, and tenants or their agents shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping. All landscaping required by or installed pursuant to landscaping plans approved under this Article or prior ordinances shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance; shall be kept free of refuse, debris, and dead, diseased, or severely damaged plants or vegetation; and shall contain at all times the number, variety, and location of plants and trees required thereby. 
4.6.9. - Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual. 
    The City Horticulturist shall promulgate mandatory standards for the installation, maintenance, survival, health and protection of trees and landscaping required to be retained, planted, installed, or maintained by this Article or prior ordinances. Those standards shall promote and effect the purposes set forth in 4.6.1 and be compiled in a Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual including compliance with the most recent version of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). (Ord. 11222010A) The Manual shall also establish an Approved Tree List setting forth trees allowed to be planted including those permitted in parking lots. 
ARTICLE 7. - SEDIMENT CONTROL 

4.7.1. - Plan and Permit Required. 
    A grading permit shall not be issued for a nonresidential or multifamily residential development until a site plan, including landscaping, has been given final approval by the City. The surface of land in the City shall not be disturbed or changed for any purpose, except as expressly exempted below, unless both of the following criteria are met. 
1.  The City Engineer has approved a plan for the control of erosion, sedimentation, and surface drainage, and, where required, such plan has been approved by the Conservation District Office. 
2.  The City Engineer has issued a grading permit. 
4.7.2. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the following. 
1.  Agricultural land management and cultural practices, or to the construction of on-farm buildings and structures used in a farming operation. 
2.  Construction of single-family residences or their accessory buildings which are not part of a residential subdivision which has an approved sediment control plan; a single-family property owner may make land improvements on his single lot without an approved erosion control plan or without obtaining a grading permit; nor shall such provisions apply to emergency repairs or maintenance of existing structures and facilities which require ground to be broken. 
4.7.3. - Guidelines for Plan Preparation. 
    Section 3-3.1 of the Aiken Sediment Control Ordinance provides guidelines for plan preparation. 
4.7.4. - Procedures for Plan Approval and Grading Permit. 
    Article 4 of the Aiken Sediment Control Ordinance provides procedures for plan approval and issuance of a grading permit. 
4.7.5. - Design Standards. 
    Article 5 of the Aiken Sediment Control Ordinance provides standards and specifications for designing, installing, and maintaining erosion and sediment control practices. 
4.7.6. - Inspection and Enforcement. 
    The City Engineer shall have the authority to inspect all work and otherwise enforce the provisions of this Article and the Aiken Sediment Control Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 8. - ACCESS MANAGEMENT 

4.8.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish standards and criteria for the number, location, design, construction, and maintenance of driveways, acceleration/deceleration lanes, and interparcel connections in the City limits of Aiken. 
4.8.2. - Applicability. 
A.  New Development. This article applies to new development in the City limits. 
B.  Changes to Existing Development. This article applies to any development in the City limits for which the cost of renovation or expansion in any one-year period exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value of the development as set by the Aiken County Tax Assessor, the South Carolina Tax Commission, or any other State or local government entity or official with the authority to do so, or by the Building Official for developments that are tax-exempt. For a development composed of individual lots, the determination of whether the 50 percent level has been exceeded shall be based on the appraised value of the individual lot or lots on which the proposed improvement or improvements will be located and not on the appraised value of the entire development. Existing driveways may be closed pursuant to 4.8.8.A. 
4.8.3. - Permit Required. 
A.  General. No curb cut, driveway, new street, acceleration/deceleration lane, or similar project serving an existing or proposed development shall be constructed, reconstructed or altered unless approved by the Director of Engineering/Public Works. The Planning Director shall not grant approval for a site plan without written approval of the access plan from the Director of Engineering/Public Works. 
B.  Application Process. An application for a permit shall be submitted to the Planning Department as part of a site plan application. Where approval of proposed work is required by SCDOT, submission to the City of a copy of the permit application to SCDOT shall be sufficient except that the Director of Engineering/Public Works may request additional information. Where there is a conflict between the requirements of the City and SCDOT, the more restrictive shall apply. 
4.8.4. - Compliance With Standards of the South Carolina Department of Transportation. 
    Except where there would be a conflict with any provision of this Article, any driveway, street, acceleration/deceleration lane, or similar project shall be designed to conform to SCDOT standards. 
4.8.5. - Limits on Number of Access Points. 
A.  General. A project or development shall be limited to the minimum number of access points required for the safe and efficient flow of traffic to, from, and within the site. Any lot created after the effective date of this article may not be entitled to its own access if it would not meet the requirements. 
B.  Multiple Lots or Uses. A project having multiple lots or land uses but functioning as a planned unit shall be considered to occupy one lot for the purpose of determining the number of access points. 
C.  Outparcels. Outparcels associated with a larger development shall be considered as part of that development and have access only internally from that development. 
D.  Maximum Numbers of Access Points Allowed. Generally, one access point will be allowed per lot per street frontage. However, additional access points may be allowed according to the following table with the approval of the Director of Engineering/Public Works and the Director of the Department of Public Safety. The number of driveways shown on the table may be further limited by other provisions of this section. 
Frontage
(Feet) Maximum Number Allowed Street Classification Arterial Collector Local < 100* 0 0 1 101-200 1 1 1 201-500 1 2 2 501-1,000 2 3 3 1,001-1,500 3 4 4 > 1,500 3 plus 
1 for each 
Additional 
Full 500 feet 4 plus 
1 for each 
Additional 
Full 500 feet 4 plus 
1 for each 
Additional 
Full 500 feet  
* On frontages of less than 100 feet, no access will be allowed without special approval by both the Director of Engineering/Public Works and the Planning Director unless no other access is possible and the lot was existing at the time of adoption of these regulations. 
E.  Limitations Based on Type of Street. 
1.  Local Streets. Any residential use may have direct access to a local street. Nonresidential uses shall not have direct access to local streets except that any lot located within a nonresidential subdivision or any parcel adjacent to a street within a nonresidential subdivision may have direct access to the local street internal to the subdivision, and provided that any corner lot abutting a local street and an arterial or collector street may take access to the local street if such access is required by the City or SCDOT. 
2.  Major or Minor Arterial Streets. No single-family dwelling or duplex shall have direct access to an arterial street. 
F.  Limit for Lots with Double Frontage. Access to a double-frontage lot occupied by a detached single-family dwelling shall be allowed only from the street with the lower functional classification. 
G.  Existing Lot with Width Less Than the Minimum Spacing. An existing lot with street frontage less than the minimum driveway spacing may not have access to that street if access is available on another street. 
4.8.6.   Standards for Driveways on Arterial and Collector Streets.
    The following are required standards for the location, spacing, design, construction, and maintenance of driveways and access points on major and minor arterial and collector streets. Any issues not addressed by the following will be covered by the Access and Roadside Management Standards of SCDOT. 
A.  Location. 
1.  Driveways shall be located where there are no sharp horizontal curves or steep vertical grades and where the provisions of the SCDOT Access and Roadside Management Standards regarding points of access are met. 
2.  Driveways shall not be located on auxiliary (acceleration/deceleration lanes) or their tapers. 
B.  Spacing. 
1.  Driveways, roads, and other points of access shall have the following separation at the street right-of-way line: on a major arterial, 200 feet; on a minor arterial, 150 feet; and on a collector, 100 feet. 
2.  No driveway, road, or other point of access shall be closer than the following to a side property line except to allow a joint driveway serving two lots: on a major arterial, 100 feet; on a minor arterial, 75 feet; and on a collector, 50 feet. 
3.  In determining compliance with this section, the measurement shall be made between the closest points of pavement and/or curbing. 
C.  Width. Each lane of a driveway shall have a maximum width of 15 feet. A landscaped median shall not be included in determining width. 
D.  Configuration. A driveway may consist of either a single two-way access or a pair of one-way accesses divided by a landscaped median or a circular driveway except that this provision shall not prevent turn lanes. 
E.  Alignment. Each driveway or road or other point of access on an arterial or collector should align with a driveway, road, or other point of access on the opposite side of the street or be offset by at least 150 feet except where a divided median prevents compliance. Intersections of collector or arterial streets should be at least 800 feet apart. 
F.  Sight Distance. Sight distances for a driveway shall meet SCDOT standards unless the Director of Engineering/Public Works allows a different distance. 
4.8.7.   Acceleration/Deceleration Lanes.
    Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be designed in accordance with SCDOT standards. 
4.8.8.   Changes to Existing Driveways.
A.  Traffic Safety. City Council may direct the closure, removal, consolidation, or revision of any driveway or access which exhibits an inordinate traffic safety problem as determined by the Director of Engineering/Public Works or the Director of Public Safety because it has caused or has the potential for causing crashes. City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed action; notice of the time and place shall be given to the owner of the subject property by a letter sent no fewer than 30 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
B.  Assembly of Existing Lots and Redevelopment. The Director of Engineering/Public Works may require the consolidation of access points in conjunction with a subdivision, combination of existing lots, and/or redevelopment of property in order to bring the overall site into compliance with the provisions of this code. 
4.8.9.   Interconnections Between Lots.
A.  Cross-Access Easement. On a major or minor arterial, a perpetual cross-access easement shall be provided by the property owner to adjoining properties that front on the same street and are or may be developed as nonresidential land uses. Cross-access easements shall be situated parallel to the street right-of-way line abutting both parcels and shall be developed and designed to ensure future connection to the neighboring properties. No permanent structures or parking that would interfere with the proposed access shall be permitted in the cross-access easement. Some improvements such as medians and landscaped islands may be constructed within an access easement if it has been demonstrated that adequate circulation and cross access will not be affected and that all applicable City standards have been met. 
B.  Construction of Driveway Connection. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, a driveway connection within the cross-access easement shall be constructed to the property line or a performance guarantee shall be provided to pay for the cost of construction in an amount determined by the Director of Engineering/Public Works. If the driveway is not constructed within two years of site plan approval, the City may use the performance guarantee to construct the driveway or may use the proceeds to construct another connecting driveway elsewhere within the City limits. 
4.8.10.   Frontage or Service Road.
    For a development having more than 1,000 feet of frontage on a major or minor arterial, a frontage or service road separated from the main road by a landscaped median of sufficient width to promote the safe and efficient movement of traffic shall be required unless waived by the Director of Engineering/Public Works. 
4.8.11.   Traffic Management Study and Required Mitigation.
    A Traffic Management Study may be required as provided in City of Aiken Code Section 11. A mitigation plan which may include the installation of acceleration/deceleration lanes, roadway improvements, and/or traffic control devices may be required for approval as the result of a Traffic Management Study. 
4.8.12.   Exemptions.
    The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to an existing lot-of-record approved before the effective date of this ordinance if the application would deprive the owner of all direct access to an abutting street. The Director of Engineering/Public Works may waive any provisions of this article deemed to be impractical because of design constraints. 
4.8.13.   Revocation.
    Any permit granted pursuant to this Article may be revoked and the driveway closed by City Council after a public hearing if the Director of Engineering/Public Works or the Director of Public Safety determines that the provisions of this Article are being violated or that the driveway constitutes a hazard because it has caused or has the potential for causing traffic crashes. The owner of the subject property shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing by a letter sent no fewer than 20 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
4.8.14.   Subdivisions.
    An application for approval of a subdivision plat which would create a lot unable to meet the requirements of this Article shall be denied. Approval of a subdivision plat for a shopping center or similar planned development which would create out-parcels fronting on a road shall be conditioned on access to such out-parcels being only from within the shopping center. A subdivision recorded without City approval shall be subject to these regulations. 
4.8.6. - Standards for Driveways on Arterial and Collector Streets. 
    The following are required standards for the location, spacing, design, construction, and maintenance of driveways and access points on major and minor arterial and collector streets. Any issues not addressed by the following will be covered by the Access and Roadside Management Standards of SCDOT. 
A.  Location. 
1.  Driveways shall be located where there are no sharp horizontal curves or steep vertical grades and where the provisions of the SCDOT Access and Roadside Management Standards regarding points of access are met. 
2.  Driveways shall not be located on auxiliary (acceleration/deceleration lanes) or their tapers. 
B.  Spacing. 
1.  Driveways, roads, and other points of access shall have the following separation at the street right-of-way line: on a major arterial, 200 feet; on a minor arterial, 150 feet; and on a collector, 100 feet. 
2.  No driveway, road, or other point of access shall be closer than the following to a side property line except to allow a joint driveway serving two lots: on a major arterial, 100 feet; on a minor arterial, 75 feet; and on a collector, 50 feet. 
3.  In determining compliance with this section, the measurement shall be made between the closest points of pavement and/or curbing. 
C.  Width. Each lane of a driveway shall have a maximum width of 15 feet. A landscaped median shall not be included in determining width. 
D.  Configuration. A driveway may consist of either a single two-way access or a pair of one-way accesses divided by a landscaped median or a circular driveway except that this provision shall not prevent turn lanes. 
E.  Alignment. Each driveway or road or other point of access on an arterial or collector should align with a driveway, road, or other point of access on the opposite side of the street or be offset by at least 150 feet except where a divided median prevents compliance. Intersections of collector or arterial streets should be at least 800 feet apart. 
F.  Sight Distance. Sight distances for a driveway shall meet SCDOT standards unless the Director of Engineering/Public Works allows a different distance. 
4.8.7. - Acceleration/Deceleration Lanes. 
    Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be designed in accordance with SCDOT standards. 
4.8.8. - Changes to Existing Driveways. 
A.  Traffic Safety. City Council may direct the closure, removal, consolidation, or revision of any driveway or access which exhibits an inordinate traffic safety problem as determined by the Director of Engineering/Public Works or the Director of Public Safety because it has caused or has the potential for causing crashes. City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed action; notice of the time and place shall be given to the owner of the subject property by a letter sent no fewer than 30 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
B.  Assembly of Existing Lots and Redevelopment. The Director of Engineering/Public Works may require the consolidation of access points in conjunction with a subdivision, combination of existing lots, and/or redevelopment of property in order to bring the overall site into compliance with the provisions of this code. 
4.8.9. - Interconnections Between Lots. 
A.  Cross-Access Easement. On a major or minor arterial, a perpetual cross-access easement shall be provided by the property owner to adjoining properties that front on the same street and are or may be developed as nonresidential land uses. Cross-access easements shall be situated parallel to the street right-of-way line abutting both parcels and shall be developed and designed to ensure future connection to the neighboring properties. No permanent structures or parking that would interfere with the proposed access shall be permitted in the cross-access easement. Some improvements such as medians and landscaped islands may be constructed within an access easement if it has been demonstrated that adequate circulation and cross access will not be affected and that all applicable City standards have been met. 
B.  Construction of Driveway Connection. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, a driveway connection within the cross-access easement shall be constructed to the property line or a performance guarantee shall be provided to pay for the cost of construction in an amount determined by the Director of Engineering/Public Works. If the driveway is not constructed within two years of site plan approval, the City may use the performance guarantee to construct the driveway or may use the proceeds to construct another connecting driveway elsewhere within the City limits. 
4.8.10. - Frontage or Service Road. 
    For a development having more than 1,000 feet of frontage on a major or minor arterial, a frontage or service road separated from the main road by a landscaped median of sufficient width to promote the safe and efficient movement of traffic shall be required unless waived by the Director of Engineering/Public Works. 
4.8.11. - Traffic Management Study and Required Mitigation. 
    A Traffic Management Study may be required as provided in City of Aiken Code Section 11. A mitigation plan which may include the installation of acceleration/deceleration lanes, roadway improvements, and/or traffic control devices may be required for approval as the result of a Traffic Management Study. 
4.8.12. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to an existing lot-of-record approved before the effective date of this ordinance if the application would deprive the owner of all direct access to an abutting street. The Director of Engineering/Public Works may waive any provisions of this article deemed to be impractical because of design constraints. 
4.8.13. - Revocation. 
    Any permit granted pursuant to this Article may be revoked and the driveway closed by City Council after a public hearing if the Director of Engineering/Public Works or the Director of Public Safety determines that the provisions of this Article are being violated or that the driveway constitutes a hazard because it has caused or has the potential for causing traffic crashes. The owner of the subject property shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing by a letter sent no fewer than 20 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
4.8.14. - Subdivisions. 
    An application for approval of a subdivision plat which would create a lot unable to meet the requirements of this Article shall be denied. Approval of a subdivision plat for a shopping center or similar planned development which would create out-parcels fronting on a road shall be conditioned on access to such out-parcels being only from within the shopping center. A subdivision recorded without City approval shall be subject to these regulations. 
CHAPTER 5 - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL 

5.1.1. - Purpose. 
    City Council may designate overlay districts which impose regulations in addition to the underlying zone or relax requirements imposed by the underlying zone when there is a special public interest which the underlying zone does not address. An overlay district promotes the health, safety, and general welfare of residents and the economic prosperity of the particular area as well as the entire City by protecting and enhancing the appearance of existing structures and the appearance of new structures. 
5.1.2. - Applicability. 
    The standards and other specific provisions of this Ordinance shall apply within overlay districts including Historic Districts and to Historic Sites (Ord. 04142003A). Regulations applicable in an overlay district shall be governed by the Design Review Board. Whenever there is conflict between the regulations of the remainder of this Ordinance and this Chapter, the more restrictive shall apply. 
5.1.3. - Determination of Economic Hardship. 
A.  Submission Requirements. If an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness is denied by the Board, the applicant may request that the application be reviewed for economic hardship pursuant to this Section. The Board may obtain expert testimony and require the applicant make submissions concerning the following information before the Board makes a final determination on the application. 
1.  Estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or relocation and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations or directives of the Board for changes necessary for issuance of a Certificate. 
2.  A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation on the structural soundness of any structures and their suitability for rehabilitation. 
3.  Estimated market value of the property under the following conditions: in its current condition; after completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or relocation; after any changes recommended or directed by the Board; and, in case of a proposed demolition, or relocation, after renovation of the existing property for continued use. The Board may require that these estimates be prepared by a qualified expert. 
4.  In the case of a proposed demolition or relocation, an estimate from an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of continued use, rehabilitation, or reuse of the existing structure at its current location. 
5.  Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner-of-record or applicant and the person from whom the property was or is to be purchased, and the terms of financing. 
6.  If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two calendar or fiscal years; itemized operating and maintenance expenses during the same period; and depreciation, deduction, and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period. 
7.  Any other information requested by the Board in its discretion to reach a determination as to whether the property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners. 
B.  Review. The Board shall review all of the evidence and information required from the applicant, hold a public hearing, and make a determination thereon within 30 days after receipt of all required information of whether the denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness will result in economic hardship to the owner because he will not receive a reasonable rate of economic return on the property or will be deprived of all reasonable use of the property. If the Board makes a determination that, in its discretion, economic hardship has not been proven by the applicant, the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness based upon economic hardship shall be denied. If the Board determines, in its discretion, that economic hardship would occur to the owner, the Board may issue a Certificate of Appropriateness based upon economic hardship or delay action on the application for a period of 90 days. During this period the Board shall investigate and make recommendations for alternative uses and plans for the property. If at the end of the 90-day period, the Board finds, after a public hearing with the notice required by 5.2.3.D being given, that without issuance of the Certificate of Appropriateness, an economic hardship would still occur, then the Board shall issue a Certificate of Appropriateness based upon economic hardship. 
ARTICLE 2. - HISTORIC OVERLAY 

5.2.1. - Applicability. 
    Any property or structure listed on the Aiken Historic Register shall be subject to this Article. 
5.2.2. - Designation to the Aiken Historic Register. 
A.  Initiation of Designations. Initiation of the proposed designation of Historic Sites (Ord. 04142003A) or Historic Districts to the Aiken Historic Register may be made by any member of the Board, any member of City Council, or a board or commission appointed by City Council, or an owner thereof. A request for designation shall be made on the appropriate application form provided by the Board and submitted to the Board for review and public hearing. 
B.  Designation Criteria. For an Historic Site or Historic District (Ord. 04142003A) to be designated to the Aiken Historic Register, City Council must conclude that it: 
1.  is significant in American, South Carolina, or Aiken history, architecture, archeology, engineering, or culture; and (Ord. 04142003A) 
2.  has integrity of location, design, setting, materials, or workmanship that need to be protected or preserved and meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  it is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to history; 
b.  it is associated with the lives of persons significant in history; 
c.  it has distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of architecture or construction; represents the work of a master; possesses high artistic values; or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; 
d.  it has yielded or is likely to yield information important in prehistory or history; or 
e.  it is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. 
C.  Public Notice. 
1.  The Board shall give the owners of properties proposed for designation as a Historic District or as an Historic Site (Ord. 04142003A) written notice of the hearing by the Board on the application for such designation by mail sent to the address for the property listed on the most current City of Aiken real property tax records, unless another address is known by the Board, no fewer than 15 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. Such notice shall state the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. The notice shall be considered given when placed in the U.S. Post Office at Aiken, South Carolina with proper postage affixed. 
2.  In addition, one public notice sign shall be posted on each street frontage of the subject property stating the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. Where more than one property is proposed for designation, the number and location of required public notice signs shall be determined by the Planning Director. 
D.  Consideration by Planning Commission and City Council. Within 15 days after the meeting at which a designation is considered, the Board shall forward its recommendation on the designation to the Planning Commission which shall conduct a public hearing on the recommendation pursuant to 6.2.14 and make its recommendation thereon to City Council. The proposed designation shall not become effective unless approved by City Council by adoption of an ordinance. At the time of designation of an Historic Site, City Council shall determine whether the affected structure is considered a Landmark, Contributing, or Non-Contributing, and, if a Landmark, whether work on the exterior not visible from a public street would require a Certificate pursuant to 5.2.3.A.1 (Ord. 04142003A) 
E.  Nominations to the National Register of Historic Places. The Board may conduct first review and evaluation of all proposed National Register nominations within the City, including any which may have been submitted to the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO), and forward all reviewed nominations to the SHPO with recommendations for consideration by the State Board of Review. 
F.  Refiling for Designation. If a request for designation is denied, the request may not be filed again for one year from the date of that denial unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Board a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the request. 
G.  Procedure for Removing Designation. The procedure followed for removing a designation shall be the same as that for initial designation. 
5.2.3. - Certificate of Appropriateness. 
A.  Activities Requiring a Certificate. 

1.  On Property Not in a Street or City Park. 
a.  A Certificate of Appropriateness may be required for alteration, construction, demolition, or relocation of property listed on the Aiken Historic Register visible from a public street right-of-way except that any change to a landmark may require a Certificate even if not visible. (Ord. 04142003A) 
b.  For the purposes of this Chapter, an activity shall be considered visible even if hidden by vegetation or a fence. An alteration requires a Certificate even if the color, texture, and composition of the material (excluding paint) is not discernible from a street right-of-way. 
c.  The Board may authorize the Planning Director to approve a Certificate for certain types of work with the concurrence of the Chairman. 
d.  Either the Chairman or Planning Director may require approval by the Board of any Certificate for an activity deemed to be significant enough to warrant it or for any activity not specifically covered. 
2.  In a Street (Including a Parkway). A Certificate of Appropriateness may be required for the following. 
a.  In a street (including a parkway) individually designated as an Historic Site (Ord. 04142003A): widening a street or the improved surface of a street or paving an unpaved street; or eliminating the parkway or providing parking areas thereon. 
b.  In a street (including a parkway) within an Historic District or individually designated as an Historic Site (Ord. 04142003A): alteration, construction, demolition, or relocation of buildings, bridges and related approaches, (Ord. 11112013A) walls, fences, gates, and stone curbs. 
3.  In a City Park Individually Designated as an Historic Site (Ord. 04142003A). A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for alteration, construction, demolition, or relocation of buildings, walls, fences, and gates. 
4.  Vegetation. For plant materials or trees individually designated as Historic Sites (Ord. 04142003A) or required as a condition of approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness, a Certificate shall be required for cutting down, destroying, relocating, or eliminating plant materials or trees. 
B.  Activities Exempt from Certificate of Appropriateness. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be required for the following. 
1.  Interior renovations. 
2.  Alteration, construction, demolition, relocation, or other work on a property not in a street or City park not visible from a street (see paragraph A above). 
3.  Exterior painting of previously painted structures. 
4.  Repairs, replacements, and routine maintenance that do not constitute alteration. 
5.  Installing, cutting down, destroying, relocating, pruning, or eliminating plant materials or trees not designated or required as a condition of a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
6.  Any work in a street that does not involve an activity listed in 5.2.3.A.2 or any work in a City Park that does not involve an activity listed in 5.2.3.A.3; 
7.  Any work on objects that the Planning Director determines are not structures because of their insignificance. 
C.  Application for Certificate of Appropriateness. 
1.  Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness are available at the Planning Department, and completed applications shall be submitted to the Department. An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness must be made by an owner-of-record of the property or by an agent with written authorization to make such application. 
2.  Applications for a Certificate shall be accompanied by the following unless waived by the Secretary or otherwise specified on the application form provided by the Board. 
a.  Drawings, including plans and exterior elevations, drawn to scale, with sufficient detail to show the exterior architectural design of the structure. 
b.  Specifications or other information describing proposed materials and textures; samples of materials may be required by the Board. 
c.  Plot plan or site layout showing all existing structures and any improvements affecting appearances such as walls, walks, terraces, accessory buildings, signs, lights, plantings, and other elements. 
d.  Photographs of the site location, showing contiguous properties and streetscapes. 
e.  All other information requested by the Board. 
3.  Applicants for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall pay the standard fee set by the Secretary, which fee shall be subject to review and approval by the Board, to cover the reasonable administrative costs of processing such applications. 
4.  Where a variance or other approval is required for a project from the Board of Zoning Appeals, such approval shall be obtained prior to consideration of a request for a Certificate of Appropriateness by the Design Review Board. 
D.  Public Hearing and Public Notice. For any Certificate of Appropriateness application that it must consider, the Board shall conduct a public hearing not later than 30 days following receipt of a completed application form accompanied by all required information and documents. Public notice of each such public hearing shall be given at least seven days prior to the hearing by the posting of a sign by the City on each street frontage of the subject property clearly visible to the public stating the date, time, and place of the public hearing. 
E.  Notice to Applicants and Owners. 
1.  The Board shall give the applicant written notice of the public hearing on his application. This notice shall be sent by certified mail to the address listed on the application and shall be considered given when placed in the U.S. Post Office at Aiken, South Carolina with proper postage affixed. 
2.  If the applicant is not the owner, a copy of the letter providing notice shall be sent by certified mail to the owner-of-record. This notice shall be considered given when placed in the U.S. Post Office at Aiken, South Carolina with proper postage affixed. 
3.  The notices required by this Section shall state the identity, address, and telephone number of the applicant and property owner; the address or location of the subject property; and the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
F.  Administrative Approval. (Ord. 04142003A) With the concurrence of the Chairman, the Planning Director may approve or amend Certificates of Appropriateness for the following activities on sites not owned by the City or may refer them to the Board for a decision. 

1.  Activities expressly authorized by the Board. 
2.  Minor design changes to projects for which a Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued by the Board. (Ord. 04142003A) 
3.  Extension of the expiration date of a Certificate of Appropriateness for an additional period not to exceed six months. (Ord. 04142003A) 
4.  Any alteration which would restore an original feature of a structure as proven through clear documentation. (Ord. 04142003A) 
5.  Anything not specifically covered by this Chapter that the Planning Director determines is not so significant as to impair or affect historic, architectural, or aesthetic character. 
Such an application shall be considered by the Planning Director as soon as possible but not later than 15 days following receipt of a completed application form accompanied by all required information and documents. A public hearing or public notice shall not be required unless the application is referred to the Board. Applications referred to the Board by the Planning Director must be considered within 30 days following receipt of the completed application form accompanied by all required information and documents. 
G.  Procedures Following Approval. If an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness is approved, the following apply. 
1.  The decision shall be filed with the Secretary and a Certificate of Appropriateness issued to the applicant. Specific conditions upon which the Certificate is issued and with which the applicant must comply shall be listed on the Certificate. 
2.  If an application is approved by the Board, the Certificate shall be signed by the Chairman, Vice-Chairman, or presiding member of the Board; if approved by the Planning Director, he shall sign the Certificate and shall notify the Board of the decision. 
3.  A copy of the Certificate and the approved application shall be provided to the Building Official and the Zoning Official who shall periodically inspect the work and report any violation of the Certificate or this Chapter to the Planning Director. 
4.  The Certificate shall expire two years from the date of issuance unless the work allowed thereunder has been substantially completed or unless another expiration date is specified by the Board or by the Planning Director pursuant to 5.2.3.F.3. 
H.  Denial of Application. 
1.  By the Planning Director. If an application is denied by the Planning Director, the Director shall file his written decision with the Secretary including the reasons for denial, send a copy to the applicant by certified mail, and provide a copy to the Building Official and the Zoning Official and each Board member. 
2.  By the Board. If an application is denied by the Board, the following apply. 
a.  The Board shall file with the Secretary its written decision, which shall include a statement of the reasons for denial, and shall provide a copy of the statement to the applicant and to the Building Official, the Zoning Official, and each Board member within 15 days of the public hearing thereon. 
b.  The Board in its decision may make recommendations to the applicant concerning changes in the proposed action that may cause it to reconsider denial. The applicant may submit an amended application to the Secretary incorporating those recommendations. Such an amended application shall be subject to the same procedures as an initial application but is exempted from the limitations in 5.2.3.K. 
c.  The applicant may apply under 5.1.3 for an exemption. 
I.  Appeal. 
1.  From the Planning Director. Any property owner, City official, or other person aggrieved by and seeking relief from any final decision of the Planning Director on an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness or interpretation of Chapter 5 and related provisions may appeal the decision of the Planning Director to the Design Review Board by submitting to the Secretary a written request stating the grounds for the appeal. The appeal request must be submitted to the Secretary within 20 days of the date on which the written decision is mailed to the applicant. The appeal shall meet the public notice requirements under 5.2.3.D, and it shall be placed on the next Board meeting agenda for which public notice requirements can be met. An appeal must be decided within 45 days of submission of the written appeal request. 
2.  From the Board. Any property owner, City official, or other person aggrieved by and seeking relief from any final decision of the Board on an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness may appeal that decision to the Circuit Court pursuant to Section 6-29-900, Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, by filing a petition with the court within 30 days of the filing of the written decision of the Board with the Secretary. 
J.  Review Standards. 
1.  General. In reviewing applications, the Board and the Planning Director shall consider the standards stated in this Chapter for the purpose of determining whether alterations, construction, demolitions, or relocations are in harmony with the prevailing historical, architectural, archeological, or aesthetic character of the Historic District, a structure in a Historic District, or an Historic Site, or a structure included in an Historic Site. (Ord. 04142003A) 
2.  Construction and Alteration. In reviewing an application for construction or alteration, the Board and the Planning Director shall consider general design, character and appropriateness of design, scale of buildings, texture and materials, relationship of such elements to similar features of structures in the immediate area, and the extent to which the alteration or construction would be harmonious with the Historic District or Historic Site in which it is located. (Ord. 04142003A) The Board and the Planning Director also shall consider the relevant standards and guidelines in the most current edition of the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. 
3.  Demolition. In reviewing an application for demolition, the Board and the Planning Director shall consider the historical, archeological, and aesthetic character of the structure (or portion thereof) proposed for demolition. They shall also consider: (1) the structural integrity (i.e., condition) of the structure and (2) the integrity of materials, location, and design of the structure. No application for demolition shall be approved solely on the basis of a structure's deteriorated condition where the Board determines that the applicant is primarily responsible for the deteriorated condition. Finally, the Board shall consider the extent to which demolition would, in the judgment of the Board, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the structure or property affected or upon the surrounding properties, or upon the district in which the structure is located. No application for demolition of a Landmark shall be approved. 
4.  Specific Guidelines. The Board shall adopt additional guidelines, subject to review and approval by City Council, consistent with this Chapter for reviewing applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
K.  Refiling of an Application. If an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness is denied, the application may not be considered by the Board again for one year unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Board a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the application. 
5.2.4. - Demolition or Relocation. 
A.  Certificate of Appropriateness Required. 
1.  No structure within an Historic District or Historic Site (Ord. 04142003A) shall be demolished or relocated until the owner thereof has applied for and received a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Board. 
2.  The Board may delay the granting of the Certificate for a period of up to 60 days from the time of the filing of the application. The Board may extend this postponement for another 180 days after a public hearing and finding by the Board that the structure or landmark is of historical, architectural, or archeological importance to the public or City of Aiken. Within any period of postponement, the Board shall endeavor to ascertain what may be done to preserve the structure or landmark. Such steps shall include, but are not limited to, consultation with civic groups, interested citizens, public interest groups, and public boards and agencies. 
3.  After the postponement period has ended and the Board has been unable to determine a reasonable alternative to demolition or relocation, the Certificate shall be granted after a public hearing, with the notice required by 5.2.3.D being given. However, if the Board finds that the structure contributes to the character of the Historic District or that the landmark is of historical, archeological, or architectural significance or that, for any other reason, preservation in the public interest is warranted, the application shall be denied. In the event of such denial, the owner may apply for an exception under 5.1.3. 
B.  Demolition by Neglect. The following provisions shall take effect six months after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
1.  Prevention of Demolition by Neglect of Exterior. No owner or person with an interest in real property which is designated an Historic Site (Ord. 04142003A) in any part of the City or any property in an Historic District, whether that property is occupied or not, shall permit the structure or property to fall into a serious state of disrepair or to remain in a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the Board, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the structure or property, or, if the structure or property is in an Historic District, upon the district. Examples of such deterioration include: 
a.  deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports; 
b.  deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members; 
c.  deterioration of exterior chimneys; 
d.  deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar; 
e.  ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or foundations, including broken windows or doors; 
f.  deterioration of any exterior feature so as to create a hazardous condition which could make demolition necessary for the public safety; or 
g.  deterioration or removal of any unique exterior architectural feature which would detract from the original architectural style. 
2.  Prevention of Demolition by Neglect of Interior. No owner or person with an interest in real property which is designated an Historic Site (Ord. 04142003A) in any part of the City, or any property in an Historic District, whether that property is occupied or not, shall permit the interior portions of such structure or property to fall into a serious state of disrepair which, in the judgment of the Board, produces a detrimental effect upon the structural integrity of such structure or property which could make demolition necessary for the public safety. 
ARTICLE 3. - OLD AIKEN OVERLAY 

5.3.1. - Applicability. 
    The Old Aiken Overlay District applies to land zoned Downtown Business (DB) and the area shown on the map adopted by City Council on April 14, 2008. The boundaries of the District shall be depicted on the Zoning Map. (Ordinance 04142008) 
5.3.2. - Certificate of Appropriateness. 
A.  Activities Requiring a Certificate on Land Zoned Downtown Business. On land zoned Downtown Business, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for the following activities visible from a public street right-of-way: 
1.  the construction, alteration, demolition or relocation of a detached single-family dwelling; (Ord. 06262006) 
2.  the construction, alteration, demolition, or relocation of a multiple-unit residential building including one composed of attached single-family units; 
3.  the construction, alteration, demolition, or relocation of a building any portion of which is or would be occupied by a nonresidential use; and 
4.  any activity not specifically covered which either the Chairman of the Design Review Board or the Planning Director deems is significant enough to warrant approval. 
B.  Activities Requiring a Certificate on Land Not Zoned Downtown Business. On land zoned other than Downtown Business, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for the following activities visible from a public street right-of-way: 
1.  the construction, demolition, or relocation of a detached single-family dwelling; 
2.  the construction, demolition, or relocation of a multiple-unit residential building including one composed of attached single-family units; 
3.  the construction, demolition, or relocation of a building any portion of which is or would be occupied by a nonresidential use; and 
4.  the alteration of an existing building where the cost of such alteration within a one-year period exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value of the building as set by the Aiken County Tax Assessor, or any other State or local government entity or official with authority to do so, or by the Building Official for a building that is tax-exempt. 
No approval shall be required for any work involving an accessory building associated with a residential use and not used for commercial purposes, including, but not limited to, a shed or garage. (Ord. 04142008) 
C.  Activities in a Street Right-of-Way. Construction, alteration, demolition, or relocation of a bridge and its related approaches shall require a Certificate of Appropriateness. (Ord. 11112013A) 
D.  Administrative Approval. The Board may authorize the Planning Director to approve a Certificate for certain types of work with the concurrence of the Chairman. 
E.  Activities Exempt from Certificate of Appropriateness. 
1.  On land zoned Downtown Business, the provisions at 5.3.2.A apply except that painting of any surface requires a Certificate. 
2.  On land zoned other than Downtown Business, any work not specifically requiring a Certificate as set forth at 5.3.2.B shall be exempt. 
F.  Application for Certificate of Appropriateness. The provisions at 5.2.3.C apply. 
G.  Public Hearing and Public Notice. The provisions at 5.2.3.D apply. 
H.  Notice to Applicants and Owners. The provisions at 5.2.3.E apply. 
I.  Administrative Approval. The provisions at 5.2.3.F apply. 
J.  Procedures Following Approval. The provisions at 5.2.3.G apply. 
K.  Denial of Application. The provisions at 5.2.3.H apply. 
L.  Appeal. The provisions at 5.2.3.I apply. 
M.  Review Standards. In reviewing applications, the Board and the Planning Director shall use the Old Aiken Architectural Design Guidelines as adopted by City Council. Where a determination is needed as to which standards apply, the Board Chairman and Planning Director shall decide unless they do not agree in which case the final decision shall be made by the Board. (Ord. 06262006) 
N.  Refiling of an Application. The provisions at 5.2.3.K apply. 
5.3.3. - Demolition or Relocation. 
    The provisions at 5.2.4 apply to any structure in the Old Aiken Overlay District. 
CHAPTER 6 - APPROVAL PROCEDURES 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL 

6.1.1. - Conformity With Zoning Ordinance. 
    Every official and employee of the City of Aiken, South Carolina vested with the duty or authority to issue a building permit, grading permit, or business license shall not issue a permit or license for any use, building, or purpose that conflicts with any provision of this Ordinance. Any permit or license or certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be null and void. 
6.1.2. - Optional Preapplication Conference. 
    Prior to the submission of any application required by this Ordinance, a potential applicant may request an optional preapplication conference to discuss procedures, standards, or regulations required by this Ordinance. Upon receipt of such request, the Planning Director, Zoning Official, or Building Official, as appropriate, shall afford the potential applicant an opportunity for such a preapplication conference at the earliest reasonable time. 
6.1.3. - Application Submittal. 
A.  Application to Building Official. Plans and applications for the following review shall be submitted to the Building Official: 
1.  Building permits; 
2.  Certificates of Occupancy; and 
3.  Telecommunication facility plans for an antenna on an existing structure, a replacement tower, or a new tower. 
B.  Application to Planning Director. All other applications and plans submitted for review under this Ordinance shall be submitted to the Planning Director. 
C.  Application Forms and Fees. The following regulations shall apply to all applications. 
1.  Forms. Applications shall be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by the City. 
2.  Primary Contact. For all applications, a single agent shall be identified for all official communications with the City. The agent may be either the applicant or a representative of the applicant. If a contact is not specified, the applicant shall be considered the primary contact. 
3.  Fees. Filing fees shall be established from time to time by the City Manager, as set forth in Sec. 2-63.1 of the Aiken Code, to defray the actual cost of processing the application. 
D.  Application Deadlines. 
1.  Applications for which no public hearing is required shall have no application deadlines. 
2.  All applications for which a public hearing is required shall be completed and submitted to the appropriate official prior to the meeting at which the permit or approval will be considered in accordance with the following table unless waived by the Planning Director. 
Permit or Approval Subject
to Review By: Application Deadline Building Official, Zoning Official, or Planning Director Only No deadline Planning Commission 35 days prior to meeting Board of Zoning Appeals 35 days prior to meeting Design Review Board 14 days prior to meeting  
E.  Complete Application Required. 
1.  Review by City. The Building Official or Planning Director shall have five working days from receipt of the application to confirm that all the required items have been submitted, except for applications required by Chapter 5. 
2.  Incomplete Applications. 
a.  If the application is not complete, the reviewing official shall inform the applicant in writing within the five-day period specifying the ways in which the application is incomplete. This notification shall be considered complete when the letter is mailed. 
b.  Following notification in writing that an application is incomplete, the applicant shall have 60 days during which to provide the requested materials and complete the application. Any application for which additional materials have not been forthcoming during this 60-day period shall be considered withdrawn unless the time period is extended by mutual agreement between the City and the applicant. 
F.  Waiver of Application Requirements. The Building Official and Planning Director shall have the authority to waive any application requirements that do not apply to a proposed project or approval. 
6.1.4.   Public Notice for Public Hearing.
A.  Summary. Notice shall be required for approvals as shown in the Table below. 
Procedure Published Posted Mailed Street Name Change ? ? Public Project Review ? ? ? Text Amendment ? Map Amendment (Rezoning) ? ? ? Designation of or Amendment to Planned Residential (PR), Planned Commercial (PC), or Planned Institutional District (PI) ? ? ? Special Exception Review ? ? ? Variance ? ? ? Designation to Aiken Historic Register See Chapter 5 Certificate of Appropriateness See Chapter 5  
B.  Types of Notice. 
1.  Published Notice. For each application requiring a public hearing, a public notice shall be placed in a local newspaper of general circulation within the City not less than twenty days prior to each such hearing for the purpose of notifying the public. 
2.  Posted Notice. For each application requiring a public hearing, a public notice sign shall be posted not less than twenty days prior to such hearing on the subject property in a location clearly visible from each adjacent street. Where more than one lot is involved in an application, the Planning Director shall determine the number and location of required public notice signs. 
3.  Mailed Notice. 
a.  The City shall provide notice via U.S. mail to: 
i.  owners of property contiguous to or across a street or railroad right-of-way from the subject property; and 
ii.  any and all parties, including homeowners' and condominium associations, who register with the Planning Director to receive such notice. 
b.  Notice shall be sent not less than 20 days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall be considered given when placed in the U.S. Post Office at Aiken, South Carolina with proper postage affixed. 
C.  Content of Notices. 
1.  Published or Mailed Notice. A published or mailed notice shall provide at least the following information: 
a.  the general location of land that is the subject of the application; 
b.  street address, where applicable; 
c.  the nature of the application; 
d.  the time, date, and location of the public hearing; 
e.  a phone number to contact the City; and 
f.  a statement that interested parties may appear at the public hearing. 
2.  Posted Notice. Required posted notices shall indicate the following: 
a.  the nature of the application; 
b.  the time, date, and location of the public hearing; and 
c.  a phone number to contact the City. 
6.1.5.   Public Notice for City Council Public Hearing.
    For every annexation, rezoning, or utility request before Aiken City Council affecting a particular piece of property that is the subject of a recommendation from the Planning Commission, notice of the public hearing before City Council on such matter shall be given to the public by the posting of a sign at least 13 days prior to the public hearing on the subject property clearly visible from each street adjacent to the particular piece of property. The notice shall set forth the following statement: "You are hereby notified that the date of the public hearing may be changed by City Council to a later date. Interested persons should contact the City Manager's Office at 642.7654 prior to the date of the public hearing to confirm the actual hearing date." (Ord. 06092003) (Ord. 11082004B) 
6.1.6.   Written Decisions Required.
    Within 25 days after a final decision is made by the Planning Commission under the requirements of this Chapter, a copy of the written decision shall be sent to the applicant, or appellant, by certified mail. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the office of the Planning Director or Building Official, as appropriate, where it shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours. No later than 48 hours after its next regularly scheduled meeting after a final decision has been made by the Board of Zoning Appeals under the requirements of this Chapter, a copy of its written decision, signed by the Board members present and voting on the agenda item, at the prior meeting, shall be sent to the applicant, or appellant, by certified mail. The original written decision shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk for permanent retention, as appropriate. (Ord. 02092004D) 
6.1.7.   Time Limits for Resubmission of Applications.
    In the event that any application is denied or disapproved by the City staff, Planning Commission, City Council, or Board of Zoning Appeals, an application for the same request shall not be refiled for one year from the date of mailing of the notice of denial. The Planning Director or Building Official, as appropriate, upon petition by the applicant, may permit the refiling of an application prior to the end of the one-year period upon a determination that significant physical, economic, or land use changes have taken place on the subject tract or within the immediate vicinity, or a significant text amendment to this Ordinance has been adopted. 
6.1.8.   Expiration of Permits and Approvals.
A.  General. All permits and approvals shall expire as set forth in each specific procedure in Article 2 of this Chapter, without further action of the Planning Director, Building Official, Board of Zoning Appeals, Historic Preservation Commission, Planning Commission, or City Council, as may be applicable, except as set forth in paragraph B below. 
B.  Exceptions. The expiration or approvals and permits shall follow paragraph A above except where one of the following applies. 
1.  A specific time period during which the permit or approval shall remain valid is expressly set forth in the permit or approval; or 
2.  A specific time period during which a specific action that must be undertaken by the holder of the permit or approval is expressly set forth in the permit or approval; or 
3.  The holder of the permit or approval either submits a complete application for the appropriate subsequent permit or approval; or, if no subsequent permit or approval is required, completes the work described in the permit or approval within the time-frames established. 
C.  Diligent Pursuit of Subsequent Applications. 
1.  An applicant who submits an appropriate subsequent application for a permit or approval must diligently pursue approval of such application, which means, at a minimum, the following. 
a.  Submission of any required additional materials, upon notification of incompleteness by the Planning Director or Building Official, within the time-frame specified in the notice of incompleteness, unless an extension of time is mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Planning Director or Building Official; and 
b.  Timely pursuit of administrative remedies, where applicable, as established within this Chapter. 
2.  Expiration of a permit or approval, including a building permit, shall invalidate previously issued permits or approvals that have exceeded their own respective time limits. 
6.1.9.   Vested Rights.
A.  General. 
1.  Pursuant to South Carolina Code Section 6-29-1510, et seq., a vested right is hereby established for two years upon the approval of a site specific development plan as evidenced by the issuance of an approved site plan by the Planning Department. 
2.  At least 60 days prior to the end of the vesting period, the landowner of real property with a vested right may apply to the Planning Director for an annual extension of the vested right. The Planning Director must approve applications for at least five annual extensions of the vested right unless an amendment to the land development ordinances or regulations has been adopted that prohibits approval. 
B.  Conditions and Limitations on Vested Rights. A vested right established by this article and in accordance with the standards and procedures in the land development ordinances or regulations is subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  if City Council establishes a vested right for a phased development plan, a site specific development plan may be required for approval with respect to each phase in accordance with regulations in effect at the time of vesting; 
2.  a vested right established under a conditionally approved site specific development plan or conditionally approved phased development plan may be terminated by the City Council upon its determination, following notice and public hearing, that the landowner has failed to meet the terms of the conditional approval; 
3.  a site specific development plan or phased development plan for which a variance, regulation, or special exception is necessary does not confer a vested right until the variance, regulation, or special exception is obtained; 
4.  a vested right for a site specific development plan expires two years after vesting; 
5.  a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan may be amended if approved by the City Council pursuant to the provisions of the land development ordinances or regulations; 
6.  a validly issued building permit does not expire or is not revoked upon expiration of a vested right, except for public safety reasons or as prescribed by the applicable building code; 
7.  a vested right to a site specific development plan or phased development plan is subject to revocation by the City Council upon its determination, after notice and public hearing, that there was a material misrepresentation by the landowner or substantial noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the original or amended approval; 
 a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan is subject to later enacted federal, state, or local laws adopted to protect public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes and nonconforming structure and use regulations which do not provide for the grandfathering of the vested right. The issuance of a building permit vests the specific construction project authorized by the building permit to the building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes in force at the time of the issuance of the building permit; 
8.  a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan is subject to later local governmental overlay zoning that imposes site plan-related requirements but does not affect allowable types, height as it affects density or intensity of uses, or density or intensity of uses; 
9.  a change in the zoning district designation or land use regulations made subsequent to vesting that affect real property does not operate to affect, prevent, or delay development of the real property under a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan without consent of the landowner; 
10.  if real property having a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan is annexed, the governing body of the municipality to which the real property has been annexed must determine, after notice and public hearing in which the landowner is allowed to present evidence, if the vested right is effective after the annexation; and 
11.  a City Council must not require a landowner to waive his vested rights as a condition of approval or conditional approval of a site specific development plan or a phased development plan. 
C.  Vested Right Attaches to Real Property. A vested right pursuant to this section is not a personal right, but attaches to and runs with the applicable real property. The landowner and all successors to the landowner who secure a vested right pursuant to this article may rely upon and exercise the vested right for its duration subject to applicable federal, state, and City laws adopted to protect public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes and nonconforming structure and use regulations which do not provide for the grandfathering of the vested right. This article does not preclude judicial determination that a vested right exists pursuant to other statutory provisions. This article does not affect the provisions of a development agreement executed pursuant to the South Carolina Local Government Development Agreement Act. (Ord. 06132005H) 
6.1.4. - Public Notice for Public Hearing. 
A.  Summary. Notice shall be required for approvals as shown in the Table below. 
Procedure Published Posted Mailed Street Name Change ? ? Public Project Review ? ? ? Text Amendment ? Map Amendment (Rezoning) ? ? ? Designation of or Amendment to Planned Residential (PR), Planned Commercial (PC), or Planned Institutional District (PI) ? ? ? Special Exception Review ? ? ? Variance ? ? ? Designation to Aiken Historic Register See Chapter 5 Certificate of Appropriateness See Chapter 5  
B.  Types of Notice. 
1.  Published Notice. For each application requiring a public hearing, a public notice shall be placed in a local newspaper of general circulation within the City not less than twenty days prior to each such hearing for the purpose of notifying the public. 
2.  Posted Notice. For each application requiring a public hearing, a public notice sign shall be posted not less than twenty days prior to such hearing on the subject property in a location clearly visible from each adjacent street. Where more than one lot is involved in an application, the Planning Director shall determine the number and location of required public notice signs. 
3.  Mailed Notice. 
a.  The City shall provide notice via U.S. mail to: 
i.  owners of property contiguous to or across a street or railroad right-of-way from the subject property; and 
ii.  any and all parties, including homeowners' and condominium associations, who register with the Planning Director to receive such notice. 
b.  Notice shall be sent not less than 20 days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall be considered given when placed in the U.S. Post Office at Aiken, South Carolina with proper postage affixed. 
C.  Content of Notices. 
1.  Published or Mailed Notice. A published or mailed notice shall provide at least the following information: 
a.  the general location of land that is the subject of the application; 
b.  street address, where applicable; 
c.  the nature of the application; 
d.  the time, date, and location of the public hearing; 
e.  a phone number to contact the City; and 
f.  a statement that interested parties may appear at the public hearing. 
2.  Posted Notice. Required posted notices shall indicate the following: 
a.  the nature of the application; 
b.  the time, date, and location of the public hearing; and 
c.  a phone number to contact the City. 
6.1.5.   Public Notice for City Council Public Hearing.
    For every annexation, rezoning, or utility request before Aiken City Council affecting a particular piece of property that is the subject of a recommendation from the Planning Commission, notice of the public hearing before City Council on such matter shall be given to the public by the posting of a sign at least 13 days prior to the public hearing on the subject property clearly visible from each street adjacent to the particular piece of property. The notice shall set forth the following statement: "You are hereby notified that the date of the public hearing may be changed by City Council to a later date. Interested persons should contact the City Manager's Office at 642.7654 prior to the date of the public hearing to confirm the actual hearing date." (Ord. 06092003) (Ord. 11082004B) 
6.1.6.   Written Decisions Required.
    Within 25 days after a final decision is made by the Planning Commission under the requirements of this Chapter, a copy of the written decision shall be sent to the applicant, or appellant, by certified mail. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the office of the Planning Director or Building Official, as appropriate, where it shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours. No later than 48 hours after its next regularly scheduled meeting after a final decision has been made by the Board of Zoning Appeals under the requirements of this Chapter, a copy of its written decision, signed by the Board members present and voting on the agenda item, at the prior meeting, shall be sent to the applicant, or appellant, by certified mail. The original written decision shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk for permanent retention, as appropriate. (Ord. 02092004D) 
6.1.7.   Time Limits for Resubmission of Applications.
    In the event that any application is denied or disapproved by the City staff, Planning Commission, City Council, or Board of Zoning Appeals, an application for the same request shall not be refiled for one year from the date of mailing of the notice of denial. The Planning Director or Building Official, as appropriate, upon petition by the applicant, may permit the refiling of an application prior to the end of the one-year period upon a determination that significant physical, economic, or land use changes have taken place on the subject tract or within the immediate vicinity, or a significant text amendment to this Ordinance has been adopted. 
6.1.8.   Expiration of Permits and Approvals.
A.  General. All permits and approvals shall expire as set forth in each specific procedure in Article 2 of this Chapter, without further action of the Planning Director, Building Official, Board of Zoning Appeals, Historic Preservation Commission, Planning Commission, or City Council, as may be applicable, except as set forth in paragraph B below. 
B.  Exceptions. The expiration or approvals and permits shall follow paragraph A above except where one of the following applies. 
1.  A specific time period during which the permit or approval shall remain valid is expressly set forth in the permit or approval; or 
2.  A specific time period during which a specific action that must be undertaken by the holder of the permit or approval is expressly set forth in the permit or approval; or 
3.  The holder of the permit or approval either submits a complete application for the appropriate subsequent permit or approval; or, if no subsequent permit or approval is required, completes the work described in the permit or approval within the time-frames established. 
C.  Diligent Pursuit of Subsequent Applications. 
1.  An applicant who submits an appropriate subsequent application for a permit or approval must diligently pursue approval of such application, which means, at a minimum, the following. 
a.  Submission of any required additional materials, upon notification of incompleteness by the Planning Director or Building Official, within the time-frame specified in the notice of incompleteness, unless an extension of time is mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Planning Director or Building Official; and 
b.  Timely pursuit of administrative remedies, where applicable, as established within this Chapter. 
2.  Expiration of a permit or approval, including a building permit, shall invalidate previously issued permits or approvals that have exceeded their own respective time limits. 
6.1.9.   Vested Rights.
A.  General. 
1.  Pursuant to South Carolina Code Section 6-29-1510, et seq., a vested right is hereby established for two years upon the approval of a site specific development plan as evidenced by the issuance of an approved site plan by the Planning Department. 
2.  At least 60 days prior to the end of the vesting period, the landowner of real property with a vested right may apply to the Planning Director for an annual extension of the vested right. The Planning Director must approve applications for at least five annual extensions of the vested right unless an amendment to the land development ordinances or regulations has been adopted that prohibits approval. 
B.  Conditions and Limitations on Vested Rights. A vested right established by this article and in accordance with the standards and procedures in the land development ordinances or regulations is subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  if City Council establishes a vested right for a phased development plan, a site specific development plan may be required for approval with respect to each phase in accordance with regulations in effect at the time of vesting; 
2.  a vested right established under a conditionally approved site specific development plan or conditionally approved phased development plan may be terminated by the City Council upon its determination, following notice and public hearing, that the landowner has failed to meet the terms of the conditional approval; 
3.  a site specific development plan or phased development plan for which a variance, regulation, or special exception is necessary does not confer a vested right until the variance, regulation, or special exception is obtained; 
4.  a vested right for a site specific development plan expires two years after vesting; 
5.  a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan may be amended if approved by the City Council pursuant to the provisions of the land development ordinances or regulations; 
6.  a validly issued building permit does not expire or is not revoked upon expiration of a vested right, except for public safety reasons or as prescribed by the applicable building code; 
7.  a vested right to a site specific development plan or phased development plan is subject to revocation by the City Council upon its determination, after notice and public hearing, that there was a material misrepresentation by the landowner or substantial noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the original or amended approval; 
 a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan is subject to later enacted federal, state, or local laws adopted to protect public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes and nonconforming structure and use regulations which do not provide for the grandfathering of the vested right. The issuance of a building permit vests the specific construction project authorized by the building permit to the building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes in force at the time of the issuance of the building permit; 
8.  a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan is subject to later local governmental overlay zoning that imposes site plan-related requirements but does not affect allowable types, height as it affects density or intensity of uses, or density or intensity of uses; 
9.  a change in the zoning district designation or land use regulations made subsequent to vesting that affect real property does not operate to affect, prevent, or delay development of the real property under a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan without consent of the landowner; 
10.  if real property having a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan is annexed, the governing body of the municipality to which the real property has been annexed must determine, after notice and public hearing in which the landowner is allowed to present evidence, if the vested right is effective after the annexation; and 
11.  a City Council must not require a landowner to waive his vested rights as a condition of approval or conditional approval of a site specific development plan or a phased development plan. 
C.  Vested Right Attaches to Real Property. A vested right pursuant to this section is not a personal right, but attaches to and runs with the applicable real property. The landowner and all successors to the landowner who secure a vested right pursuant to this article may rely upon and exercise the vested right for its duration subject to applicable federal, state, and City laws adopted to protect public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes and nonconforming structure and use regulations which do not provide for the grandfathering of the vested right. This article does not preclude judicial determination that a vested right exists pursuant to other statutory provisions. This article does not affect the provisions of a development agreement executed pursuant to the South Carolina Local Government Development Agreement Act. (Ord. 06132005H) 
6.1.5. - Public Notice for City Council Public Hearing. 
    For every annexation, rezoning, or utility request before Aiken City Council affecting a particular piece of property that is the subject of a recommendation from the Planning Commission, notice of the public hearing before City Council on such matter shall be given to the public by the posting of a sign at least 13 days prior to the public hearing on the subject property clearly visible from each street adjacent to the particular piece of property. The notice shall set forth the following statement: "You are hereby notified that the date of the public hearing may be changed by City Council to a later date. Interested persons should contact the City Manager's Office at 642.7654 prior to the date of the public hearing to confirm the actual hearing date." (Ord. 06092003) (Ord. 11082004B) 
6.1.6. - Written Decisions Required. 
    Within 25 days after a final decision is made by the Planning Commission under the requirements of this Chapter, a copy of the written decision shall be sent to the applicant, or appellant, by certified mail. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the office of the Planning Director or Building Official, as appropriate, where it shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours. No later than 48 hours after its next regularly scheduled meeting after a final decision has been made by the Board of Zoning Appeals under the requirements of this Chapter, a copy of its written decision, signed by the Board members present and voting on the agenda item, at the prior meeting, shall be sent to the applicant, or appellant, by certified mail. The original written decision shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk for permanent retention, as appropriate. (Ord. 02092004D) 
6.1.7. - Time Limits for Resubmission of Applications. 
    In the event that any application is denied or disapproved by the City staff, Planning Commission, City Council, or Board of Zoning Appeals, an application for the same request shall not be refiled for one year from the date of mailing of the notice of denial. The Planning Director or Building Official, as appropriate, upon petition by the applicant, may permit the refiling of an application prior to the end of the one-year period upon a determination that significant physical, economic, or land use changes have taken place on the subject tract or within the immediate vicinity, or a significant text amendment to this Ordinance has been adopted. 
6.1.8. - Expiration of Permits and Approvals. 
A.  General. All permits and approvals shall expire as set forth in each specific procedure in Article 2 of this Chapter, without further action of the Planning Director, Building Official, Board of Zoning Appeals, Historic Preservation Commission, Planning Commission, or City Council, as may be applicable, except as set forth in paragraph B below. 
B.  Exceptions. The expiration or approvals and permits shall follow paragraph A above except where one of the following applies. 
1.  A specific time period during which the permit or approval shall remain valid is expressly set forth in the permit or approval; or 
2.  A specific time period during which a specific action that must be undertaken by the holder of the permit or approval is expressly set forth in the permit or approval; or 
3.  The holder of the permit or approval either submits a complete application for the appropriate subsequent permit or approval; or, if no subsequent permit or approval is required, completes the work described in the permit or approval within the time-frames established. 
C.  Diligent Pursuit of Subsequent Applications. 
1.  An applicant who submits an appropriate subsequent application for a permit or approval must diligently pursue approval of such application, which means, at a minimum, the following. 
a.  Submission of any required additional materials, upon notification of incompleteness by the Planning Director or Building Official, within the time-frame specified in the notice of incompleteness, unless an extension of time is mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Planning Director or Building Official; and 
b.  Timely pursuit of administrative remedies, where applicable, as established within this Chapter. 
2.  Expiration of a permit or approval, including a building permit, shall invalidate previously issued permits or approvals that have exceeded their own respective time limits. 
6.1.9. - Vested Rights. 
A.  General. 
1.  Pursuant to South Carolina Code Section 6-29-1510, et seq., a vested right is hereby established for two years upon the approval of a site specific development plan as evidenced by the issuance of an approved site plan by the Planning Department. 
2.  At least 60 days prior to the end of the vesting period, the landowner of real property with a vested right may apply to the Planning Director for an annual extension of the vested right. The Planning Director must approve applications for at least five annual extensions of the vested right unless an amendment to the land development ordinances or regulations has been adopted that prohibits approval. 
B.  Conditions and Limitations on Vested Rights. A vested right established by this article and in accordance with the standards and procedures in the land development ordinances or regulations is subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  if City Council establishes a vested right for a phased development plan, a site specific development plan may be required for approval with respect to each phase in accordance with regulations in effect at the time of vesting; 
2.  a vested right established under a conditionally approved site specific development plan or conditionally approved phased development plan may be terminated by the City Council upon its determination, following notice and public hearing, that the landowner has failed to meet the terms of the conditional approval; 
3.  a site specific development plan or phased development plan for which a variance, regulation, or special exception is necessary does not confer a vested right until the variance, regulation, or special exception is obtained; 
4.  a vested right for a site specific development plan expires two years after vesting; 
5.  a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan may be amended if approved by the City Council pursuant to the provisions of the land development ordinances or regulations; 
6.  a validly issued building permit does not expire or is not revoked upon expiration of a vested right, except for public safety reasons or as prescribed by the applicable building code; 
7.  a vested right to a site specific development plan or phased development plan is subject to revocation by the City Council upon its determination, after notice and public hearing, that there was a material misrepresentation by the landowner or substantial noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the original or amended approval; 
 a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan is subject to later enacted federal, state, or local laws adopted to protect public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes and nonconforming structure and use regulations which do not provide for the grandfathering of the vested right. The issuance of a building permit vests the specific construction project authorized by the building permit to the building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes in force at the time of the issuance of the building permit; 
8.  a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan is subject to later local governmental overlay zoning that imposes site plan-related requirements but does not affect allowable types, height as it affects density or intensity of uses, or density or intensity of uses; 
9.  a change in the zoning district designation or land use regulations made subsequent to vesting that affect real property does not operate to affect, prevent, or delay development of the real property under a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan without consent of the landowner; 
10.  if real property having a vested site specific development plan or vested phased development plan is annexed, the governing body of the municipality to which the real property has been annexed must determine, after notice and public hearing in which the landowner is allowed to present evidence, if the vested right is effective after the annexation; and 
11.  a City Council must not require a landowner to waive his vested rights as a condition of approval or conditional approval of a site specific development plan or a phased development plan. 
C.  Vested Right Attaches to Real Property. A vested right pursuant to this section is not a personal right, but attaches to and runs with the applicable real property. The landowner and all successors to the landowner who secure a vested right pursuant to this article may rely upon and exercise the vested right for its duration subject to applicable federal, state, and City laws adopted to protect public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes and nonconforming structure and use regulations which do not provide for the grandfathering of the vested right. This article does not preclude judicial determination that a vested right exists pursuant to other statutory provisions. This article does not affect the provisions of a development agreement executed pursuant to the South Carolina Local Government Development Agreement Act. (Ord. 06132005H) 
ARTICLE 2. - PROCEDURES 

6.2.1. - Summary of Development Review Procedures. 
    The following Table summarizes the development review procedures of the City of Aiken. In case of conflict between this table and the individual procedures, the text of the procedures shall control. 
KEY:   • Review/Report  ? Public Hearing/Recommendation  ¦ Final Approval  ? Appeal Building Official Planning Director Design Review Board Planning Commission City Council Board of Zoning Appeals Court of Common Pleas Approval by Building Official 6.2.3 Building Permit ¦ 6.2.4 Certificate of Occupancy ¦ ? 6.2.5 Telecommunication Facility Plan ¦ ? Approval by Planning Director 6.2.2 Written Interpretation ¦ ? 6.2.6 Sign Permit ¦ ? 6.2.7 Conditional Use Permit ¦ ? 6.2.8 Certificate of Compliance ¦ ? 6.2.9 Site Plan Review ¦ ? 6.2.10 Landscape Plan ¦ ? 5.2.3 
5.3.2 Minor Certificate of Appropriateness ¦ ? Approval by Planning Commission 6.2.11 Street Name • ¦ ? 6.2.12 Public Project Review • ¦ ? Approval by City Council 6.2.13 Historic Designation • ? ? ¦ ? 6.2.14 Rezoning • ? ¦ ? 6.2.15 Text Amendment • ? ¦ ? 6.2.16 Planned Residential (PR), Planned Commercial (PC), 
Planned Institutional (PI) • ? ¦ ? 6.2.17 Attached Single-Family Residential • ? ¦ ? Approval by Board of Zoning Appeals 6.2.18 Special Exception • ¦ ? 6.2.19 Variance • ¦ ? 6.2.20 Administrative Appeal ¦ ? Approval by Design Review Board 5.2.3 
5.3.2 Major Certificate of Appropriateness • ¦ ?  
6.2.2.   Written Interpretation.
A.  Authority. The Planning Director shall have authority to make written interpretations of this Ordinance. 
B.  Request for Interpretation. A written request for interpretation shall be submitted to the Planning Director. 
C.  Interpretation by Planning Director. 
1.  The Planning Director shall take the following steps within 15 days of receipt of a written request for interpretation. 
a.  Review and evaluate the request in light of the text of this Ordinance, the Official Zoning Map, the Comprehensive Plan, and any other relevant information; 
b.  Consult with other staff, as necessary; and 
c.  Render an opinion. 
2.  The interpretation shall be provided to the applicant in writing by mail. 
D.  Official Record. The Planning Director shall maintain an official record of interpretations which shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
E.  Appeals. Appeals of written interpretations shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the interpretation in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. 
6.2.3.   Building Permit.
A.  Application Requirements. 
1.  In addition to any other requirements determined by the Building Official, all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to a scale of not less than 1/8" = 1 foot, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the proposed building or structure, and the exact size and location of any existing buildings or structures on the lot. 
2.  Plans shall show the existing or proposed use of each building or part of building, and such other information with regard to the building or lot, parking areas, distances from nearby buildings, or neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Ordinance. 
3.  One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner or agent when approved by the Building Official. 
B.  Approval Process. The Building Official shall approve or deny a building permit application within 15 working days of receipt of all required information. Such permit shall not be issued without the approval of the Planning Director. 
C.  Expiration of Approval. 
1.  Work described in any building permit that has not begun within six months from the date of issuance of the permit shall cause the permit to expire and be of no further effect. In such cases, no further work shall occur until a new building permit or an extension has been obtained. 
2.  If, after substantial commencement of construction, work is discontinued or no substantial work has occurred for a period of six months or more, the building permit shall expire and be of no further effect. In such cases, no further work shall occur until a new building permit or an extension has been obtained. 
3.  The Building Official shall have the authority to grant one extension not to exceed 90 days. 
6.2.4.   Certificate of Occupancy.
A.  Applicability. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following. 
1.  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or enlarged; or 
2.  Change in use of an existing building to a different Use Category as set forth in Chapter 3; or 
3.  Any change in a nonconforming use. 
B.  Unlawful to Occupy Without Valid Certificate of Occupancy. No such occupancy, use, or change of use shall take place until the Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Building Official. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any development, or phase thereof, where a Certificate of Compliance is required by 6.2.8 until such Certificate of Compliance has been issued. 
C.  Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. Pending the issuance of a permanent Certificate of Occupancy, a temporary Certificate may be issued. The temporary Certificate shall be valid for a period established by the Building Official not to exceed a maximum of 120 days pending completion of an addition or during partial occupancy of a structure. 
D.  Expiration. 
1.  A Certificate of Occupancy shall not expire. 
2.  A temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall expire no later than 120 days after issuance. 
E.  Appeals. A decision on a Certificate of Occupancy may be appealed not later than 30 days after the decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with 6.2.20. 
6.2.5.   Telecommunication Facility Plan Review.
A.  Applicability. The application and review procedures in this Section, along with the conditions in 3.3.22, Telecommunications Facilities, shall apply to all such facilities located within the City limits. 
B.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners of record may apply. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  An application accompanied by a fee set by the City Manager (in order to defray the cost of technical review) for an antenna on an existing structure, replacement of an existing tower, or a new tower shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Building Official. The applicant shall provide such information deemed necessary by the Building Official. 
2.  All telecommunication facilities must submit an application accompanied by a fee set by the City Manager (in order to defray the cost of technical review) to the Planning Director, along with the following documents, if applicable. 
a.  One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antennas, including description of design characteristics and materials. 
b.  A site plan drawn to scale showing property boundaries, tower location, tower height, guy wires and anchors, existing structures, parking, fences, landscape plan, existing land uses on adjacent property, and significant and Grand trees to be affected. 
c.  Photographs or elevation drawings depicting typical design of proposed structures. 
d.  A current map showing locations of applicant's existing and proposed antennas and towers in Aiken County. 
e.  A report from a structural engineer registered in South Carolina showing the tower antenna capacity by type and number, a certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA 222 standards (latest revision), and a determination of the fall zone. 
f.  Identification of the owners of all antennas and equipment to be located on the site. 
g.  If the applicant is not the owner, written authorization from the site owner for the application. 
h.  Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been issued. 
i.  A written agreement to allow other users to co-locate on the tower and documentation that the tower will be designed to allow it. 
j.  A written agreement to remove the tower and/or antenna within 180 days after cessation of use. 
k.  Evidence that applicable conditions in 3.3.22.B will be met. 
l.  Additional information as required by the Planning Director or Building Official. 
D.  Technical Review. 
1.  Engineering Certification. The applicant must submit the following information to the Building Official. 
a.  A certificate from an engineer registered in South Carolina that the proposed facility will contain only equipment meeting Federal Communication Commission rules and will be operated in accordance therewith. 
b.  Certification that the new tower is designed to accommodate additional antennas equal in number to applicant's present and future requirements. 
c.  Written indemnification of the City and proof of liability insurance or financial ability to respond to claims of up to $1,000,000 in the aggregate which may arise from operation of the facility during its life, at no cost to the City, in form approved by the City Attorney. 
2.  Engineering Review. City Council may retain an engineer licensed in South Carolina to review any telecommunication plan application or determine whether a suitable alternate location for a tower or antenna is available. 
E.  Approval Process. The Building Official shall have authority to approve Telecommunication Facility Plans, although special exception approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals is also required in some districts (see the Use Tables in Chapter 3, Article 1). The decision on approval by the Building Official must be granted within 45 days of submission of a completed application unless a variance is required or an extension of time is granted in writing by the applicant. In accordance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, denial of an application for a telecommunications facility shall be supported by substantial evidence explained in a letter to the applicant sent certified mail within two business days of the decision. 
F.  Expiration of Approval. Approval of a Telecommunication Facility Plan pursuant to this Ordinance shall expire two years from the date of final approval by the City. 
G.  Appeals. Appeals of administrative decisions made by the Building Official shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the decision, in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. An applicant may appeal the following. 
1.  Denial of permit by the Building Official, which includes failure to act within 45 days on an application that is determined to be complete, unless extended by mutual agreement. 
2.  Requests for variances from the general district regulations and setback requirements, but not from any other conditions in this Section. 
6.2.6.   Sign Permit.
A.  Applicability. 
1.  This Section shall apply to any sign located within the City limits except for those signs specifically exempted in 4.4.2. 
2.  Sign Alterations Exempt from Permit. A permit is not required prior to engaging in sign alterations if such alterations involve only: 
a.  The changing of copy on a sign designed for changeable copy; 
b.  The painting or refinishing of the surface of a sign face or sign structure of a permitted sign so as to maintain the appearance as approved on the date such sign received a permit; or 
c.  The changing of any tenant panels on a permitted directory sign provided such tenant panel matches the approved design. 
B.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
C.  Application Requirements. The following information shall be submitted with an application for a sign permit unless waived by the Planning Director. 
1.  A complete application form as approved by the Planning Director and appropriate fee. 
2.  A scaled plan and drawings showing front and side elevations of the sign as proposed. 
3.  For freestanding signs, a survey showing property lines; proposed sign location; a landscaping and lighting plan or a written statement stating there will be none; and any existing site improvements. 
4.  For facade signs, a scaled drawing showing the entire facade or tenant space facade, the proposed sign location, and any existing facade signs. 
5.  Such other information as the Planning Director may require to verify compliance with all applicable requirements. 

D.  Approval Process. The Planning Director shall approve any sign that meets the requirements of Chapter 4, Article 4. If the application for a sign permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing by certified mail within 15 days. 
E.  Expiration of Approval. A sign permit shall expire 180 days from the date of its issuance unless the sign and all items required by the permit have been completed in compliance with the permit. The Planning Director shall have the authority to grant one extension not to exceed 60 days. 
F.  Appeals. A decision on a sign permit may be appealed not later than 30 days after the decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with 6.2.20. 
6.2.7.   Conditional Use Permit.
A.  Applicability. A conditional use permit is a permit issued by right for a use subject to listed conditions (see the Use Tables in Chapter 3, Article 1). Every conditional use is subject to special conditions set forth in Chapter 3, Article 3. 

B.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
C.  Application Requirements. Application for a conditional use permit shall follow the procedure for obtaining a building permit set forth in 6.2.3. Where a site plan is required by 6.2.9, the site plan review procedures shall apply prior to application for a building permit. Any special requirements or conditions set forth in Chapter 3, Article 3 shall be met prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
D.  Approval Process. 
1.  When a Site Plan is Required. Where site plan review is required (see 6.2.9), the Planning Director shall approve the site plan and so advise the applicant in writing. A determination by the Planning Director that all requirements and provisions have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval of the site plan, notice of which shall be provided to the applicant in writing. The Planning Director shall notify the applicant within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. 
2.  When a Site Plan is Not Required. Where no site plan review is required, the Planning Director shall approve or deny a conditional use permit application within 15 working days of receipt of all required information. 
E.  Expiration of Approval. A conditional use permit shall expire two years from the date of final approval by the City. 
F.  Approval is Site-Specific. A conditional use permit is specific to the site identified as part of the approval process, and all conditions and approvals shall run with the land unless otherwise stated in the approval. 
G.  Appeals. Appeal of a decision regarding a conditional use permit shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the decision, in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. 
6.2.8.   Certificate of Compliance.
A.  Applicability. 

1.  This Section applies to development that has obtained site plan approval or a prior development permit. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any development, or phase thereof, where a Certificate of Compliance is required by this Section until such Certificate of Compliance has been issued. 
2.  The development, or an approved phase, may not be occupied or used until a Certificate of Compliance has been obtained from the Planning Director. Approved phase for purposes of this Section shall be a phase approved through the site plan review process, or a phase approved by the Planning Director prior to a request for an inspection for a Certificate of Compliance. In order for a phase to receive a Certificate of Compliance, that phase must be able to function alone with all required infrastructure, including, but not limited to, access drives, parking, drainage facilities, utilities, and required landscaping. 
B.  Approval Process. 
1.  The Planning Director shall verify with the City Engineer that construction has occurred in accordance with submitted plans for roads, parking, drainage systems and utilities, DHEC permits to operate water and sewer systems, and acceptance of completed water and sewer lines for permanent ownership, operation and maintenance. The Planning Director shall also verify with the City Horticulturist that compliance with the approved landscape plan, or submission of an approved performance guarantee, has occurred. 
2.  Following verification in accordance with paragraph 1 above, the Planning Director shall schedule and conduct a final inspection to verify compliance with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, requirements of subdivision approval, site plan approval or permit, and any other applicable approval. 
3.  Upon determination of compliance, the Planning Director shall issue a Certificate of Compliance to the applicant within 15 days of receipt of all required information. A determination by the Planning Director that all requirements and provisions have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval, notice of which shall be provided to the applicant in writing. 
C.  Temporary Certificate of Compliance. 
1.  At the discretion of the Planning Director, a Temporary Certificate of Compliance may be issued for a period not to exceed six months. 
2.  No Temporary Certificate of Compliance shall be issued for a development, or approved phase thereof, unless it meets both of the following conditions. 
a.  Development is substantially complete and the site is in a safe, accessible and useable condition; and 
b.  Development surety in an amount adequate to cover the cost of any incomplete improvements has been provided to the City. 
D.  Expiration. 
1.  A Certificate of Compliance shall not expire. 
2.  A Temporary Certificate of Compliance shall expire no later than six months after issuance. 
E.  Appeals. Appeal of a decision regarding a Certificate of Compliance shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the decision, in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. 
6.2.9.   Site Plan Review.
A.  Applicability. 
1.  All proposed development shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning Director, unless expressly exempted in paragraph B below. 
2.  For all development requiring site plan review by the Planning Director, simultaneous review by the Building Official may occur; however, no building permit shall be issued until site plan approval has been granted. 
B.  Development Exempt from Approval. The following activities or uses shall be exempt from site plan review although they may be reviewed under other administrative procedures where noted in this Section or other sections of this Ordinance. 
1.  Public Projects. The construction of any public street or utility service line, whether publicly or privately owned; such public project plans shall be submitted and reviewed by the Planning Director under a separate administrative procedure consistent with State law as specified in 6.2.12. 
2.  Maintenance. Maintenance of any structure. 
3.  Agriculture. The use or intended use of land, with or without accessory structures, for purposes of agriculture, raising of crops or animals, forestry, and similar uses, except for intensive agriculture. 
4.  Single-Family Residences. A detached single-family dwelling on a single lot, and, where permitted, a manufactured home not located in a manufactured home park. 
5.  Accessory Structures Integral to Permitted Development. The Planning Director may waive the site plan review requirement for any accessory structure or use, whether temporary or permanent. 
6.  Renovation or Improvement. Any renovation or improvement that does not involve an increase in impervious surface area (paved or roofed area or other surfaces that do not absorb water). 
C.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
D.  Application Requirements. A site plan review application shall be considered complete when the following items have been submitted (unless expressly waived by the Planning Director). 
1.  Application Form and Fee. A complete application form as approved by the Planning Director and appropriate fee. 
2.  Certification of Owner Consent. Certification, written and signed by the property owner-of-record, that such owner formally consents to the proposed development. 
3.  Property Deed. If necessary, a copy of the deed for the subject property. 
4.  Written Narrative. If necessary, a written narrative outlining the following. 
a.  The nature and details of the proposed development. 
b.  If the proposed site plan is a phase of a previously approved multi-phase plan or PR concept plan, a description of how such phase relates to such plan, in whole or in part. 
c.  The proposed form of ownership of the development (e.g. fee simple, horizontal property regime, property owner association, etc.) and detailed provisions for maintenance responsibility for all improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, parking areas, bikeways, pedestrian ways, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer systems, and landscaping and open space areas. 
d.  Any proposed dedication of improvements to any public agency, specifying such improvements and the affected agencies. 
e.  Any other information necessary to further clarify the proposed development. 
5.  Site Plan. A final site plan or set of plans in a quantity set by the Planning Director at a minimum scale of 1" = 30' or other appropriate scale showing the following (unless waived by the Planning Director). 
a.  Name of development; 
b.  Graphic scale; 
c.  Date of drawing and date of any revisions; 
d.  Vicinity sketch showing the general site location and depicting vehicular access routes accurately referenced to the nearest public road; 
e.  Topographic survey at one-foot contour intervals, or other topographic information acceptable to the City Engineer, unless waived by the City Engineer; 
f.  All existing permanent structures and facilities within 50 feet of the subject property; 
g.  All existing and proposed easements within 50 feet of the subject property; 
h.  Proposed site development, including land uses, any building or other structure locations and gross floor area, number and dimension of manufactured housing spaces, street, driveway, bike and pedestrian way, parking area layouts, interconnections with off-site facilities, and freestanding sign locations, if applicable. The plan view of buildings shall show limits of roofed areas and indicate the exterior wall line dimensioned to property lines; 
i.  Lighting standards (including height and intensity); 
j.  Location of proposed drainage system, including off-site areas of interconnection; 
k.  Location of proposed water and sanitary sewer system, including off-site areas of interconnection; 
l.  Location of other proposed waste disposal systems, including solid waste collection areas; 
m.  Table indicating calculations for required parking; 
n.  Location and dimensions for parking, handicapped accessible spaces, and off-street loading areas, where applicable; 
o.  Location of other utilities such as electrical, telephone, natural gas, and cable television; 
p.  Location of proposed open space areas; 
q.  Location of proposed buffer areas; 
r.  Zoning of the site, including overlay zones; 
s.  Where applicable, surveyed delineation of any wetland area and required buffers or other delineation of a natural feature on the site which is protected or defined under provisions of this Ordinance; 
t.  Notation as to FEMA/FIRM flood zones covering the site and proposed first floor elevation of all buildings; and 
u.  Fire hydrants and fire lanes. 
6.  Landscape Plan. Proposed landscape plan as required in 6.2.10. 
7.  Development Phasing Plan. A plan indicating the contemplated phasing of the proposed development, including the following. 
a.  A map depicting proposed phases at a minimum scale of 1" = 100' or other appropriate scale acceptable to the Planning Director. 
b.  A schedule report, listing by each proposed phase (as applicable) the number of residential units by type, number of hotel rooms, amount of gross building square footage for all nonresidential uses by type, expected type of open space improvements, and public improvements to be dedicated to any governmental or other public agency. 
8.  Approvals, Certifications, and Recommendations. Copy of approvals, certifications, and recommendations required by all appropriate City, County, State, and federal regulations for the proposed development, and documentation of compliance with such, as applicable, including, but not limited to the following. 
a.  South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control approval of water and sewer system design, where applicable. 
b.  South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control air, water quality, or solid waste permit. 
c.  Approval by providers of electric, natural gas, telephone, or cable television of the utility service and layout shown on the site plan. 

d.  South Carolina Department of Transportation encroachment permit, if necessary. 
9.  Offers of Dedication to Public Ownership. Any offers of dedication to public ownership and permanent public maintenance of improvements, such as streets, drainage systems, parks, pathways, etc., including the proposed manner of such dedication. 
10.  Legal Documents. Draft easements and other legal documents pertaining to the operation and management of the proposed development if required by any other provisions of this Ordinance. 
11.  Other Requirements. Any other items specifically required of a site plan application by any other provisions of this Ordinance, or other information deemed necessary for review by the Planning Director. 
E.  Approval Process. If the proposed site plan is determined by the Planning Director to be consistent with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the Planning Director shall approve the site plan and so advise the applicant in writing. A determination by the Planning Director that all such requirements and provisions have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval of the site plan, notice of which shall be provided to the applicant in writing. The Planning Director shall notify the applicant within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. 
F.  Maximum Review Period for Site Plan. 
1.  Failure to Act. Once an application for review of a site plan is considered complete according to 6.1.3.E, failure by the City to act within 60 days shall constitute approval of the plan, as set forth in Section 6-29-1150 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina. 
2.  Authorization to Proceed. A letter of approval, copy of the site plan signed by the Planning Director, or other authorization to proceed shall be sent by the Planning Director to the applicant within this 60-day period. If the plan is not approved, a written statement detailing the deficiencies shall be sent within the required 60-day period. 
3.  Extensions. The 60-day time period may be extended by mutual agreement between the Planning Director and the applicant. 
G.  Expiration of Approval. 
1.  The applicant shall have two years following approval of the site plan to submit a complete building permit application or, if no building permit is required, to obtain a Certificate of Compliance, or the site plan approval shall expire. 
2.  For any project where more than one building is to be built, the applicant may submit a series of building permit applications. The first application must be submitted within two years from the date site plan approval is granted. Each subsequent application must be submitted within 180 days from the date of issuance of a Certificate of Compliance or Certificate of Occupancy for the previous building, whichever shall occur first. The lapse of more than 180 days shall cause the expiration of the site plan approval. 
H.  Appeals. Appeals of administrative decisions shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the decision, in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. 
6.2.10.   Landscape Plan Review.
A.  Applicability. 
1.  Project Area. Except as set forth in paragraph 3. below, only the actual project area shall be used as the basis in determining compliance with this Section and the standards in Chapter 4, Article 6. 
2.  New Project. Landscape plan approval pursuant to this Ordinance shall be required for the following. 
a.  The project area of a multifamily residential or commercial development. 
b.  Conversion of a site from single-family residential use to any multifamily residential or commercial use. 
c.  Any off-street parking area in any zoning district, except for such an area for a detached single-family residential use with individual lots. 
3.  Renovation or Expansion of an Existing Development. 
a.  If the Building Official determines that the cost of renovation or expansion of an existing development in any one-year period exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value of the development as set by the Aiken County Tax Assessor, the South Carolina Tax Commission, or any other State or local governmental entity or official with authority to do so, or by the Building Official for developments that are tax-exempt, the entire development or site shall be brought into compliance with Chapter 4, Article 6. For a development composed of individual lots, the determination of whether the aforesaid limit has been exceeded shall be based on the appraised value of the individual lot or lots on which the proposed improvement or improvements will be located and not on the appraised value of the entire development, including other lots. 
b.  The Planning Director may waive any provision of Chapter 4 Article 6 if compliance would be impractical. 
c.  With the authorization of the Planning Director, the Building Inspector may issue a building permit to allow work on existing structures prior to approval of a landscape plan, but no other work may proceed. 
4.  Exemptions. 
a.  Those portions of public or private plant nurseries, tree farms, or botanical gardens used for the growing of plants for sale or for public use or enjoyment shall be exempt from the tree replacement provisions in 4.6.4. 
b.  A commercial or multifamily project under development in the DB District shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section, except that the project shall comply with the provisions of 4.6.4 regarding the following: 
i.  the removal or replacement of Significant and Grand trees; and 
ii.  the provision of a planting strip where off-street parking is provided along or adjacent to the street. 
B.  Approval Required Prior to Permit Allowing Grading or Construction. No grading permit, building permit, or other permit or approval allowing construction of a project may be issued by the City on a project subject to this Section without a Landscape Plan having been approved pursuant to this Section prior to such issuance. 
C.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
D.  Application Requirements. 
1.  An application for landscape plan approval shall be submitted to the Planning Director with the number of copies set by the Planning Director and the appropriate fee. 
2.  The Landscape Plan shall include the following (unless waived by the Planning Director). 
a.  Name of the project; 
b.  Tax parcel number; 
c.  Acreage or square footage of the lot or parcel on which the project is situated; 
d.  Acreage or square footage to be disturbed; 
e.  Dimensions of the lot or parcel on which the project is situated; 
f.  Graphic scale and north arrow; 
g.  Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner; 
h.  Name, address, and telephone number of the plan preparer; 
i.  Zoning of the site; 
j.  Location map at a scale sufficient to depict the exact location of the site; 
k.  Calculation of the area of the total site required to be landscaped and that actually provided; 
l.  In the planting strip, the location, type, and caliper of all Grand and Significant trees indicating those to be removed and existing trees to be counted in meeting the requirement for trees in the planting strip set forth in 4.6.4.B.1; 
m.  A tree survey on paper copies and a transparent medium depicting either 
i.  the DBH, location, and variety of the Grand and Significant Trees on the entire site and a clear indication of trees to be removed; and 
ii.  the total DBH of Significant Trees on the entire site and the total DBH of Significant Trees being removed; 
or 
iii.  the DBH, location, and variety of Grand Trees on the entire site and the Significant Trees in the yard area and a clear indication of trees to be removed; 
iv.  a listing of all Significant Trees in the buildable area including DBH and variety and the location of Significant Trees being saved to reach the 20 percent requirement; 
v.  the total DBH of Significant Trees on the entire site and the total DBH of Significant Trees being removed. 
n.  The protected area required around each tree based on one foot radius for each inch DBH; 
o.  A statement of the total caliper of the replacement inches required and the total caliper of those provided; 
p.  Clear delineation of the limits of clearing; 
q.  The number, location, and botanical and common names of plants to be installed including: 
i.  the caliper of required trees; 
ii.  shrubbery; and 
iii.  a clear indication of the areas to be seeded or sodded; 
r.  A notation that protective measures for trees, installation methods for new plant material, and maintenance of landscaped areas will comply with the standards established by this Ordinance, the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual, and the City Horticulturist; and 
s.  A notation provided by City Staff regarding maintenance and pruning; and 
t.  Other information as required by City staff to facilitate review. 

E.  Approval Process. The Planning Director shall have authority to approve landscape plans. The decision on approval by the Planning Director must be granted within 60 days of submission of a complete application unless a variance is required or an extension of time is mutually agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the Planning Director. 
F.  Expiration of Approval. Approval of a landscape plan shall expire two years from the date of final approval by the City, unless a building permit has been obtained and kept current. 
G.  Appeals. Appeals of administrative decisions shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the decision, in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. 
6.2.11.   Street Name.
A.  General. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve or deny the proposed name of any street consistent with the criteria set forth below. 
B.  Application Requirements. Any person proposing to name a street or change the name of a street shall submit a list of at least three proposed names in priority order to the Planning Commission. Where such application is not part of another development approval according to this Chapter, an appropriate application fee shall be required. 
C.  Criteria for New Names and Name Changes. 
1.  No new street name or proposed renaming of an existing street shall duplicate, be phonetically similar to, or in any way be likely to be confused with an existing street name, in spite of the use of prefixes or suffixes. 
2.  Names must be simple, logical, easy to read and pronounce, clear, and brief with no frivolous or complicated words or unconventional spellings. 
3.  Names that might reasonably be perceived as offensive shall not be permitted. 
4.  The use of alphabetical letters (such as "A" Street) is prohibited. 
5.  Preference will be given to names that have some association with Aiken or the immediate location of the road or place such as reference to local history or physiographic features. 
6.  Use of a common theme is recommended for names of streets that are associated with one another, such as those within a residential development. 
7.  In changing any street name, care should be taken to preserve local history and to minimize disruption and cost. 
8.  Intersecting streets shall not have the same or similar name. 
9.  A proposed street obviously in alignment with an existing street shall bear the name of the existing street to the extent practicable. 
10.  Street sections planned to be or likely to be connected in a straight line shall bear the same name; street sections not planned to be or unlikely to be connected shall not bear the same name. 
11.  A street that continues through an intersection should generally bear the same name. 
12.  A street making an approximate right-angle turn where there is no possibility of extending the street in either direction shall be considered to be continuous and be so named; where there is a choice of direction or a possibility of extending either section in the future, such configuration shall be considered to be an intersection and different names assigned. 
13.  A street name that otherwise meets the above criteria but in the judgment of the Planning Commission may be misleading or otherwise be inappropriate shall be disapproved. 
D.  Approval Process. 

1.  Public notice is required in accordance with 6.1.4. 
2.  Notice shall be mailed to the owners of property whose addresses would be affected at least ten days in advance of the required public hearing. 
3.  After holding the required public hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine if the name is suitable. 
4.  If the Planning Commission approves a new street name or name change, it shall so certify in writing and forward such certification by certified mail to the applicant, the Aiken County Register of Mesne Conveyance, the Aiken County 911 office, the post office and any other affected agencies, including all property owners-of-record on the affected street. 
5.  If the Planning Commission disapproves a new street name or name change, it shall so state in writing, including all reasons for the disapproval, and shall forward such notice to the party proposing the change within 15 days. 
E.  Appeals. Appeal of a decision on a street name may be made to City Council within 15 days by submission of a letter requesting it to the City Manager. 
6.2.12.   Public Project Review.
A.  Applicability. The Planning Commission shall review all proposed public projects, except for minor utilities, for location, character, and extent. 
B.  Who May Apply. Any owner of land which is the subject of a public project or an agent authorized by such entity in writing may apply for public project review. 
C.  Application Requirements. An application for public project review shall include, but not be limited to, the following information and an appropriate fee for review. 
1.  An application form approved by the Planning Director; 
2.  Documentation in the form of a deed showing public ownership of the subject parcel, a lease indicating a public tenancy, or a notarized affidavit that more than 50 percent of the proposed project is funded with public monies; 
3.  A written narrative addressing the following. 
a.  The need for the project, with supporting documentation. 
b.  A reference to and, where practical, graphic depiction of the location of the proposed development on an Aiken County tax map with parcel number. 
c.  any freshwater wetland or conservation district boundary line. 
d.  The character of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area and with the characteristics of the site on which it is to be located. 
e.  The extent of the proposed development in terms of number of buildings, height of structures, total amount of square footage, number of parking spaces, site acreage, and other pertinent items as may be applicable. 
4.  Description of maintenance responsibility for all improvements including, but not limited to, streets, parking areas, paths, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer systems, open space areas, and solid waste disposal; 
5.  If applicable, a dimensioned site plan that conforms to the requirements of 6.2.9.D.5; and 
6.  Comments or approvals of affected agencies. 
D.  Approval Process. 
1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed public project in light of the Comprehensive Plan; the report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant before the scheduled Planning Commission public hearing. 
2.  Action by Planning Commission. 
a.  Following published and posted notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding any proposed public project. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall study the proposed public project taking into account the consistency of the proposed project with the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the public project proposal is compatible with the Comprehensive Plan and shall include written findings. 
d.  If the Planning Commission finds the proposal conflicts with the Comprehensive Plan, it shall forward its written findings and an explanation of its reasoning to the public entity proposing the project. 
e.  If the public entity proposes to proceed with its public project in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan, then the entity must publicly state its intention to proceed and its reasons for proceeding. The public entity must also provide written notice of its intention to proceed and its reasons to City Council and Planning Commission, and publish a notice in a publication of general circulation at least 30 days in advance of award of a contract or beginning of construction of the proposed public project. 
6.2.13.   Historic District/Landmark Designation.
    See 5.2.2, Designation to the Aiken Historic Register. 
6.2.14.   Rezoning.
A.  Applicability. This Section shall apply to any land within the City limits for which the existing zoning district is proposed to be changed. 
B.  Who May Apply. A proposed rezoning may be initiated by City Council, the Planning Commission, the City Manager or by the owner (or a designated agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record) of such property for which the rezoning is sought. Rezoning concurrent with annexation shall follow the procedures for annexation set forth in the Aiken City Code and 2.1.4. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  A complete application shall be on a form approved by the Planning Director accompanied by the appropriate fee and shall include the following. 
a.  A narrative addressing the reasons for the requested rezoning and the applicable review criteria set forth in 6.2.14.E. 
b.  A boundary plat of the subject property prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor. 
c.  Any additional information deemed necessary by the Planning Director. 
2.  Any designated agent shall submit written consent from all of the property owners-of-record. 
D.  Approval Process. 

1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a report that reviews the proposed rezoning in light of the Comprehensive Plan, the review criteria listed below, and the general requirements of this Ordinance. A copy of the report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant before the scheduled public hearing. 
2.  Planning Commission Recommendation. 
a.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and following appropriate notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding any proposed rezoning. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall study the proposed rezoning taking into account all factors which it may deem relevant including, but not limited to, consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, the review criteria listed below, and whether the proposed rezoning serves to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
c.  At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, modified approval, or denial of the rezoning. 
d.  The staff shall prepare a report of the Planning Commission deliberations and recommendation which shall be forwarded to City Council. 
3.  City Council Action. 
a.  A required public hearing by City Council held for the purpose of considering a rezoning shall be scheduled concurrent with the second reading of the ordinance adopting the proposed rezoning. 
b.  City Council shall consider the proposed rezoning at the earliest reasonable date and shall consider the report of the Planning Commission in making its decision. 
c.  Following City Council action, the applicant shall be notified within 15 days of the decision in writing. 
E.  Review Criteria. In making recommendations regarding proposed rezoning, the Commission shall consider and make findings on the following matters. 
1.  Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Compatibility with the zoning, conforming uses of nearby property, and character of the surrounding area. 
3.  Suitability of the subject property for uses permitted by the existing zoning. 
4.  Suitability of the subject property for uses permitted by the proposed zoning. 
5.  The need for additional property with the proposed zoning classification within the City limits. 
6.  Availability of sanitary sewer, water, stormwater, and transportation facilities. 
F.  Amendment of Official Zoning Map. Within 60 days of approval of a rezoning by City Council, the Planning Director shall amend the Official Zoning Map to reflect the change. 
G.  Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by City Council's decision may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.15.   Text Amendment.
A.  Applicability. This Section shall apply to any portion of the text of this Ordinance that is proposed to be changed. 
B.  Who May Apply. 

1.  Any proposed text amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by any member of City Council, the Planning Commission, or the City Manager. Any citizen of the City may request in writing to the Planning Commission that a proposed text amendment be considered after which the Planning Commission may initiate an amendment. 
2.  Any proposed text amendment to this Ordinance initiated by a member of City Council may be given first reading prior to being referred to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation. 
C.  Approval Process. 
1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed amendment in light of the Comprehensive Plan and the general requirements of this Ordinance. A copy shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant before the scheduled public hearing. 
2.  Planning Commission Recommendation. 
a.  Following published notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall study the proposed amendment taking into account all factors which it may deem relevant including, but not limited to, the consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive Plan and whether the proposed amendment serves to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
c.  At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, modified approval, or denial of the amendment. 
d.  The staff shall prepare a report of the Planning Commission deliberations and recommendation which shall be forwarded to City Council. 
3.  City Council Action. 
a.  A required public hearing by City Council held for the purpose of considering a text amendment shall be scheduled concurrent with the second reading of the ordinance adopting the proposed amendment. 
b.  City Council shall consider the proposed amendment at the earliest reasonable date and shall consider the report of the Planning Commission in making a decision. 
c.  City Council shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the proposed amendment 
d.  Following City Council action, the applicant shall be notified within 15 days of the decision in writing. 
D.  Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by City Council's decision may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.16.   Planned Residential, Planned Commercial, and Planned Institutional.
A.  Applicability. Land in the Horse District or listed on the Aiken Historic Register may not be zoned PR, PC, or PI. (Ord. 11082004A) 
B.  Who May Apply. The owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  An application form approved by the Planning Director and appropriate fee. 
2.  The concept plan shall include a sketch plan schematically showing major streets, major utilities, land uses, entrance locations on existing streets, major open space and buffers, and a conceptual drainage plan, along with a narrative addressing the proposed development explaining and tabulating the following: 
a.  land uses; 
b.  number of dwelling units by housing type; 
c.  elevations of facades of proposed buildings visible from an abutting street; (Ord. 05142007A) 
d.  residential density and/or square footage of nonresidential uses; 
e.  open space acreage; 
f.  potential traffic generation; 
g.  overall character and architectural style; 
h.  relationship of the proposed development to existing conforming development in the area; and 
i.  other related development features. 
3.  If the concept plan includes a subdivision plat in lieu of a sketch plan, maximum structure heights and maximum buildable area for each lot shall be shown. 
4.  A statement of how the proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
5.  Other relevant information as may be requested by the Planning Director. 
D.  Approval Process. 

1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed concept plan in light of the design criteria in Chapter 4, the Comprehensive Plan, and the general requirements of this Ordinance. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant before the scheduled public hearing. 
2.  Planning Commission Recommendation. 
a.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and following published, posted, and mailed notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall study the proposed concept plan taking into account all factors which it may deem relevant including, but not limited to, the design criteria in Chapter 4, the consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive Plan, and whether the proposed project serves to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
c.  At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, modified approval, or denial. 
d.  The staff shall prepare a report of the Planning Commission deliberations and recommendation which shall be forwarded to City Council. 
3.  City Council Action. 
a.  A required public hearing by City Council held for the purpose of considering a concept plan shall be scheduled concurrent with the second reading of the ordinance adopting the proposed annexation or rezoning. 
b.  City Council shall consider the proposed concept plan and the report of the Planning Commission in making a decision. City Council shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or deny it. 
c.  Following City Council action, the applicant shall be notified within 15 days of the decision in writing. 
E.  Expiration of Approval. City Council shall have the right to review a concept plan when no building permits have been issued in the past five years, and may choose not to issue further permits for the project until a revised concept plan has been approved. 
F.  Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by City Council's determination may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.17.   Attached Single-Family Residential.
A.  Applicability. This Section shall apply to any attached single-family residential project. 
1.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
2.  Application Requirements. 
a.  An application form as approved by the Planning Director and appropriate fee. 
b.  The concept plan shall include a site plan schematically showing major streets, major utilities, land uses, entrance locations on existing streets, major open space and buffers, along with a narrative addressing the proposed development explaining and tabulating the following: 
i.  A site plan depicting the arrangement of streets, off-street parking, and buildings; 
ii.  number of dwelling units by housing type; 
iii.  dwelling unit density; 
iv.  open space acreage and percentage; 
v.  a tree survey complying with Chapter 4, Article 6 of this Ordinance; 
vi.  elevations of typical buildings; 
vii.  signage; 
viii.  a traffic study if required by the City's Traffic Management Ordinance; and 
ix.  other related development features. 
c.  A statement of how the proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
d.  Other relevant information as may be requested by the Planning Director. 
3.  Approval Process. 

a.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed concept plan in light of the design criteria in 4.2.9, the Comprehensive Plan, and the general requirements of this Ordinance. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant before the scheduled hearing. 
b.  Planning Commission Recommendation. 
i.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and following published, posted, and mailed notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. 
ii.  The Planning Commission shall study the proposed concept plan taking into account all factors which it may deem relevant including, but not limited to, the design criteria in 4.2.9, the consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive Plan, and whether the proposed project serves to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
iii.  At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, modified approval, or denial. 
iv.  The staff shall prepare a report of the Planning Commission deliberations and recommendation which shall be forwarded to City Council. 
c.  City Council Action. 
i.  A required public hearing by City Council held for the purpose of considering a concept plan shall be scheduled concurrent with the second reading of the ordinance. 
ii.  City Council shall consider the proposed concept plan and the report of the Planning Commission in making a decision. City Council shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the proposed concept plan. 
iii.  Following City Council action, the applicant shall be notified within 15 days of the decision in writing. 
4.  Amendments. Changes to an approved concept plan not considered significant may be approved by the Planning Director. Any change in the approved concept plan that would increase the dwelling unit density, substantially change the character of a development, or constitute a major revision of a development as determined by the Planning Director shall require approval by City Council after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission regarding the changes. A request for a revision of the concept plan shall be supported by a written statement explaining why the revisions are necessary or desirable and shall follow the approval procedure at 6.2.16. 
5.  Expiration of Approval. City Council shall have the right to review a concept plan when no building permits have been issued in the past five years, and the City may choose not to issue further permits until a revised concept plan has been approved. 
6.  Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by City Council's determination may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.18.   Special Exception.
A.  Applicability. A special exception shall require approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
B.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
C.  Application Requirements. An application for a special exception shall consist of information necessary for the Board of Zoning Appeals to make a determination regarding the request, including, but not limited to the following. 
1.  An application form as approved by the Planning Director and appropriate fee; 
2.  A sketch plan showing the preliminary proposed siting of structures or uses on the subject property. 
3.  The proposed density expressed in terms of dwelling units per acre, total square footage per acre, or other acceptable measure. 
4.  A letter addressing the consistency of the proposed use with the character and purpose of the zoning district in which it would be located. 
5.  The consistency of the proposed use with the Comprehensive Plan; 
6.  Any relevant conditions or restrictions as set forth in Chapter 3, Article 3; and 
7.  Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning Director. 
D.  Approval Process. 

1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed development in light of the Comprehensive Plan, the review criteria listed below, and the requirements of this Ordinance. A copy of the report shall be provided to the Board of Zoning Appeals and the applicant before the scheduled hearing. 
2.  Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. 
a.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and following posted and mailed notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the special exception application. 
b.  After review of the application and the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a written finding and approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the request. 
c.  If approval, or approval with modifications or conditions, is granted, the decision shall be communicated in writing by certified mail to the applicant within 25 days, and the applicant shall then be authorized to submit a site plan or building permit application consistent with this Chapter. (Ord. 01222001) 
E.  Special Exception Review Criteria. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall approve an application for a special exception if, and only if, the applicant demonstrates that the proposed use and any associated development will meet all of the following criteria. 
1.  Be in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan; and 
2.  Be consistent with the "character and purpose' statement of the applicable district; and 
3.  Be of a size, shape, and character suited for the proposed site; and 
4.  Be compatible with the existing uses adjacent to and near the property, and not otherwise adversely affect the development of the general neighborhood or of the district in which the use is proposed; and 
5.  Not generate vehicular traffic or create vehicular circulation problems or parking demands that have an unacceptably adverse impact on nearby properties when compared with uses permitted by right in the same district; and 
6.  Not be hazardous, detrimental, or disturbing to surrounding land uses due to noise, glare, smoke, dust, odor, fumes, water pollution, or general nuisance; and 
7.  Be consistent with existing and planned pedestrian and vehicular circulation adjacent to and near the property; and 
8.  Be adequately served by essential public services and facilities not requiring additional public expense; and 
9.  Not adversely affect any site or feature of historical, cultural, natural, or scenic importance; and 
10.  Conform to any specific criteria or conditions specified for that use as set forth in Chapter 3, Article 3; and 
11.  Not be contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare, provided that a denial based exclusively on this language shall include explicit findings regarding the way in which granting the special exception would be contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
F.  Conditions on Approvals. To ensure that a proposed special exception use will meet the criteria set forth above or to alleviate or mitigate potential adverse effects of such use, the Board of Zoning Appeals may place specific conditions on the approval addressing various issues including, but not limited to, the following. 
1.  Location, size, and orientation of uses, structures, and enclosures. 
2.  Additional setbacks for proposed uses, structures, or enclosures, from property lines or other structures or objects on nearby lots. 
3.  Additional buffers. 
4.  Fencing or walls. 
5.  Shielding of lighting. 
6.  Pedestrian circulation, including sidewalks or other pedestrian connections. 
7.  Vehicle circulation, including points of ingress and egress. 
8.  Improvements on adjacent streets. 
9.  Location of paving, off-street parking and loading, and service and delivery areas. 
10.  Hours of operation. 
11.  Protection of trees and other natural assets and additional landscaping. 
12.  Protection of sites of scenic, historical, or cultural importance. 
13.  Restriction on number, size, and location of signs. 
14.  Siting of uses to improve capability with adjacent development. 
15.  Restrictions on or reduction of the extent or intensity of the proposed use. 
G.  Expiration of Approval. A special exception approval shall expire on the date specified by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the approval, but not less than two years from approval, or two years after the date of the approval hearing where no date is specified, unless the applicant submits a complete site plan review application, or building permit application, where no site plan is required. 
H.  Revocation of Special Exception. 
1.  If an owner of property granted a special exception fails in any manner to follow the conditions of the special exception or engages in any activity prohibited by this Ordinance, or prohibited under the special exception, then the City of Aiken may, after five days of posting notice on the subject property granted the special exception, suspend the special exception for a period of 60 days. 
2.  Within 30 days of the date of posting this notice, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a hearing to ascertain all the facts in the matter. Notice of such hearing shall be in writing and shall set forth the reason for the hearing or the complaint against the property owner and shall be served upon the property owner in person, or by registered or certified mail return receipt requested to the owner's last known address. 
3.  In the event the City is not able to serve notice upon the owner in person, and any notice sent by registered or certified mail return receipt requested is returned by the postal service, the City shall cause such notice to be posted at the property-in-question, and such posting shall be a valid means of service. 
4.  If the Board of Zoning Appeals finds and concludes from the evidence that the special exception has been violated by the owner in any of the provisions under the special exception granted or conditions attached to it, it may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew such special exception. 
5.  In the case of revocation or nonrenewal, no application for special exception may be filed for a period of one year after the revocation becomes effective. 
6.  Following the entry of an order suspending or revoking a special exception, the property owner may seek judicial review in a manner provided by South Carolina law. The Board of Zoning Appeals may stay enforcement proceedings fur such order for a period of 30 days pending the filing or final disposition of proceedings of judicial review. 
I.  Approval is Site-Specific. Special exception approval is specific to the site identified as part of the approval process, and all conditions and approvals shall run with the land unless otherwise stated in the approval. 
J.  Appeal. Any applicant aggrieved by the Board's decision may appeal such determination to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.19.   Variance.
A.  Who May File. The owner, developer, or agent with authorization from the owner, may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with the Planning Director. 
B.  Approval Process. 
1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report which shall be provided to the applicant or appellant before the Board of Zoning Appeals meeting at which the application is scheduled to be reviewed. 
2.  Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. 
a.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and following published and posted notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing. 
b.  After review of the variance application and the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a written finding and give its approval; approval with modifications or conditions; or disapproval. 
c.  If approval or approval with modifications or conditions is granted, the decision shall be communicated in writing by certified mail to the applicant within 25 days, and the applicant shall then be authorized to submit a site plan or building permit application where no site plan is required. (Ord. 01222001) 
C.  Criteria for Approval of Variances. 
1.  Required Findings. A variance may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals if the Board concludes that the strict enforcement of any design and performance standard set forth in this Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship to the applicant and that, by granting the variance, the spirit of this Ordinance will be observed, public health, safety, and welfare will not be diminished, and substantial justice will be done. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship if the Board determines and expresses in writing all of the following findings. 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property; and 
b.  These conditions do not generally apply to other properties in the vicinity; and 
c.  Due to these conditions, the application of the Ordinance to the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property; and 
d.  The conditions are not the result of the applicant's own actions; and 
e.  Granting of the variance would not substantially conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this Ordinance; and 
f.  The authorization of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property or the public good, and the character of the district will not be harmed by the granting of the variance. 
2.  Limitations. The Board may not grant a variance the effect of which would be any of the following. 
a.  To permit a use of land or a structure that is not allowed in the applicable district. 
b.  To allow an increase in intensity or physical extension of a nonconforming use. 
c.  To increase the density of a use above that permitted by the applicable district. 
3.  Profitability Not to Be Considered. The fact that property may be developed more profitably should a variance be granted may not be considered grounds for a variance. 
4.  Hardship Due to Eminent Domain. Where the alleged hardship results from the taking of part of the property by eminent domain, thus reducing the land area available for parking, buffers, and other purposes, the applicant shall have the burden of proving that, after good-faith efforts by the applicant or previous owner, the condemning authority failed or refused to provide the applicant compensation adequate to cover the value of both the land actually taken and the economic impacts of the reduction in the size of the remaining property. Only if the applicant meets this burden of proof will a hardship under these conditions be considered adequate to justify the granting of a variance. 
D.  Expiration of Approval. A variance shall expire on the date specified by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the approval, but not less than two years from approval, or two years after the date of the approval hearing where no date is specified, unless the applicant submits a complete site plan review application, or building permit application where no site plan is required. 
E.  Appeal. Any party aggrieved by the Board's decision may appeal such determination to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.20.   Appeal of Administrative Decision.

A.  Who May Appeal. Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision or interpretation made pursuant to this Ordinance may bring an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing an application with the Planning Director. An aggrieved person is defined as any property owner within 300 feet of the property for which a decision has been rendered and may include persons owning property beyond 300 feet if it is determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals (based upon information provided by the appellant) that such property owners may be affected by a decision or interpretation. 
B.  Deadline for Submission of Application. An application for appeal shall be filed (received by the Planning Director or postmarked) not later than 15 days after the decision being appealed in order to be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
C.  Review Process. 
1.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and at the conclusion of the proceeding on the variance request or the appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall take one of the following actions, consistent with the provisions of this Article. 
a.  Affirm the action of the official that made the decision. 
b.  Modify the action of the official and, to that end, have all the powers of the official from which the appeal is taken, and may issue a permit or direct that a permit be issued. 
c.  Reverse the action of the official and, to that end, have all the powers of the officer from which the appeal is taken, and may issue a permit or direct that a permit be issued. 
2.  Every order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Board shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. 
D.  Appeal to Court of Common Pleas. Any party aggrieved by the Board's decision may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.2. - Written Interpretation. 
A.  Authority. The Planning Director shall have authority to make written interpretations of this Ordinance. 
B.  Request for Interpretation. A written request for interpretation shall be submitted to the Planning Director. 
C.  Interpretation by Planning Director. 
1.  The Planning Director shall take the following steps within 15 days of receipt of a written request for interpretation. 
a.  Review and evaluate the request in light of the text of this Ordinance, the Official Zoning Map, the Comprehensive Plan, and any other relevant information; 
b.  Consult with other staff, as necessary; and 
c.  Render an opinion. 
2.  The interpretation shall be provided to the applicant in writing by mail. 
D.  Official Record. The Planning Director shall maintain an official record of interpretations which shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
E.  Appeals. Appeals of written interpretations shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the interpretation in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. 
6.2.3. - Building Permit. 
A.  Application Requirements. 
1.  In addition to any other requirements determined by the Building Official, all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to a scale of not less than 1/8" = 1 foot, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the proposed building or structure, and the exact size and location of any existing buildings or structures on the lot. 
2.  Plans shall show the existing or proposed use of each building or part of building, and such other information with regard to the building or lot, parking areas, distances from nearby buildings, or neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Ordinance. 
3.  One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner or agent when approved by the Building Official. 
B.  Approval Process. The Building Official shall approve or deny a building permit application within 15 working days of receipt of all required information. Such permit shall not be issued without the approval of the Planning Director. 
C.  Expiration of Approval. 
1.  Work described in any building permit that has not begun within six months from the date of issuance of the permit shall cause the permit to expire and be of no further effect. In such cases, no further work shall occur until a new building permit or an extension has been obtained. 
2.  If, after substantial commencement of construction, work is discontinued or no substantial work has occurred for a period of six months or more, the building permit shall expire and be of no further effect. In such cases, no further work shall occur until a new building permit or an extension has been obtained. 
3.  The Building Official shall have the authority to grant one extension not to exceed 90 days. 
6.2.4. - Certificate of Occupancy. 
A.  Applicability. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following. 
1.  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or enlarged; or 
2.  Change in use of an existing building to a different Use Category as set forth in Chapter 3; or 
3.  Any change in a nonconforming use. 
B.  Unlawful to Occupy Without Valid Certificate of Occupancy. No such occupancy, use, or change of use shall take place until the Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Building Official. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any development, or phase thereof, where a Certificate of Compliance is required by 6.2.8 until such Certificate of Compliance has been issued. 
C.  Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. Pending the issuance of a permanent Certificate of Occupancy, a temporary Certificate may be issued. The temporary Certificate shall be valid for a period established by the Building Official not to exceed a maximum of 120 days pending completion of an addition or during partial occupancy of a structure. 
D.  Expiration. 
1.  A Certificate of Occupancy shall not expire. 
2.  A temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall expire no later than 120 days after issuance. 
E.  Appeals. A decision on a Certificate of Occupancy may be appealed not later than 30 days after the decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with 6.2.20. 
6.2.5. - Telecommunication Facility Plan Review. 
A.  Applicability. The application and review procedures in this Section, along with the conditions in 3.3.22, Telecommunications Facilities, shall apply to all such facilities located within the City limits. 
B.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners of record may apply. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  An application accompanied by a fee set by the City Manager (in order to defray the cost of technical review) for an antenna on an existing structure, replacement of an existing tower, or a new tower shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Building Official. The applicant shall provide such information deemed necessary by the Building Official. 
2.  All telecommunication facilities must submit an application accompanied by a fee set by the City Manager (in order to defray the cost of technical review) to the Planning Director, along with the following documents, if applicable. 
a.  One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antennas, including description of design characteristics and materials. 
b.  A site plan drawn to scale showing property boundaries, tower location, tower height, guy wires and anchors, existing structures, parking, fences, landscape plan, existing land uses on adjacent property, and significant and Grand trees to be affected. 
c.  Photographs or elevation drawings depicting typical design of proposed structures. 
d.  A current map showing locations of applicant's existing and proposed antennas and towers in Aiken County. 
e.  A report from a structural engineer registered in South Carolina showing the tower antenna capacity by type and number, a certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA 222 standards (latest revision), and a determination of the fall zone. 
f.  Identification of the owners of all antennas and equipment to be located on the site. 
g.  If the applicant is not the owner, written authorization from the site owner for the application. 
h.  Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been issued. 
i.  A written agreement to allow other users to co-locate on the tower and documentation that the tower will be designed to allow it. 
j.  A written agreement to remove the tower and/or antenna within 180 days after cessation of use. 
k.  Evidence that applicable conditions in 3.3.22.B will be met. 
l.  Additional information as required by the Planning Director or Building Official. 
D.  Technical Review. 
1.  Engineering Certification. The applicant must submit the following information to the Building Official. 
a.  A certificate from an engineer registered in South Carolina that the proposed facility will contain only equipment meeting Federal Communication Commission rules and will be operated in accordance therewith. 
b.  Certification that the new tower is designed to accommodate additional antennas equal in number to applicant's present and future requirements. 
c.  Written indemnification of the City and proof of liability insurance or financial ability to respond to claims of up to $1,000,000 in the aggregate which may arise from operation of the facility during its life, at no cost to the City, in form approved by the City Attorney. 
2.  Engineering Review. City Council may retain an engineer licensed in South Carolina to review any telecommunication plan application or determine whether a suitable alternate location for a tower or antenna is available. 
E.  Approval Process. The Building Official shall have authority to approve Telecommunication Facility Plans, although special exception approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals is also required in some districts (see the Use Tables in Chapter 3, Article 1). The decision on approval by the Building Official must be granted within 45 days of submission of a completed application unless a variance is required or an extension of time is granted in writing by the applicant. In accordance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, denial of an application for a telecommunications facility shall be supported by substantial evidence explained in a letter to the applicant sent certified mail within two business days of the decision. 
F.  Expiration of Approval. Approval of a Telecommunication Facility Plan pursuant to this Ordinance shall expire two years from the date of final approval by the City. 
G.  Appeals. Appeals of administrative decisions made by the Building Official shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the decision, in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. An applicant may appeal the following. 
1.  Denial of permit by the Building Official, which includes failure to act within 45 days on an application that is determined to be complete, unless extended by mutual agreement. 
2.  Requests for variances from the general district regulations and setback requirements, but not from any other conditions in this Section. 
6.2.6. - Sign Permit. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  This Section shall apply to any sign located within the City limits except for those signs specifically exempted in 4.4.2. 
2.  Sign Alterations Exempt from Permit. A permit is not required prior to engaging in sign alterations if such alterations involve only: 
a.  The changing of copy on a sign designed for changeable copy; 
b.  The painting or refinishing of the surface of a sign face or sign structure of a permitted sign so as to maintain the appearance as approved on the date such sign received a permit; or 
c.  The changing of any tenant panels on a permitted directory sign provided such tenant panel matches the approved design. 
B.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
C.  Application Requirements. The following information shall be submitted with an application for a sign permit unless waived by the Planning Director. 
1.  A complete application form as approved by the Planning Director and appropriate fee. 
2.  A scaled plan and drawings showing front and side elevations of the sign as proposed. 
3.  For freestanding signs, a survey showing property lines; proposed sign location; a landscaping and lighting plan or a written statement stating there will be none; and any existing site improvements. 
4.  For facade signs, a scaled drawing showing the entire facade or tenant space facade, the proposed sign location, and any existing facade signs. 
5.  Such other information as the Planning Director may require to verify compliance with all applicable requirements. 

D.  Approval Process. The Planning Director shall approve any sign that meets the requirements of Chapter 4, Article 4. If the application for a sign permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing by certified mail within 15 days. 
E.  Expiration of Approval. A sign permit shall expire 180 days from the date of its issuance unless the sign and all items required by the permit have been completed in compliance with the permit. The Planning Director shall have the authority to grant one extension not to exceed 60 days. 
F.  Appeals. A decision on a sign permit may be appealed not later than 30 days after the decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with 6.2.20. 
6.2.7. - Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Applicability. A conditional use permit is a permit issued by right for a use subject to listed conditions (see the Use Tables in Chapter 3, Article 1). Every conditional use is subject to special conditions set forth in Chapter 3, Article 3. 

B.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
C.  Application Requirements. Application for a conditional use permit shall follow the procedure for obtaining a building permit set forth in 6.2.3. Where a site plan is required by 6.2.9, the site plan review procedures shall apply prior to application for a building permit. Any special requirements or conditions set forth in Chapter 3, Article 3 shall be met prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
D.  Approval Process. 
1.  When a Site Plan is Required. Where site plan review is required (see 6.2.9), the Planning Director shall approve the site plan and so advise the applicant in writing. A determination by the Planning Director that all requirements and provisions have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval of the site plan, notice of which shall be provided to the applicant in writing. The Planning Director shall notify the applicant within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. 
2.  When a Site Plan is Not Required. Where no site plan review is required, the Planning Director shall approve or deny a conditional use permit application within 15 working days of receipt of all required information. 
E.  Expiration of Approval. A conditional use permit shall expire two years from the date of final approval by the City. 
F.  Approval is Site-Specific. A conditional use permit is specific to the site identified as part of the approval process, and all conditions and approvals shall run with the land unless otherwise stated in the approval. 
G.  Appeals. Appeal of a decision regarding a conditional use permit shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the decision, in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. 
6.2.8. - Certificate of Compliance. 
A.  Applicability. 

1.  This Section applies to development that has obtained site plan approval or a prior development permit. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any development, or phase thereof, where a Certificate of Compliance is required by this Section until such Certificate of Compliance has been issued. 
2.  The development, or an approved phase, may not be occupied or used until a Certificate of Compliance has been obtained from the Planning Director. Approved phase for purposes of this Section shall be a phase approved through the site plan review process, or a phase approved by the Planning Director prior to a request for an inspection for a Certificate of Compliance. In order for a phase to receive a Certificate of Compliance, that phase must be able to function alone with all required infrastructure, including, but not limited to, access drives, parking, drainage facilities, utilities, and required landscaping. 
B.  Approval Process. 
1.  The Planning Director shall verify with the City Engineer that construction has occurred in accordance with submitted plans for roads, parking, drainage systems and utilities, DHEC permits to operate water and sewer systems, and acceptance of completed water and sewer lines for permanent ownership, operation and maintenance. The Planning Director shall also verify with the City Horticulturist that compliance with the approved landscape plan, or submission of an approved performance guarantee, has occurred. 
2.  Following verification in accordance with paragraph 1 above, the Planning Director shall schedule and conduct a final inspection to verify compliance with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, requirements of subdivision approval, site plan approval or permit, and any other applicable approval. 
3.  Upon determination of compliance, the Planning Director shall issue a Certificate of Compliance to the applicant within 15 days of receipt of all required information. A determination by the Planning Director that all requirements and provisions have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval, notice of which shall be provided to the applicant in writing. 
C.  Temporary Certificate of Compliance. 
1.  At the discretion of the Planning Director, a Temporary Certificate of Compliance may be issued for a period not to exceed six months. 
2.  No Temporary Certificate of Compliance shall be issued for a development, or approved phase thereof, unless it meets both of the following conditions. 
a.  Development is substantially complete and the site is in a safe, accessible and useable condition; and 
b.  Development surety in an amount adequate to cover the cost of any incomplete improvements has been provided to the City. 
D.  Expiration. 
1.  A Certificate of Compliance shall not expire. 
2.  A Temporary Certificate of Compliance shall expire no later than six months after issuance. 
E.  Appeals. Appeal of a decision regarding a Certificate of Compliance shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the decision, in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. 
6.2.9. - Site Plan Review. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  All proposed development shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning Director, unless expressly exempted in paragraph B below. 
2.  For all development requiring site plan review by the Planning Director, simultaneous review by the Building Official may occur; however, no building permit shall be issued until site plan approval has been granted. 
B.  Development Exempt from Approval. The following activities or uses shall be exempt from site plan review although they may be reviewed under other administrative procedures where noted in this Section or other sections of this Ordinance. 
1.  Public Projects. The construction of any public street or utility service line, whether publicly or privately owned; such public project plans shall be submitted and reviewed by the Planning Director under a separate administrative procedure consistent with State law as specified in 6.2.12. 
2.  Maintenance. Maintenance of any structure. 
3.  Agriculture. The use or intended use of land, with or without accessory structures, for purposes of agriculture, raising of crops or animals, forestry, and similar uses, except for intensive agriculture. 
4.  Single-Family Residences. A detached single-family dwelling on a single lot, and, where permitted, a manufactured home not located in a manufactured home park. 
5.  Accessory Structures Integral to Permitted Development. The Planning Director may waive the site plan review requirement for any accessory structure or use, whether temporary or permanent. 
6.  Renovation or Improvement. Any renovation or improvement that does not involve an increase in impervious surface area (paved or roofed area or other surfaces that do not absorb water). 
C.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
D.  Application Requirements. A site plan review application shall be considered complete when the following items have been submitted (unless expressly waived by the Planning Director). 
1.  Application Form and Fee. A complete application form as approved by the Planning Director and appropriate fee. 
2.  Certification of Owner Consent. Certification, written and signed by the property owner-of-record, that such owner formally consents to the proposed development. 
3.  Property Deed. If necessary, a copy of the deed for the subject property. 
4.  Written Narrative. If necessary, a written narrative outlining the following. 
a.  The nature and details of the proposed development. 
b.  If the proposed site plan is a phase of a previously approved multi-phase plan or PR concept plan, a description of how such phase relates to such plan, in whole or in part. 
c.  The proposed form of ownership of the development (e.g. fee simple, horizontal property regime, property owner association, etc.) and detailed provisions for maintenance responsibility for all improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, parking areas, bikeways, pedestrian ways, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer systems, and landscaping and open space areas. 
d.  Any proposed dedication of improvements to any public agency, specifying such improvements and the affected agencies. 
e.  Any other information necessary to further clarify the proposed development. 
5.  Site Plan. A final site plan or set of plans in a quantity set by the Planning Director at a minimum scale of 1" = 30' or other appropriate scale showing the following (unless waived by the Planning Director). 
a.  Name of development; 
b.  Graphic scale; 
c.  Date of drawing and date of any revisions; 
d.  Vicinity sketch showing the general site location and depicting vehicular access routes accurately referenced to the nearest public road; 
e.  Topographic survey at one-foot contour intervals, or other topographic information acceptable to the City Engineer, unless waived by the City Engineer; 
f.  All existing permanent structures and facilities within 50 feet of the subject property; 
g.  All existing and proposed easements within 50 feet of the subject property; 
h.  Proposed site development, including land uses, any building or other structure locations and gross floor area, number and dimension of manufactured housing spaces, street, driveway, bike and pedestrian way, parking area layouts, interconnections with off-site facilities, and freestanding sign locations, if applicable. The plan view of buildings shall show limits of roofed areas and indicate the exterior wall line dimensioned to property lines; 
i.  Lighting standards (including height and intensity); 
j.  Location of proposed drainage system, including off-site areas of interconnection; 
k.  Location of proposed water and sanitary sewer system, including off-site areas of interconnection; 
l.  Location of other proposed waste disposal systems, including solid waste collection areas; 
m.  Table indicating calculations for required parking; 
n.  Location and dimensions for parking, handicapped accessible spaces, and off-street loading areas, where applicable; 
o.  Location of other utilities such as electrical, telephone, natural gas, and cable television; 
p.  Location of proposed open space areas; 
q.  Location of proposed buffer areas; 
r.  Zoning of the site, including overlay zones; 
s.  Where applicable, surveyed delineation of any wetland area and required buffers or other delineation of a natural feature on the site which is protected or defined under provisions of this Ordinance; 
t.  Notation as to FEMA/FIRM flood zones covering the site and proposed first floor elevation of all buildings; and 
u.  Fire hydrants and fire lanes. 
6.  Landscape Plan. Proposed landscape plan as required in 6.2.10. 
7.  Development Phasing Plan. A plan indicating the contemplated phasing of the proposed development, including the following. 
a.  A map depicting proposed phases at a minimum scale of 1" = 100' or other appropriate scale acceptable to the Planning Director. 
b.  A schedule report, listing by each proposed phase (as applicable) the number of residential units by type, number of hotel rooms, amount of gross building square footage for all nonresidential uses by type, expected type of open space improvements, and public improvements to be dedicated to any governmental or other public agency. 
8.  Approvals, Certifications, and Recommendations. Copy of approvals, certifications, and recommendations required by all appropriate City, County, State, and federal regulations for the proposed development, and documentation of compliance with such, as applicable, including, but not limited to the following. 
a.  South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control approval of water and sewer system design, where applicable. 
b.  South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control air, water quality, or solid waste permit. 
c.  Approval by providers of electric, natural gas, telephone, or cable television of the utility service and layout shown on the site plan. 

d.  South Carolina Department of Transportation encroachment permit, if necessary. 
9.  Offers of Dedication to Public Ownership. Any offers of dedication to public ownership and permanent public maintenance of improvements, such as streets, drainage systems, parks, pathways, etc., including the proposed manner of such dedication. 
10.  Legal Documents. Draft easements and other legal documents pertaining to the operation and management of the proposed development if required by any other provisions of this Ordinance. 
11.  Other Requirements. Any other items specifically required of a site plan application by any other provisions of this Ordinance, or other information deemed necessary for review by the Planning Director. 
E.  Approval Process. If the proposed site plan is determined by the Planning Director to be consistent with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the Planning Director shall approve the site plan and so advise the applicant in writing. A determination by the Planning Director that all such requirements and provisions have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval of the site plan, notice of which shall be provided to the applicant in writing. The Planning Director shall notify the applicant within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. 
F.  Maximum Review Period for Site Plan. 
1.  Failure to Act. Once an application for review of a site plan is considered complete according to 6.1.3.E, failure by the City to act within 60 days shall constitute approval of the plan, as set forth in Section 6-29-1150 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina. 
2.  Authorization to Proceed. A letter of approval, copy of the site plan signed by the Planning Director, or other authorization to proceed shall be sent by the Planning Director to the applicant within this 60-day period. If the plan is not approved, a written statement detailing the deficiencies shall be sent within the required 60-day period. 
3.  Extensions. The 60-day time period may be extended by mutual agreement between the Planning Director and the applicant. 
G.  Expiration of Approval. 
1.  The applicant shall have two years following approval of the site plan to submit a complete building permit application or, if no building permit is required, to obtain a Certificate of Compliance, or the site plan approval shall expire. 
2.  For any project where more than one building is to be built, the applicant may submit a series of building permit applications. The first application must be submitted within two years from the date site plan approval is granted. Each subsequent application must be submitted within 180 days from the date of issuance of a Certificate of Compliance or Certificate of Occupancy for the previous building, whichever shall occur first. The lapse of more than 180 days shall cause the expiration of the site plan approval. 
H.  Appeals. Appeals of administrative decisions shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the decision, in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. 
6.2.10. - Landscape Plan Review. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  Project Area. Except as set forth in paragraph 3. below, only the actual project area shall be used as the basis in determining compliance with this Section and the standards in Chapter 4, Article 6. 
2.  New Project. Landscape plan approval pursuant to this Ordinance shall be required for the following. 
a.  The project area of a multifamily residential or commercial development. 
b.  Conversion of a site from single-family residential use to any multifamily residential or commercial use. 
c.  Any off-street parking area in any zoning district, except for such an area for a detached single-family residential use with individual lots. 
3.  Renovation or Expansion of an Existing Development. 
a.  If the Building Official determines that the cost of renovation or expansion of an existing development in any one-year period exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value of the development as set by the Aiken County Tax Assessor, the South Carolina Tax Commission, or any other State or local governmental entity or official with authority to do so, or by the Building Official for developments that are tax-exempt, the entire development or site shall be brought into compliance with Chapter 4, Article 6. For a development composed of individual lots, the determination of whether the aforesaid limit has been exceeded shall be based on the appraised value of the individual lot or lots on which the proposed improvement or improvements will be located and not on the appraised value of the entire development, including other lots. 
b.  The Planning Director may waive any provision of Chapter 4 Article 6 if compliance would be impractical. 
c.  With the authorization of the Planning Director, the Building Inspector may issue a building permit to allow work on existing structures prior to approval of a landscape plan, but no other work may proceed. 
4.  Exemptions. 
a.  Those portions of public or private plant nurseries, tree farms, or botanical gardens used for the growing of plants for sale or for public use or enjoyment shall be exempt from the tree replacement provisions in 4.6.4. 
b.  A commercial or multifamily project under development in the DB District shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section, except that the project shall comply with the provisions of 4.6.4 regarding the following: 
i.  the removal or replacement of Significant and Grand trees; and 
ii.  the provision of a planting strip where off-street parking is provided along or adjacent to the street. 
B.  Approval Required Prior to Permit Allowing Grading or Construction. No grading permit, building permit, or other permit or approval allowing construction of a project may be issued by the City on a project subject to this Section without a Landscape Plan having been approved pursuant to this Section prior to such issuance. 
C.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
D.  Application Requirements. 
1.  An application for landscape plan approval shall be submitted to the Planning Director with the number of copies set by the Planning Director and the appropriate fee. 
2.  The Landscape Plan shall include the following (unless waived by the Planning Director). 
a.  Name of the project; 
b.  Tax parcel number; 
c.  Acreage or square footage of the lot or parcel on which the project is situated; 
d.  Acreage or square footage to be disturbed; 
e.  Dimensions of the lot or parcel on which the project is situated; 
f.  Graphic scale and north arrow; 
g.  Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner; 
h.  Name, address, and telephone number of the plan preparer; 
i.  Zoning of the site; 
j.  Location map at a scale sufficient to depict the exact location of the site; 
k.  Calculation of the area of the total site required to be landscaped and that actually provided; 
l.  In the planting strip, the location, type, and caliper of all Grand and Significant trees indicating those to be removed and existing trees to be counted in meeting the requirement for trees in the planting strip set forth in 4.6.4.B.1; 
m.  A tree survey on paper copies and a transparent medium depicting either 
i.  the DBH, location, and variety of the Grand and Significant Trees on the entire site and a clear indication of trees to be removed; and 
ii.  the total DBH of Significant Trees on the entire site and the total DBH of Significant Trees being removed; 
or 
iii.  the DBH, location, and variety of Grand Trees on the entire site and the Significant Trees in the yard area and a clear indication of trees to be removed; 
iv.  a listing of all Significant Trees in the buildable area including DBH and variety and the location of Significant Trees being saved to reach the 20 percent requirement; 
v.  the total DBH of Significant Trees on the entire site and the total DBH of Significant Trees being removed. 
n.  The protected area required around each tree based on one foot radius for each inch DBH; 
o.  A statement of the total caliper of the replacement inches required and the total caliper of those provided; 
p.  Clear delineation of the limits of clearing; 
q.  The number, location, and botanical and common names of plants to be installed including: 
i.  the caliper of required trees; 
ii.  shrubbery; and 
iii.  a clear indication of the areas to be seeded or sodded; 
r.  A notation that protective measures for trees, installation methods for new plant material, and maintenance of landscaped areas will comply with the standards established by this Ordinance, the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual, and the City Horticulturist; and 
s.  A notation provided by City Staff regarding maintenance and pruning; and 
t.  Other information as required by City staff to facilitate review. 

E.  Approval Process. The Planning Director shall have authority to approve landscape plans. The decision on approval by the Planning Director must be granted within 60 days of submission of a complete application unless a variance is required or an extension of time is mutually agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the Planning Director. 
F.  Expiration of Approval. Approval of a landscape plan shall expire two years from the date of final approval by the City, unless a building permit has been obtained and kept current. 
G.  Appeals. Appeals of administrative decisions shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of mailing of the decision, in accordance with the procedures in 6.2.20. 
6.2.11. - Street Name. 
A.  General. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve or deny the proposed name of any street consistent with the criteria set forth below. 
B.  Application Requirements. Any person proposing to name a street or change the name of a street shall submit a list of at least three proposed names in priority order to the Planning Commission. Where such application is not part of another development approval according to this Chapter, an appropriate application fee shall be required. 
C.  Criteria for New Names and Name Changes. 
1.  No new street name or proposed renaming of an existing street shall duplicate, be phonetically similar to, or in any way be likely to be confused with an existing street name, in spite of the use of prefixes or suffixes. 
2.  Names must be simple, logical, easy to read and pronounce, clear, and brief with no frivolous or complicated words or unconventional spellings. 
3.  Names that might reasonably be perceived as offensive shall not be permitted. 
4.  The use of alphabetical letters (such as "A" Street) is prohibited. 
5.  Preference will be given to names that have some association with Aiken or the immediate location of the road or place such as reference to local history or physiographic features. 
6.  Use of a common theme is recommended for names of streets that are associated with one another, such as those within a residential development. 
7.  In changing any street name, care should be taken to preserve local history and to minimize disruption and cost. 
8.  Intersecting streets shall not have the same or similar name. 
9.  A proposed street obviously in alignment with an existing street shall bear the name of the existing street to the extent practicable. 
10.  Street sections planned to be or likely to be connected in a straight line shall bear the same name; street sections not planned to be or unlikely to be connected shall not bear the same name. 
11.  A street that continues through an intersection should generally bear the same name. 
12.  A street making an approximate right-angle turn where there is no possibility of extending the street in either direction shall be considered to be continuous and be so named; where there is a choice of direction or a possibility of extending either section in the future, such configuration shall be considered to be an intersection and different names assigned. 
13.  A street name that otherwise meets the above criteria but in the judgment of the Planning Commission may be misleading or otherwise be inappropriate shall be disapproved. 
D.  Approval Process. 

1.  Public notice is required in accordance with 6.1.4. 
2.  Notice shall be mailed to the owners of property whose addresses would be affected at least ten days in advance of the required public hearing. 
3.  After holding the required public hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine if the name is suitable. 
4.  If the Planning Commission approves a new street name or name change, it shall so certify in writing and forward such certification by certified mail to the applicant, the Aiken County Register of Mesne Conveyance, the Aiken County 911 office, the post office and any other affected agencies, including all property owners-of-record on the affected street. 
5.  If the Planning Commission disapproves a new street name or name change, it shall so state in writing, including all reasons for the disapproval, and shall forward such notice to the party proposing the change within 15 days. 
E.  Appeals. Appeal of a decision on a street name may be made to City Council within 15 days by submission of a letter requesting it to the City Manager. 
6.2.12. - Public Project Review. 
A.  Applicability. The Planning Commission shall review all proposed public projects, except for minor utilities, for location, character, and extent. 
B.  Who May Apply. Any owner of land which is the subject of a public project or an agent authorized by such entity in writing may apply for public project review. 
C.  Application Requirements. An application for public project review shall include, but not be limited to, the following information and an appropriate fee for review. 
1.  An application form approved by the Planning Director; 
2.  Documentation in the form of a deed showing public ownership of the subject parcel, a lease indicating a public tenancy, or a notarized affidavit that more than 50 percent of the proposed project is funded with public monies; 
3.  A written narrative addressing the following. 
a.  The need for the project, with supporting documentation. 
b.  A reference to and, where practical, graphic depiction of the location of the proposed development on an Aiken County tax map with parcel number. 
c.  any freshwater wetland or conservation district boundary line. 
d.  The character of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area and with the characteristics of the site on which it is to be located. 
e.  The extent of the proposed development in terms of number of buildings, height of structures, total amount of square footage, number of parking spaces, site acreage, and other pertinent items as may be applicable. 
4.  Description of maintenance responsibility for all improvements including, but not limited to, streets, parking areas, paths, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer systems, open space areas, and solid waste disposal; 
5.  If applicable, a dimensioned site plan that conforms to the requirements of 6.2.9.D.5; and 
6.  Comments or approvals of affected agencies. 
D.  Approval Process. 
1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed public project in light of the Comprehensive Plan; the report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant before the scheduled Planning Commission public hearing. 
2.  Action by Planning Commission. 
a.  Following published and posted notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding any proposed public project. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall study the proposed public project taking into account the consistency of the proposed project with the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the public project proposal is compatible with the Comprehensive Plan and shall include written findings. 
d.  If the Planning Commission finds the proposal conflicts with the Comprehensive Plan, it shall forward its written findings and an explanation of its reasoning to the public entity proposing the project. 
e.  If the public entity proposes to proceed with its public project in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan, then the entity must publicly state its intention to proceed and its reasons for proceeding. The public entity must also provide written notice of its intention to proceed and its reasons to City Council and Planning Commission, and publish a notice in a publication of general circulation at least 30 days in advance of award of a contract or beginning of construction of the proposed public project. 
6.2.13. - Historic District/Landmark Designation. 
    See 5.2.2, Designation to the Aiken Historic Register. 
6.2.14. - Rezoning. 
A.  Applicability. This Section shall apply to any land within the City limits for which the existing zoning district is proposed to be changed. 
B.  Who May Apply. A proposed rezoning may be initiated by City Council, the Planning Commission, the City Manager or by the owner (or a designated agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record) of such property for which the rezoning is sought. Rezoning concurrent with annexation shall follow the procedures for annexation set forth in the Aiken City Code and 2.1.4. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  A complete application shall be on a form approved by the Planning Director accompanied by the appropriate fee and shall include the following. 
a.  A narrative addressing the reasons for the requested rezoning and the applicable review criteria set forth in 6.2.14.E. 
b.  A boundary plat of the subject property prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor. 
c.  Any additional information deemed necessary by the Planning Director. 
2.  Any designated agent shall submit written consent from all of the property owners-of-record. 
D.  Approval Process. 

1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a report that reviews the proposed rezoning in light of the Comprehensive Plan, the review criteria listed below, and the general requirements of this Ordinance. A copy of the report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant before the scheduled public hearing. 
2.  Planning Commission Recommendation. 
a.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and following appropriate notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding any proposed rezoning. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall study the proposed rezoning taking into account all factors which it may deem relevant including, but not limited to, consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, the review criteria listed below, and whether the proposed rezoning serves to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
c.  At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, modified approval, or denial of the rezoning. 
d.  The staff shall prepare a report of the Planning Commission deliberations and recommendation which shall be forwarded to City Council. 
3.  City Council Action. 
a.  A required public hearing by City Council held for the purpose of considering a rezoning shall be scheduled concurrent with the second reading of the ordinance adopting the proposed rezoning. 
b.  City Council shall consider the proposed rezoning at the earliest reasonable date and shall consider the report of the Planning Commission in making its decision. 
c.  Following City Council action, the applicant shall be notified within 15 days of the decision in writing. 
E.  Review Criteria. In making recommendations regarding proposed rezoning, the Commission shall consider and make findings on the following matters. 
1.  Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Compatibility with the zoning, conforming uses of nearby property, and character of the surrounding area. 
3.  Suitability of the subject property for uses permitted by the existing zoning. 
4.  Suitability of the subject property for uses permitted by the proposed zoning. 
5.  The need for additional property with the proposed zoning classification within the City limits. 
6.  Availability of sanitary sewer, water, stormwater, and transportation facilities. 
F.  Amendment of Official Zoning Map. Within 60 days of approval of a rezoning by City Council, the Planning Director shall amend the Official Zoning Map to reflect the change. 
G.  Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by City Council's decision may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.15. - Text Amendment. 
A.  Applicability. This Section shall apply to any portion of the text of this Ordinance that is proposed to be changed. 
B.  Who May Apply. 

1.  Any proposed text amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by any member of City Council, the Planning Commission, or the City Manager. Any citizen of the City may request in writing to the Planning Commission that a proposed text amendment be considered after which the Planning Commission may initiate an amendment. 
2.  Any proposed text amendment to this Ordinance initiated by a member of City Council may be given first reading prior to being referred to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation. 
C.  Approval Process. 
1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed amendment in light of the Comprehensive Plan and the general requirements of this Ordinance. A copy shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant before the scheduled public hearing. 
2.  Planning Commission Recommendation. 
a.  Following published notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall study the proposed amendment taking into account all factors which it may deem relevant including, but not limited to, the consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive Plan and whether the proposed amendment serves to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
c.  At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, modified approval, or denial of the amendment. 
d.  The staff shall prepare a report of the Planning Commission deliberations and recommendation which shall be forwarded to City Council. 
3.  City Council Action. 
a.  A required public hearing by City Council held for the purpose of considering a text amendment shall be scheduled concurrent with the second reading of the ordinance adopting the proposed amendment. 
b.  City Council shall consider the proposed amendment at the earliest reasonable date and shall consider the report of the Planning Commission in making a decision. 
c.  City Council shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the proposed amendment 
d.  Following City Council action, the applicant shall be notified within 15 days of the decision in writing. 
D.  Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by City Council's decision may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.16. - Planned Residential, Planned Commercial, and Planned Institutional. 
A.  Applicability. Land in the Horse District or listed on the Aiken Historic Register may not be zoned PR, PC, or PI. (Ord. 11082004A) 
B.  Who May Apply. The owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  An application form approved by the Planning Director and appropriate fee. 
2.  The concept plan shall include a sketch plan schematically showing major streets, major utilities, land uses, entrance locations on existing streets, major open space and buffers, and a conceptual drainage plan, along with a narrative addressing the proposed development explaining and tabulating the following: 
a.  land uses; 
b.  number of dwelling units by housing type; 
c.  elevations of facades of proposed buildings visible from an abutting street; (Ord. 05142007A) 
d.  residential density and/or square footage of nonresidential uses; 
e.  open space acreage; 
f.  potential traffic generation; 
g.  overall character and architectural style; 
h.  relationship of the proposed development to existing conforming development in the area; and 
i.  other related development features. 
3.  If the concept plan includes a subdivision plat in lieu of a sketch plan, maximum structure heights and maximum buildable area for each lot shall be shown. 
4.  A statement of how the proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
5.  Other relevant information as may be requested by the Planning Director. 
D.  Approval Process. 

1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed concept plan in light of the design criteria in Chapter 4, the Comprehensive Plan, and the general requirements of this Ordinance. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant before the scheduled public hearing. 
2.  Planning Commission Recommendation. 
a.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and following published, posted, and mailed notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall study the proposed concept plan taking into account all factors which it may deem relevant including, but not limited to, the design criteria in Chapter 4, the consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive Plan, and whether the proposed project serves to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
c.  At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, modified approval, or denial. 
d.  The staff shall prepare a report of the Planning Commission deliberations and recommendation which shall be forwarded to City Council. 
3.  City Council Action. 
a.  A required public hearing by City Council held for the purpose of considering a concept plan shall be scheduled concurrent with the second reading of the ordinance adopting the proposed annexation or rezoning. 
b.  City Council shall consider the proposed concept plan and the report of the Planning Commission in making a decision. City Council shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or deny it. 
c.  Following City Council action, the applicant shall be notified within 15 days of the decision in writing. 
E.  Expiration of Approval. City Council shall have the right to review a concept plan when no building permits have been issued in the past five years, and may choose not to issue further permits for the project until a revised concept plan has been approved. 
F.  Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by City Council's determination may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.17. - Attached Single-Family Residential. 
A.  Applicability. This Section shall apply to any attached single-family residential project. 
1.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
2.  Application Requirements. 
a.  An application form as approved by the Planning Director and appropriate fee. 
b.  The concept plan shall include a site plan schematically showing major streets, major utilities, land uses, entrance locations on existing streets, major open space and buffers, along with a narrative addressing the proposed development explaining and tabulating the following: 
i.  A site plan depicting the arrangement of streets, off-street parking, and buildings; 
ii.  number of dwelling units by housing type; 
iii.  dwelling unit density; 
iv.  open space acreage and percentage; 
v.  a tree survey complying with Chapter 4, Article 6 of this Ordinance; 
vi.  elevations of typical buildings; 
vii.  signage; 
viii.  a traffic study if required by the City's Traffic Management Ordinance; and 
ix.  other related development features. 
c.  A statement of how the proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
d.  Other relevant information as may be requested by the Planning Director. 
3.  Approval Process. 

a.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed concept plan in light of the design criteria in 4.2.9, the Comprehensive Plan, and the general requirements of this Ordinance. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant before the scheduled hearing. 
b.  Planning Commission Recommendation. 
i.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and following published, posted, and mailed notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. 
ii.  The Planning Commission shall study the proposed concept plan taking into account all factors which it may deem relevant including, but not limited to, the design criteria in 4.2.9, the consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive Plan, and whether the proposed project serves to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
iii.  At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, modified approval, or denial. 
iv.  The staff shall prepare a report of the Planning Commission deliberations and recommendation which shall be forwarded to City Council. 
c.  City Council Action. 
i.  A required public hearing by City Council held for the purpose of considering a concept plan shall be scheduled concurrent with the second reading of the ordinance. 
ii.  City Council shall consider the proposed concept plan and the report of the Planning Commission in making a decision. City Council shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the proposed concept plan. 
iii.  Following City Council action, the applicant shall be notified within 15 days of the decision in writing. 
4.  Amendments. Changes to an approved concept plan not considered significant may be approved by the Planning Director. Any change in the approved concept plan that would increase the dwelling unit density, substantially change the character of a development, or constitute a major revision of a development as determined by the Planning Director shall require approval by City Council after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission regarding the changes. A request for a revision of the concept plan shall be supported by a written statement explaining why the revisions are necessary or desirable and shall follow the approval procedure at 6.2.16. 
5.  Expiration of Approval. City Council shall have the right to review a concept plan when no building permits have been issued in the past five years, and the City may choose not to issue further permits until a revised concept plan has been approved. 
6.  Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by City Council's determination may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.18. - Special Exception. 
A.  Applicability. A special exception shall require approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
B.  Who May Apply. The property owner or an agent with written authorization from all owners-of-record may apply. 
C.  Application Requirements. An application for a special exception shall consist of information necessary for the Board of Zoning Appeals to make a determination regarding the request, including, but not limited to the following. 
1.  An application form as approved by the Planning Director and appropriate fee; 
2.  A sketch plan showing the preliminary proposed siting of structures or uses on the subject property. 
3.  The proposed density expressed in terms of dwelling units per acre, total square footage per acre, or other acceptable measure. 
4.  A letter addressing the consistency of the proposed use with the character and purpose of the zoning district in which it would be located. 
5.  The consistency of the proposed use with the Comprehensive Plan; 
6.  Any relevant conditions or restrictions as set forth in Chapter 3, Article 3; and 
7.  Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning Director. 
D.  Approval Process. 

1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed development in light of the Comprehensive Plan, the review criteria listed below, and the requirements of this Ordinance. A copy of the report shall be provided to the Board of Zoning Appeals and the applicant before the scheduled hearing. 
2.  Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. 
a.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and following posted and mailed notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the special exception application. 
b.  After review of the application and the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a written finding and approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the request. 
c.  If approval, or approval with modifications or conditions, is granted, the decision shall be communicated in writing by certified mail to the applicant within 25 days, and the applicant shall then be authorized to submit a site plan or building permit application consistent with this Chapter. (Ord. 01222001) 
E.  Special Exception Review Criteria. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall approve an application for a special exception if, and only if, the applicant demonstrates that the proposed use and any associated development will meet all of the following criteria. 
1.  Be in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan; and 
2.  Be consistent with the "character and purpose' statement of the applicable district; and 
3.  Be of a size, shape, and character suited for the proposed site; and 
4.  Be compatible with the existing uses adjacent to and near the property, and not otherwise adversely affect the development of the general neighborhood or of the district in which the use is proposed; and 
5.  Not generate vehicular traffic or create vehicular circulation problems or parking demands that have an unacceptably adverse impact on nearby properties when compared with uses permitted by right in the same district; and 
6.  Not be hazardous, detrimental, or disturbing to surrounding land uses due to noise, glare, smoke, dust, odor, fumes, water pollution, or general nuisance; and 
7.  Be consistent with existing and planned pedestrian and vehicular circulation adjacent to and near the property; and 
8.  Be adequately served by essential public services and facilities not requiring additional public expense; and 
9.  Not adversely affect any site or feature of historical, cultural, natural, or scenic importance; and 
10.  Conform to any specific criteria or conditions specified for that use as set forth in Chapter 3, Article 3; and 
11.  Not be contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare, provided that a denial based exclusively on this language shall include explicit findings regarding the way in which granting the special exception would be contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
F.  Conditions on Approvals. To ensure that a proposed special exception use will meet the criteria set forth above or to alleviate or mitigate potential adverse effects of such use, the Board of Zoning Appeals may place specific conditions on the approval addressing various issues including, but not limited to, the following. 
1.  Location, size, and orientation of uses, structures, and enclosures. 
2.  Additional setbacks for proposed uses, structures, or enclosures, from property lines or other structures or objects on nearby lots. 
3.  Additional buffers. 
4.  Fencing or walls. 
5.  Shielding of lighting. 
6.  Pedestrian circulation, including sidewalks or other pedestrian connections. 
7.  Vehicle circulation, including points of ingress and egress. 
8.  Improvements on adjacent streets. 
9.  Location of paving, off-street parking and loading, and service and delivery areas. 
10.  Hours of operation. 
11.  Protection of trees and other natural assets and additional landscaping. 
12.  Protection of sites of scenic, historical, or cultural importance. 
13.  Restriction on number, size, and location of signs. 
14.  Siting of uses to improve capability with adjacent development. 
15.  Restrictions on or reduction of the extent or intensity of the proposed use. 
G.  Expiration of Approval. A special exception approval shall expire on the date specified by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the approval, but not less than two years from approval, or two years after the date of the approval hearing where no date is specified, unless the applicant submits a complete site plan review application, or building permit application, where no site plan is required. 
H.  Revocation of Special Exception. 
1.  If an owner of property granted a special exception fails in any manner to follow the conditions of the special exception or engages in any activity prohibited by this Ordinance, or prohibited under the special exception, then the City of Aiken may, after five days of posting notice on the subject property granted the special exception, suspend the special exception for a period of 60 days. 
2.  Within 30 days of the date of posting this notice, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a hearing to ascertain all the facts in the matter. Notice of such hearing shall be in writing and shall set forth the reason for the hearing or the complaint against the property owner and shall be served upon the property owner in person, or by registered or certified mail return receipt requested to the owner's last known address. 
3.  In the event the City is not able to serve notice upon the owner in person, and any notice sent by registered or certified mail return receipt requested is returned by the postal service, the City shall cause such notice to be posted at the property-in-question, and such posting shall be a valid means of service. 
4.  If the Board of Zoning Appeals finds and concludes from the evidence that the special exception has been violated by the owner in any of the provisions under the special exception granted or conditions attached to it, it may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew such special exception. 
5.  In the case of revocation or nonrenewal, no application for special exception may be filed for a period of one year after the revocation becomes effective. 
6.  Following the entry of an order suspending or revoking a special exception, the property owner may seek judicial review in a manner provided by South Carolina law. The Board of Zoning Appeals may stay enforcement proceedings fur such order for a period of 30 days pending the filing or final disposition of proceedings of judicial review. 
I.  Approval is Site-Specific. Special exception approval is specific to the site identified as part of the approval process, and all conditions and approvals shall run with the land unless otherwise stated in the approval. 
J.  Appeal. Any applicant aggrieved by the Board's decision may appeal such determination to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.19. - Variance. 
A.  Who May File. The owner, developer, or agent with authorization from the owner, may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with the Planning Director. 
B.  Approval Process. 
1.  Staff Review and Report. The Planning Director shall prepare a staff report which shall be provided to the applicant or appellant before the Board of Zoning Appeals meeting at which the application is scheduled to be reviewed. 
2.  Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. 
a.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and following published and posted notice in accordance with 6.1.4, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing. 
b.  After review of the variance application and the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a written finding and give its approval; approval with modifications or conditions; or disapproval. 
c.  If approval or approval with modifications or conditions is granted, the decision shall be communicated in writing by certified mail to the applicant within 25 days, and the applicant shall then be authorized to submit a site plan or building permit application where no site plan is required. (Ord. 01222001) 
C.  Criteria for Approval of Variances. 
1.  Required Findings. A variance may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals if the Board concludes that the strict enforcement of any design and performance standard set forth in this Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship to the applicant and that, by granting the variance, the spirit of this Ordinance will be observed, public health, safety, and welfare will not be diminished, and substantial justice will be done. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship if the Board determines and expresses in writing all of the following findings. 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property; and 
b.  These conditions do not generally apply to other properties in the vicinity; and 
c.  Due to these conditions, the application of the Ordinance to the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property; and 
d.  The conditions are not the result of the applicant's own actions; and 
e.  Granting of the variance would not substantially conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this Ordinance; and 
f.  The authorization of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property or the public good, and the character of the district will not be harmed by the granting of the variance. 
2.  Limitations. The Board may not grant a variance the effect of which would be any of the following. 
a.  To permit a use of land or a structure that is not allowed in the applicable district. 
b.  To allow an increase in intensity or physical extension of a nonconforming use. 
c.  To increase the density of a use above that permitted by the applicable district. 
3.  Profitability Not to Be Considered. The fact that property may be developed more profitably should a variance be granted may not be considered grounds for a variance. 
4.  Hardship Due to Eminent Domain. Where the alleged hardship results from the taking of part of the property by eminent domain, thus reducing the land area available for parking, buffers, and other purposes, the applicant shall have the burden of proving that, after good-faith efforts by the applicant or previous owner, the condemning authority failed or refused to provide the applicant compensation adequate to cover the value of both the land actually taken and the economic impacts of the reduction in the size of the remaining property. Only if the applicant meets this burden of proof will a hardship under these conditions be considered adequate to justify the granting of a variance. 
D.  Expiration of Approval. A variance shall expire on the date specified by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the approval, but not less than two years from approval, or two years after the date of the approval hearing where no date is specified, unless the applicant submits a complete site plan review application, or building permit application where no site plan is required. 
E.  Appeal. Any party aggrieved by the Board's decision may appeal such determination to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
6.2.20. - Appeal of Administrative Decision. 

A.  Who May Appeal. Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision or interpretation made pursuant to this Ordinance may bring an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing an application with the Planning Director. An aggrieved person is defined as any property owner within 300 feet of the property for which a decision has been rendered and may include persons owning property beyond 300 feet if it is determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals (based upon information provided by the appellant) that such property owners may be affected by a decision or interpretation. 
B.  Deadline for Submission of Application. An application for appeal shall be filed (received by the Planning Director or postmarked) not later than 15 days after the decision being appealed in order to be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
C.  Review Process. 
1.  Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, and at the conclusion of the proceeding on the variance request or the appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall take one of the following actions, consistent with the provisions of this Article. 
a.  Affirm the action of the official that made the decision. 
b.  Modify the action of the official and, to that end, have all the powers of the official from which the appeal is taken, and may issue a permit or direct that a permit be issued. 
c.  Reverse the action of the official and, to that end, have all the powers of the officer from which the appeal is taken, and may issue a permit or direct that a permit be issued. 
2.  Every order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Board shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. 
D.  Appeal to Court of Common Pleas. Any party aggrieved by the Board's decision may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
CHAPTER 7 - REVIEW AUTHORITIES 

7.1.1. - Building Official. 
A.  Designation. The Director of Public Safety shall designate the Building Official for the City who shall be the Building Official to whom reference is made throughout this Ordinance. 
B.  Delegation. Where this Ordinance assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the Building Official, the Building Official may delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or employee of the City. 
C.  Powers and Duties. The Building Official shall perform duties and possess powers as follows: 
1.  Issue building permits (6.2.3) and certificates of occupancy (6.2.4); and 
2.  Review telecommunication facility plans not requiring approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals (6.2.5). 
D.  Appeal. Appeal from any administrative decision of the Building Official shall follow the procedures established in 6.2.20. 
7.1.2. - Zoning Official. 
A.  Designation. The Planning Director shall designate a Zoning Official to whom reference is made throughout this Ordinance. 
B.  Delegation. Where this Ordinance assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the Zoning Official, the Zoning Official may delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or employee of the City with the approval of the Planning Director. 
C.  Powers and Duties. The Zoning Official shall perform the duties and possess powers as follows. 
1.  Enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
2.  Any other delegated by the Planning Director or otherwise expressly directed in this Ordinance. 
D.  Appeal. Appeal from any administrative decision of the Zoning Official shall follow the procedures established in 6.2.20. 
7.1.3. - Planning Director. 
A.  Designation. The City Manager shall designate the Director of the Planning Department of the City, who shall be the Planning Director to whom reference is made throughout this Ordinance. 
B.  Delegation. Where this Ordinance assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the Planning Director, the Planning Director may delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or employee of the City. 
C.  Powers and Duties. The Planning Director shall perform the duties and possess the powers as follows. 
1.  Make written administrative interpretations of this Ordinance (6.2.2). 
2.  Review and take final action on sign permits (6.2.6), conditional use permits (6.2.7), and certificates of compliance (6.2.8). 
3.  Review and take final action on site plans (6.2.9) and landscape plans (6.2.10). 
4.  Review and make recommendations on street names (6.2.11), public project review (6.2.12), designation of Historic Districts or landmarks (6.2.13), rezoning (6.2.14), text amendments (6.2.15), and Planned Residential, Planned Commercial, and Planned Institutional developments (6.2.16). 
5.  Review and make recommendations on special exceptions (6.2.18) and variances (6.2.19). 
D.  Appeal. Appeal from any administrative decision of the Planning Director shall follow the procedures established in 6.2.20. 
7.1.4. - Planning Commission. 
A.  Authority. The Planning Commission is hereby established, pursuant to the authority of Section 6-29-310, et seq., of the Code of Laws of South Carolina. 
B.  Powers and Duties. The Planning Commission shall perform the duties and possess the powers as follows: 
1.  Take final action on street names (6.2.11) and public project review (6.2.12); and 
2.  Make recommendations to City Council on designation of Historic Districts or landmarks (6.2.13), rezoning (6.2.14), text amendments (6.2.15), and Planned Residential (6.2.16). 
C.  Staff to Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall work with the Planning Director to provide appropriate staff for the Commission. 
D.  Appeal. Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the Planning Commission may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
7.1.5. - City Council. 
A.  Powers and Duties. City Council shall perform the duties and possess the powers as set forth in this Ordinance, including final action on designations to the Aiken Historic Register (6.2.13), rezoning (6.2.14), text amendments (6.2.15), and Planned Residential, Planned Commercial, and Planned Institutional developments (6.2.16). 
B.  Appeal. Any party aggrieved by City Council's actions may appeal such action to the Court of Common Pleas of Aiken County within 30 days of written notification. 
7.1.6. - Board of Zoning Appeals. 
A.  Creation. The Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established, pursuant to the authority of Section 6-29-780, et seq., of the Code of Laws of South Carolina. 
B.  Membership, Terms and Compensation. 
1.  Number, Appointment. The Board shall consist of seven members appointed by City Council and shall include, to the extent practicable, at least one attorney and one design professional (either a registered architect or a registered landscape architect). None of the members shall hold any other public office or position in the City or County. A Planning Commission member may be appointed to serve as a non-voting ex-officio member of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
2.  Terms. All members shall be appointed for three (3) year terms. All terms shall end on December 1 of the applicable year or until a replacement is appointed. (Ord. 02122001A) 
3.  Current Members. Members of the Board of Zoning Appeals on the effective date of this Ordinance shall continue to serve until their respective terms expire. 
4.  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by City Council for the balance of the unexpired term. 
5.  Removal. After written notice, City Council may remove a member for cause, which may include, but not be limited to, nonattendance at meetings. 
6.  Compensation. City Council shall determine the compensation of members, if any. 
C.  Officers, Meetings, Quorum. 
1.  Officers. The Board shall elect one of its members Chair and another Vice-Chair, each of whom shall serve one-year terms beginning in January and ending the following December. The Board shall appoint a Secretary who may be an official or employee of the City and need not be a member of the Board. 
2.  Meetings. The Board shall meet at the call of the Chair and at such regular times as the Board may determine. All meetings shall be held at a designated place and shall be open to the public. 
3.  Quorum. A minimum of four members of the Board shall be required as a quorum in order for the Board to conduct business. 
4.  Notice of Meetings. Public notice of all meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be provided in accordance with 6.1.4. 
5.  Witnesses. The presiding officer may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
6.  Rules of Proceeding. The Board shall adopt rules for the conduct of business. 
7.  Penalty for Contempt. In case of contempt by a party, witness, or other person before the Board of Appeals, the Board may certify this fact to the Court of Common Pleas of the County in which the contempt occurs and, after hearing, the judge may impose any penalty authorized by law. 
8.  Minutes. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact. The Board shall keep records of its deliberations and other official actions, all of which must be filed in the office of the Planning Director and must be a public record. 
D.  Territorial Jurisdiction. 
1.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have jurisdiction over all lands within the City. 
2.  City Council may expand the jurisdiction of the Board of Zoning Appeals by ordinance and/or intergovernmental agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Section 6-29-330 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina. 
E.  Powers and Duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals has the following powers. 
1.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an official in the administration or enforcement of this Ordinance (6.2.20). 
2.  To take final action on requests for special exceptions (6.2.18) and variances (6.2.19). 
F.  Staff. The Department of Planning shall serve as staff to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
G.  Order of Board on Appeal. In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of this Section, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken. Provided a quorum is present, the concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance or to affect any variation in this Ordinance. 
H.  Appeal from Board of Zoning Appeals. A person who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, or an officer or agent of the City, may appeal from a decision of the Board to the Court of Common Pleas in and for the County by filing with the Clerk of the Court a petition in writing, setting forth plainly, fully, and distinctly why the decision is contrary to law. The appeal must be filed within 30 days after the decision of the Board. The appeal shall proceed in accordance with Sections 6-29-820 through 6-29-850 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina. 
7.1.7. - Design Review Board. 
A.  Creation. The Design Review Board of the City of Aiken, South Carolina, is hereby established. 
B.  Number. The Board shall be composed of seven members. 
C.  Appointment. The members of the Board shall be appointed by City Council which shall allow the public an adequate and reasonable opportunity to comment on all such appointments. Members of the Board shall be installed and assume their duties at the first regular meeting of the Board following their appointment. 
D.  Qualifications. All members appointed to the Board must be residents of the City of Aiken and must have demonstrated their civic interest, and be available to attend meetings. City Council shall endeavor to appoint persons with diverse relevant qualifications. At least three members shall be persons who are knowledgeable in one or more of the following disciplines: archeology; historic preservation, architecture and construction; American, South Carolina and local history, urban planning and design; structural engineering; law; or real estate. To the extent that they are available, an historic preservationist and a licensed architect shall serve as members of the Board at all times. 
E.  Terms of Office. 
1.  The term of office of each member of the Board shall be two years. 
2.  The term of office of each Board member shall commence January 1 and shall expire on December 31 of the final year of the term, or until a replacement is approved. The terms of each member of the Board shall expire on December 31 of the final year of the term, regardless of the date of appointment. 
F.  Appointment to Fill a Vacancy. Any vacancy on the Board due to death, resignation, or any other cause shall be filled by appointment by City Council within 30 days of the occurrence of the vacancy. The person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term of the member being replaced. 
G.  Meetings, Quorum, and Voting. The Board shall hold an annual meeting in January to elect officers and to conduct other pending business. The Board shall meet at least monthly to hear applications and conduct business under its jurisdiction, unless there are no pending requests to be considered. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman, a majority of the members of the Board, or upon request by City Council. A majority of the members of the full Board shall constitute a quorum for the conducting of business, and a majority vote of those members eligible to vote shall be necessary for approval of any action by the Board. 
H.  Officers. The Board shall elect from its membership a Chairman and Vice-Chairman who shall serve for one year or until their successors are elected. A staff member of the City of Aiken's Planning Department shall serve as Secretary but shall not be a member of the Board. 
I.  Compensation. Members shall serve without compensation except for reimbursement of authorized expenses related to the performance of their duties. 
J.  Jurisdiction . The Board may exercise the powers granted it pursuant to this Chapter and Sections 6-29-870 through 6-29-940, Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, and successor provisions, within the corporate limits of the City of Aiken. 
K.  Powers and Duties. The Design Review Board shall have the following powers. 
1.  Adopt its own bylaws not inconsistent with this Chapter or applicable statutes of the State and appoint subcommittees as needed. 
2.  Accept such gifts, grants, and money as may be appropriate for the purposes of this Chapter. Such money may be expended only for advancing the purposes of this Chapter and must be appropriated by City Council as part of the regular City budget. 
3.  Recommend for designation, or removal of designation, subject to approval by City Council, Historic Districts and Historic Sites (Ord. 04142003A) and the expansion of existing Historic Districts or Historic Sites (Ord. 04142003A). 
4.  Cooperate with and enlist the assistance of persons, organizations, corporations, foundations, and public agencies in matters involving historic preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and adaptive usage and such outside expertise it deems necessary for assistance or advice on matters pending before it. 
5.  Conduct meetings. 
6.  Hold public hearings, investigate, review, place conditions on, and make decisions on: 
a.  applications, plans, Certificates of Appropriateness, or other permits for alteration, construction, demolition, or relocation of structures within Historic Districts or which affect Historic Sites or Historic Districts; (Ord. 10282008A); 
b.  recommendations on designations of Historic Districts and Historic Sites (Ord. 04142003A); 
c.  applications, plans, Certificates of Appropriateness, or other permits for alteration, construction, demolition, or relocation of structures within Overlay Districts or which may affect Overlay Districts; 
7.  Issue cease-and-desist orders restraining any violation of this Chapter or a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
8.  Review and evaluate relevant surveys and studies of structures, sites, districts, and landmarks performed by any unit of government or private organization, and compile appropriate descriptions, facts, photographs, and summaries of such surveys. 
9.  Provide for periodic updated surveys and research efforts to identify neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures, and objects that have historic, archeological, community, architectural, or aesthetic importance, interest, or value. 
10.  Compile and maintain the Aiken Historic Register and maintain a local inventory of historic structures including whether each is a Landmark, Contributing, or Noncontributing. (Ord. 04142003A) 
11.  Review and make recommendations to City Council and other City boards, commissions, and departments on projects involving historic properties or structures, projects in Historic Districts, or related matters not subject to the Certificate of Appropriateness requirements of this Chapter. 
12.  Discharge all other powers and duties as set forth in this Chapter or necessarily implied therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 02082016B , § 1, 2-8-2016) 
CHAPTER 8 - NONCONFORMITIES 

8.1.1. - Authority to Continue. 
    Nonconformities shall be allowed to continue in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
8.1.2. - Burden of Proof. 
    The burden of establishing that any nonconformity is a legal nonconformity as defined in this Ordinance shall, in all cases, be upon the owner of such nonconformity and not upon the City or any other person. 
8.1.3. - Repairs and Maintenance. 
A.  Normal Maintenance. Repairs and normal maintenance required to keep a nonconforming use or structure in a safe condition are permitted, provided that no alterations may be made except those allowed by this Chapter or required by law or ordinance. 
B.  Restoring Unsafe Buildings. Except as provided above, nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the Building Official or complying with his lawful requirements. 
8.1.4. - Nonconforming Uses. 
A.  Continuation. Any use lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance may be continued even though it does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance for the District in which it is located. Similarly, whenever a text amendment or rezoning renders a use nonconforming, any existing lawful use may be continued. However, no building or structure or premises where a nonconforming use has ceased for more than 12 months, or has changed to a permitted or conforming use, shall again be used in a nonconforming manner. 
B.  Extension or Alteration. No building, structure, or premises containing a nonconforming use shall hereafter be extended unless such extension or alteration shall conform to the building line setback, height limitations, yard, and other provisions regulating the size and placement of buildings, structures, or premises for the district in which it is located. 
C.  Accessory Use. No use that is accessory to a principal nonconforming use shall continue after such principal use shall have ceased or terminated unless it conforms to all provisions of this Ordinance. 
8.1.5. - Nonconforming Buildings and Structures. 
A.  Continuation. Any nonconforming building or structure lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance or of amendments to this Ordinance may continue. 
B.  Reconstruction. 
1.  If a residential or nonresidential building or structure (including any accessory structures) is damaged by reason of fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, riot, war, or an act of God, it may be repaired, reconstructed, and used as before and if the damage does not exceed 50 percent of its replacement value, as determined by the Building Official, and if the repairs and reconstruction are done within 12 months from the time such damage occurred. 
2.  If a nonresidential building or structure (including any accessory structures) is damaged and if such damage is greater than 50 percent of its replacement valuation as determined by the Building Official, such building or structure may only be reconstructed to conform with the provisions regulating the placement of buildings and structures in the district in which it is situated. 
3.  If a residential building or structure (including any accessory structure) is damaged greater than 50 percent of its replacement valuation as determined by the Building Official, such building or structure may be repaired, reconstructed, and used as before if the repairs and reconstruction are done within 12 months from the time such damage occurred. The Building Official may require conformance with specific provisions of this Ordinance where deemed necessary to resolve public safety concerns (see 4.1.3.A). 
4.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no illegal use shall be re-established. 
C.  Alteration or Additions. Alterations and/or additions to a nonconforming building or structure may be permitted as long as the alterations and/or additions do not increase the nonconformity of the building or structure to the building setback line, height limitations, yard, or other provisions regulating the size and placement of buildings and structures for the district in which the nonconforming building or structure is located. 
8.1.6. - Nonconforming Manufactured Housing or Mobile Home. 
    A manufactured home or mobile home that is located on an individual lot at the time that the property is designated as part of the RSM District and which does not conform to the requirements for a manufactured home contained in 4.2.7 may remain on the property subject to the following requirements. 
1.  The property owner shall submit with the request for rezoning to RSM a written confirmation that the unit has been registered with Aiken County in the form of a Certificate of Occupancy issued by the County Building Official, or other proof of registration and, if applicable, a Septic Tank Permit issued by the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC). 
2.  The unit shall be brought into compliance with the requirements for manufactured homes contained in 4.2.8, items f, g, j and k. Any changes needed to meet these requirements shall be completed within 180 days following a zoning change to the RSM District. 
8.1.7. - Nonconforming Manufactured or Mobile Home Park. 
    The owner of a manufactured home park or mobile home park located in the City of Aiken which is made nonconforming by the passage of this Zoning Ordinance shall have a period of two years from the effective date of this Ordinance to bring their park into conformance with this Ordinance (see 4.2.8). Failure of the owner to bring a manufactured home park or mobile home park into compliance with the requirements of this Section of the Zoning Ordinance shall result in the owner's loss of the City of Aiken business license and require the removal of all manufactured or mobile homes from the park. 
8.1.8. - Nonconforming Junk or Salvage Yards. 
    The owner of a junkyard, salvage yard, or other facility in which inoperable vehicles are stored which is made nonconforming by the passage of this Zoning Ordinance shall have a period of two years from the effective date of this Ordinance to bring the yard or facility into conformance with this Ordinance (see 4.3.7). Failure of the owner to bring the yard or facility into compliance shall result in the owner's loss of the City of Aiken business license and require the removal of all vehicles and other material stored in the yard or facility. 
8.1.9. - Nonconforming Lots of Record. 
    Legally recorded lots-of-record that do not meet the minimum area or frontage requirements may nevertheless be used for any of the uses permitted in the respective zoning district, provided that all other requirements of this Ordinance are met. 
8.1.10. - Nonconforming Adult Businesses. 
    If any adult business lawfully operating on November 9, 1992, is in violation of the location restrictions of 3.3.2.A because two or more adult businesses are located within 1500 feet of each other, but is otherwise in a permitted location, the business that was first established and continually operated at that location is the conforming use and the later established business is nonconforming. 
8.1.11. - Nonconforming Stables in the RSS District. 
    Any stalls in the RSS District existing before October 14, 1996 may be rented out for the stabling of pleasure horses. Anyone who has horses and discontinues the use for more than 12 months may rent the stalls again as long as the stalls were existing as of October 14, 1996. Lots and the horses thereon must be maintained in accordance with the provisions of 3.3.21.C. 
8.1.12. - Horses on Nonconforming Lots. 
A.  RSS District. Horses may be kept on nonconforming lots in the RSS District that contain one acre or more; for nonconforming lots containing less than an acre, permission to keep horses must be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
B.  HD District. Horses may be kept on any nonconforming lot in an HD District. 
8.1.13. - Nonconforming Signs. 
A.  Continuation Allowed. Continuation in accordance with this Section is permitted for any sign or sign structure, except portable or mobile signs, not conforming with the provisions of Chapter 4, Article 4, but which was lawfully existing: 
1.  Prior to January 10, 1994; 
2.  Prior to the effective date of any amendment to the Zoning Ordinance making the sign or sign structure nonconforming; or 
3.  Prior to the effective date of an annexation (unless removal is required as a condition of annexation). 
B.  Removal or Compliance Required. Notwithstanding paragraph A. above, a nonconforming sign or sign structure must be removed or brought into compliance with this Ordinance within 90 days after notification by the Zoning Official if the sign or sign structure is meets any of the following standards. 
1.  Not maintained in a safe and sound condition as determined by the Zoning Official; 
2.  Damaged to the extent that the cost to repair it exceeds more than 50 percent of its original cost as determined by the Building Official; 
3.  Abandoned; 
4.  Changed by the alteration of 80 percent or more of the identification area of the face of the sign, whether or not it increases the sign's nonconformity; 
5.  Located on a site that has been vacated by the use the sign identifies; or 
6.  Required to be removed or changed by a condition in an annexation ordinance adopted by City Council. 
C.  Repair, Renovation, Alteration or Replacement. Any sign or sign structure not conforming with the provisions of this Ordinance or any amendments thereto shall not be repaired, renovated, or altered in a manner that will add to, enlarge, or extend its nonconformity and shall not be replaced by a nonconforming sign or sign structure. 
CHAPTER 9 - ENFORCEMENT 

9.1.1. - Enforcement by Zoning Official. 
    The Zoning Official of the City of Aiken, South Carolina, and when necessary, the Aiken Department of Public Safety, shall enforce the provisions of this ordinance within the police jurisdiction of the City in the manner and form and with the power provided in laws of the State of South Carolina and the City Code for the City of Aiken. The Aiken Department of Public Safety shall have the right to investigate potential Zoning Ordinance violations pursuant to existing State of South Carolina and federal laws. Properties are subject to inspection of the premises by the Zoning Official without prior notice during normal business hours. (Ord. 05282001B) Any official authorized to enforce this Ordinance may stop any work determined to violate the provisions hereof. (Ord. 04082002A) 
9.1.2. - Violations and Penalties. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or in any other capacity, to violate any provision of this Ordinance. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any such provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both. Each day that any violation of any provision of this Ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
9.1.3. - Violation of Landscaping and Tree Preservation Provisions. 
A.  Tree Removal. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a tree in violation of this ordinance, and upon conviction therefor, shall be punished as provided by Section 1-13 of the Aiken City Code. Each tree removed in violation of Chapter 4, Article 6 shall constitute a separate offense. 
2.  In the event the Zoning Official determines that trees have been removed in violation of Chapter 4, Article 6, he may require the property owners of the site to replace the removed trees within a specified period of time with trees of a variety from the Approved Tree List having a minimum caliper of two inches. (Ord. 04082002A) The replacement trees shall be planted on the site and have a cumulative caliper at least equal that of the trees removed, unless, in the opinion of the City Horticulturist, such replanting is infeasible due to lack of available area in which case an appropriate amount shall be placed into the Tree Fund as set forth at 4.6.4.B.2.d. (Ord. 04082002A) The variety and location of the replacement trees shall be approved by the Planning Director. (Ord. 04082002A) The decision of the Zoning Official on replacement may be appealed pursuant to 6.2.20 of this Ordinance. 
B.  Maintenance. 
1.  If the Zoning Official determines that a site fails to comply with the maintenance requirements of 4.6.8.B (Ord. 04082002A), he shall notify the property owner in writing of the nature of the deficiency and that corrective action is required within 30 days. The Zoning Official may allow additional time for corrective action if adverse weather or other unavoidable circumstances would prevent immediate compliance and shall notify the applicant in writing thereof. If corrective action is not taken within the time allowed, the Zoning Official shall notify the City Attorney who shall be responsible for taking appropriate additional measures to obtain compliance and/or initiate enforcement proceedings or prosecution. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to violate the maintenance requirements of Chapter 4, Article 6 of this Ordinance, and, upon conviction, any such person shall be punished as provided by Section 1-13 of the Aiken City Code. Each day that a violation continues after the lapse of the 30-day compliance period or other compliance period authorized in writing by the Zoning Official or other City officer shall constitute a separate offense. 
3.  The failure to comply with the maintenance requirements of Chapter 4, Article 6 (Ord. 04082002A) of this Ordinance after the lapse of the 30-day compliance period or other compliance period authorized in writing by the Zoning Official or other City officer shall constitute an additional ground for suspension or revocation of a business license pursuant to Section 15 of the Business License Ordinance. 
9.1.4. - Violation of Overlay District Provisions. 
    The Zoning Official shall periodically inspect work in progress under a Certificate of Appropriateness. In the event that this Chapter or a Certificate of Appropriateness is violated, the Design Review Board, Zoning Official, or Building Official may issue an order requiring the person or persons committing the violation to cease and desist immediately therefrom. The cease-and-desist order shall remain in effect until any Certificate of Appropriateness required for the work is approved. A violation of a cease-and-desist order issued by the Board or the Zoning Official or Building Official is hereby declared unlawful and shall be punished as set forth in 9.1.2. 
CHAPTER 10 - DEFINITIONS 

10.1.1. - General. 
    The following provisions shall govern the text of this Ordinance. 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future. 
2.  Words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular. 
3.  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
4.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
5.  All time periods are in calendar days, unless expressly stated otherwise. 
10.1.2. - Words and Terms. 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are defined as follows. 
    ACCESS: Entrance for vehicles to and/or exit from land fronting on the public street system. 
    ACCESSORY BUILDING: A detached subordinate building not more than two stories in height, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building on the same lot. 
    ACCESSORY USE: A use which is subordinate to but associated with the principal use on the same lot. 
    ADULT BUSINESS: Any business activity, establishment, store, club, or other use that allows or involves the following. 
1.  Persons appearing live before the public or audiences in a state of nudity or semi-nudity for any form of compensation or consideration. 
2.  Live performances characterized by specified sexual activities. 
3.  Sale or rental in any form of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
4.  Coin-operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
5.  As one of its principal business purposes, offering for sale or rental for any form of consideration audio recordings in any form, books, magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, or visual representations depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    ADULT CARE FACILITY: A facility providing care for nonresident adults for portions of any 24-hour period. As an incidental use, any such facility may provide overnight stays for brief period of time, not to exceed two weeks, for a client whose primary caregiver is unavailable. 
    AGRICULTURE, INTENSIVE: Animal agricultural practices that intensify traditional farming or ranching techniques, including feedlots, brooders, and factory farming. 
    AIKEN HISTORIC REGISTER: The listing of all districts and sites designated by City Council under this Ordinance. 
    ALLEY: A service roadway that usually affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property, is not intended for general traffic circulation, and is 20 feet or less in width. 
    ALTERATION: For the purposes of Chapter 5, any act or process that changes the exterior architectural appearance of a structure. 
    ANTENNA: A device, dish, or an array of the same used to transmit or receive telecommunications signals. 
    APARTMENT, ACCESSORY: An additional dwelling unit that is subordinate to the principal dwelling unit on the property whether located within the principal structure or in a separate accessory building. (Ord. 04082002A) 
    APPROVED TREE LIST: A listing of tree varieties set forth in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual prepared by the City Horticulturist including trees specifically allowed in parking lots. 
    ARTERIAL, MAJOR: A street whose primary function is to carry large volumes of traffic at higher speeds through the City or from one part of the City to another, that provides access to adjacent properties only if absolutely necessary, that typically has a minimum ADT of 15,000, and is usually designated as a State or federal primary highway. 
    ARTERIAL, MINOR: A street whose primary function is to carry large volumes of traffic at higher speeds through the City or from one part of the City to another, that provides access to adjacent properties on a limited basis, and typically has an ADT of 5,000 to 15,000. 
    ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: See "Residential Assisted Living Facility." 
    ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL: A group of at least three dwelling units each having ground-floor outside access and separated by common walls without openings. 
    ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROJECT: A one-family dwelling with ground-floor outside access attached to one or more similar one-family dwellings by common vertical walls without openings; such units are in groups of at least three (with two units being considered a duplex). 
    AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOPS: A building or site on or in which a business is engaged in repair or equipping of vehicles. 
    AUTOMOBILE SALES or STORAGE YARDS or LOTS: An open premise used for the storage or sale of complete and operable automobiles. 
    AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD or JUNK YARD: Any place used principally for wrecking or storage where one or more vehicles not in running condition, or the parts thereof, are stored in the open, or any building or structure used principally for wrecking or storage of automobiles not in running condition. 
    BANK: Any bank, savings and loan, credit union, or similar institution accepting deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 
    BED AND BREAKFAST HOME STAY: An owner-occupied building or portion thereof and associated accessory buildings offering transient lodging with a maximum of three guest bedrooms and meals, with no meeting rooms. 
    BED AND BREAKFAST INN: An owner-occupied building or portion thereof and associated accessory buildings offering transient lodging in four to ten guest bedrooms and meals and, with special exception approval, offering meeting rooms and meals to those other than guests on a limited basis. 
    BED AND BREAKFAST/MEETING FACILITY: An owner-occupied building or portion thereof and associated accessory buildings offering transient lodging in four to ten guest bedrooms and meals and, with special exception approval, offering meeting rooms and meals to those other than guests on a larger scale than that possible in a Bed and Breakfast Inn. 
    BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS: The board or body as set forth under the laws of the State of South Carolina whose purpose is to hear appeals from decisions of administrative officials and make decisions on requests for variances and special exceptions pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance. 
    BUFFER: Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
    BUILDABLE AREA: That portion of a lot or site on which a principal building could be erected or placed as permitted by this Ordinance. 
    BUILDING: A free-standing, roofed structure for the shelter of persons, animals, equipment, or materials. 
    BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the level of the established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building, to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip, or gabled roof. For buildings set back from the street or right-of-way line, the height shall be measured from the average elevation of the natural grade along the front of the buildings, provided the distance of the building or buildings from the street right-of-way line is not less than the heights of such grade above the established grade of the street. In case of through lots, or double front lots, the established grade of such abutting street shall govern to one-half the depth of the lot. 
    BUILDING LENGTH: For a rectangular building, the horizontal dimension that is greater (Figure 1). For a building that is composed of two or more interconnected rectangles, the horizontal dimension of that composite building that is greater (Figure 2). For a building with an irregular shape, the greater horizontal dimension measured to the farthest extent of the exterior walls (Figure 3). (Ord. 04082013) 

    BUILDING OFFICIAL: The person who issues building permits and Certificates of Occupancy and performs other duties as set forth at 7.1.1. 
    BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In a residential zoning district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a principal building on the lot on which the same is situated. 
    CALIPER: The diameter in inches of a tree trunk measured six inches above the grade of the surface of the ground at the base of the tree. For a tree to be acceptable as a replacement tree and for measurement pursuant to this method, the tree must consist of only one trunk at the point of measurement. 
    CANDELA: The basic unit of luminous intensity adopted under the Systeme International d'Unites; equal to 1/60 of the luminous intensity per square centimeter of a black body radiating at a temperature of 2.046 degrees Kelvin. 
    CANDLE POWER: Luminous intensity measured in candelas. 
    CANOPY, ATTACHED: An attached canopy is a rigid multi-sided structure covered with fabric, metal, or other materials supported by a building at one or more points or extremities and by columns or posts embedded in the ground at other points or extremities; may be illuminated by means of internal or external source. 
    CANOPY, FREE STANDING: A rigid multi-sided structure covered with fabric, metal, or other materials supported by columns or posts embedded in the ground; may be illuminated by means of internal or external source. 
    CATERING TRUCK : A vehicle mounted food product establishment designed to be readily movable (including, but not limited to food trucks, food trailers and pushcarts) from which food and/or drink is distributed or served to attendees of an event in which service is not targeting sale to the general public. 
    CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT: An area generally bounded by Barnwell Avenue, Union Street, the Railroad Cut, and Greenville Street SW. 

    CITY PARK: See Park, City. 
    CLASSIFICATION: The category of a street based upon its intended purposes and operating characteristics. 
    COLLECTOR, MAJOR: A street whose primary function is to connect a local street to another local street or to a collector or arterial street, that provides direct access to abutting properties unless such access would significantly impede traffic flow, and typically has an ADT of 2,000 to 5,000. 
    COLLECTOR, MINOR: A street whose primary function is to connect a local street to another local street or collector street, that provides direct access to adjacent properties, and typically has an ADT of 500 to 2,000. 
    COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: For the purposes of this Ordinance, a commercial vehicle shall mean any vehicle which exceeds 10,000 pounds gross vehicular weight, or 20 feet in length, or has more than two axles. 
    COMMUNICATIONS TOWER: A tower, pole, or similar structure which supports a telecommunications antenna above ground in a fixed location, free-standing, guyed, or on a structure but not including communications towers for amateur radio operators licensed by the Federal Communications Commission which are exempt from municipal zoning restrictions. 
    COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The legally adopted Comprehensive Land Use and Transportation Plan, and any amendments or attachments thereto. 
    CONDITIONAL USE: A use allowed on a lot in a zoning district only upon a showing by the applicant that such use on the lot will comply with all applicable conditions and standards for such use as set forth in Chapter 3, Article 3. 
    CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY: See Residential Assisted Living Facility. 
    CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of Chapter 5, the act of adding height or enclosed area to an existing structure, expanding the footprint of an existing structure, or erecting a structure. 
    CONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE: A structure that contributes to the character of an Historic Site or an Historic District. 
    CONVENIENCE STORE: A business establishment, often accompanied by fuel sales, stocking a limited selection of food and household products, generally oriented toward convenience and traveler shopping needs. 
    CROWN PRUNING: The pruning method of crown reduction accomplished by cutting back limbs to laterals that are at least one-third the size of the parent limb (also called drop-crotch pruning). (Ord. 04082002A) 
    CROWN RAISING: The removal of the lower branches of a tree in order to provide clearance for buildings, vehicles, pedestrians, and vistas. (Ord. 04082002A) 
    CROWN REDUCTION: Reducing the height or spread of a tree by pruning methods which maintain the structural integrity and natural form of the tree. (Ord. 04082002A) 
    CROWN TOPPING: The cutting back of limbs to a stub, bud, or lateral branch not large enough to assume the terminal role. (Ord. 04082002A) 
    DBH (Diameter at Breast Height): The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches 4.5 feet above grade except that a tree with multiple trunks that fork below the 4.5-foot level is measured below the fork. (Ord. 04082002A) 
    DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys a structure in whole. (Ord. 01282008A) 
    DESIGN REVIEW BOARD: The board appointed by City Council pursuant to the Overlay Districts provisions in Chapter 5 of this Ordinance and State law. 
    DESIGNATION, HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC SITE: Placement of a site, structure, or area to the Aiken Historic Register by City Council. See 6.2.13. 
    DETENTION POND: A drainage facility designed to manage and temporarily hold storm water and release it gradually as determined by the City Engineer. 
    DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING/PUBLIC WORKS: The Director of the Public Works Department of the City. 
    DISTRIBUTION LINE: Any utility line providing connection between transmission lines and service lines. 
    DRIVEWAY: An access point that is not a public street, road, or highway. 
    DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof intended exclusively for residential purposes. 
    DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing only one housekeeping unit and designed or used to house not more than one family in a permanent manner. 
    DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY: A building designed for, or portion of a building having accommodations for, two or more families being independent of each other, and each having its own kitchen and bath facilities. This term includes premises occupied more or less permanently for residential purposes in which the rooms are occupied in apartments, suites, or groups such as apartment units, apartment hotel, studio apartments, and all other dwellings similarly occupied, but does not include duplexes or single-family dwellings. 
    DWELLING UNIT: A single housekeeping unit, whether in a single-family or multifamily structure, including, at a minimum, a kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area. In Residential and Planned Residential zoning districts, dwelling unit density for any multifamily dwellings with a communal kitchen will include the number of units with bathroom and sleeping areas. (Ord. 09232013A) 
    ELECTRONIC READERBOARD : A sign attached to a freestanding sign which uses light emitting diodes or similar technology to display changeable messages. 
    EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE: The architectural features, character, and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including, but not limited to, the kind and texture of the building material and the type, design, and character of windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements. 
    FAMILY: One or two persons or parents with their direct descendants and adopted children together with not more than two persons not so related, living together in a room or rooms comprising a single housekeeping unit. Every additional group of five or fewer persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate family. Family does not include a group occupying a club, dormitory, etc. 
    FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The total enclosed area of all floors of a building measured to the outside face of the structural members in exterior walls, and including halls, stairways, elevator shafts at each floor level, service and mechanical equipment rooms, and basement or attic areas having a height of more than seven feet. Gross floor area shall exclude areas used exclusively for vehicle parking or loading. 
    FOOTCANDLE: The amount of light generated by one candle shining one foot away from a one-square-foot surface as measured by a photometric light meter. 
    FRONTAGE: The length of that portion of a property which directly adjoins a street. 
    FRONTAGE STREET: A street that is parallel to, adjacent to, but separate from an arterial and that is designed to provide access to abutting properties so that these properties are somewhat sheltered from the effects of the through traffic on the arterial street and so that the flow of traffic on the arterial street is not impeded by direct driveway access to these properties. 
    FULL CUT-OFF LIGHTING FIXTURE: A lighting fixture from which no light is emitted at or above a horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of the fixture. 
    GARAGE: A building or structure or part thereof intended to be used for storage or housing of vehicles. 
    GROCERY STORE: A business establishment where the majority of floor area is dedicated to the sale of produce, dry goods, meats, baked goods, dairy items, and/or pre-prepared foods. This includes supermarkets, food stores, dairies, and delicatessens, but does not include convenience stores. 
    GROUP HOME, TYPE 1: A home serving nine or fewer mentally or physically handicapped persons provided the home provides care on a 24-hour basis and is approved or licensed by a state agency or department for that purpose (South Carolina Code of Laws - Title 6, Chapter 29, Section 770). 
    GROUP HOME, TYPE 2 or 3: Any group home not meeting the definition of a Type 1 group home. 
    HARDSHIP: A condition caused by peculiar characteristics of a lot or tract of land that hinders strict compliance with this Ordinance, but that does not include personal or economic disadvantages or self-created conditions. 
    HEIGHT, COMMUNICATIONS TOWER: The distance from the base of the tower to the top of the structure. 
    HIGHWAY; STREET; ROAD: The entire width between right-of-way or boundary lines of a public way open for vehicular travel. 
    HISTORIC DISTRICT: A geographically definable area designated by City Council as possessing a concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, structures, or objects of historic, archeological, architectural, or aesthetic value. A district may also be comprised of individual sites, buildings, structures, or objects linked by association or history. 
    HISTORIC SITE: An individual property not contiguous to an Historic District designated by City Council as historic because of its historic, archeological, architectural, or aesthetic value. 
    HOME OCCUPATION TYPE 1: A low-intensity business conducted inside a dwelling which is allowed by right, is essentially imperceptible to nearby residents, and does not involve the sale of merchandise or provision of services to customers on-site on any sort of regular basis. 
    HOME OCCUPATION TYPE 2: A business which may involve the sale of merchandise or provision of services to customers on-site conducted inside a dwelling which requires approval of a special exception by the Board of Zoning Appeals including possible restrictions imposed by the BZA and other limitations set forth in the Zoning Ordinance to minimize the impact on nearby residents. 
    HOTEL or MOTEL: A commercial building with guest rooms for sleeping designed for and occupied by transients renting rooms on a daily basis and usually staying less than seven days. 
    INSTITUTION: A nonprofit or quasi-public use. See 3.2.4.F 
    KENNEL: Any building or premises where four or more dogs or cats (at least 8 weeks of age) or other small animals are kept, and for which remuneration is received. This definition shall not include premises that are used for residential purposes at which the occupant is keeping his own personal animals. 
    KITCHEN: A room or space used, intended, or designed to be used for the cooking or preparation of food. (Ord. 09232013A) 
    LAKE: A body of water with a permanent pool of a depth sufficient to preclude the growth of noxious weeds as determined by the City Engineer. 
    LANDMARK: A structure that is essential to the character of an Historic Site or Historic District. 
    LANDSCAPED AREA: That area not covered by buildings or pavement and containing landscaping. 
    LANDSCAPING: Plant material including but not limited to grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, trees, and organic matter such as mulch. This may also include stone, gravel (except in parking lots and driveways), walls and fences, and certain lakes or ponds meeting the requirements in 4.6.7. 
    LARGE RETAIL PROJECT: Any new predominantly retail development or collection of retail uses with a gross indoor floor area in excess of 40,000 square feet or any enlargement or alteration to an existing predominantly retail project that would result in a gross indoor floor area in excess of 40,000 square feet. 
    LOCAL STREET: A street whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties and typically has an ADT of up to 500. 
    LODGING or BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling unit or part thereof in which lodging and meals are provided in exchange for compensation. 
    LOT or LOT OF RECORD or PLAT: A lot or parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a map on file with the Registrar of Mesne Conveyance of Aiken County, South Carolina, or in common use by County officials. 

    LOT, CORNER: A lot which abuts on two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street that form an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees. 
    LOT DEPTH: The average distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
    LOT, INTERIOR: A lot that is not a corner lot and is bounded by a lot on each side line. 
    LOT LINE, FRONT: The front lot line of an interior lot is the line separating the lot from the street right-of-way or easement of principal access. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the lot line upon which the principal building entrance will front and/or where the principal address is assigned as determined by the City Engineer. 
    LOT LINE, REAR: The rear lot line is the boundary opposite and more or less parallel to the front lot line. The rear lot line of an irregular or triangular lot shall be a line not less than ten feet long, lying wholly within the lot, and parallel to and at the farthest distance from the front lot line. 
    LOT LINE, SIDE: A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front line or a rear lot line. 
    LOT, THROUGH: A lot that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
    LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum building setback line. 
    LUMEN: A unit of measurement of the rate at which light is emitted from a source. The International System unit of luminous flux, equal to the light emitted in a unit solid angle by a uniform point source of one candela. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD-Code), transportable in one or more sections are eight feet or more in width and 40 feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. This term does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE: A unit of ground indicated by corner markers on which a manufactured home may be placed in a manufactured home park. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A unified development of lots for the placement of one manufactured home per platted lot for non-transient occupancy, established for the purpose of having individually-owned lots. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any site, lot, parcel, or tract of land under single ownership with sites available for rent or lease upon which two or more manufactured housing units or mobile homes are placed. 
    MOBILE FOOD VENDOR : A vehicle mounted food product establishment designed to be readily movable (including, but not limited to food trucks, catering trucks, food trailers and pushcarts) from which food is distributed, sold, or served to walk-up customers. 
    MOBILE HOME: A manufactured home constructed prior to June 15, 1976 or that otherwise does not meet the HUD-Code standards. 
    MOTEL: See "Hotel or Motel." 
    MULCH: A layer of organic material placed on the soil around plants to retain moisture and prevent weeds. 
    NATURAL GRADE: The slope of the ground adjoining the building. 
    NONCONFORMING USE: Any use of a building or of land that does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is situated but which was existing and lawful prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or amendment. 
    NONCONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE: A structure that does not contribute to the character of an Historic Site or an Historic District. 
    NURSING HOME: A facility which is operated for the purpose of providing long-term individualized and substantial nursing, personal assistance, or convalescent care for residents unrelated to the operator. 
    OPEN SPACE: Outdoor or unenclosed area on the ground accessible for outdoor living, recreation, pedestrian access, or landscaping. Open space shall not include parking areas, driveways, deck or terrace areas, utility or service areas, or any space with a dimension of less than six feet in any direction. 
    OUTPARCEL: Any lot created from an overall tract wherein the remaining tract is larger than any single lot created and wherein the conditions and locations of access to such lot from a public street may be restricted and/or provided through easements granted by the larger tract holder. 
    OVERLAY DISTRICT: A geographic area designated on the Official Zoning Map where certain regulations of this Ordinance apply in addition to the underlying zoning district regulations. See 2.1.1 and 2.6.1. 
    PARK, CITY: All premises and facilities owned, leased, or used by the City or its Department of Parks and Recreation for any recreational purposes, not including a street right-of-way. 
    PARK, COMMUNITY: A park commonly 20 acres or more in size providing an area or building for community gathering, and including areas for active games such as baseball, softball, soccer, tennis, basketball and volleyball. May also include a swimming pool, as well as passive areas for hiking, biking, sitting, and picnicking. A maintenance building may also be provided. 
    PARK, NEIGHBORHOOD: A park commonly no more than five acres in size that is easily accessible to a neighborhood within safe walking and biking distance. A neighborhood park provides facilities for all ages, passive as well as active, including play equipment, open space for games, paved game areas, ballfields and landscaped areas. A small maintenance building may also be provided. 
    PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL: A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces which may include partially enclosed one-story buildings, or a parking garage that is the principal structure on the parcel and where a charge is made for storage or parking of vehicles. 
    PARKING SPACE: An area of appropriate dimensions to be used exclusively as a temporary storage space for private motor vehicles and not for truck loading and unloading space. 
    PERMIT: A legal document in which the City or SCDOT gives written permission for an access to an applicant. 
    PHASED DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A development plan submitted to the City by a landowner that shows the types and density or intensity of uses for a specific property or properties to be developed in phases, but which do not satisfy the requirements for a site specific development plan. (Ord. 06132005H) 
    PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT (PC): A commercial or mixed use development project comprehensively planned as a unified entity with a master concept plan that permits flexibility in siting buildings, shared access and parking, and mixtures of land uses. 
    PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PR): A development primarily used for residential purposes comprehensively planned as a unified entity with a concept plan approved by City Council that generally permits flexibility in siting buildings and a mixture of housing types and land uses but requires the preservation of usable open spaces and significant environmental features. Commercial and institutional uses may be included if they are primarily for the benefit of the residents of the project. 
    PLANNING COMMISSION: Refers to the Planning Commission of the City of Aiken, South Carolina, as set forth under the laws of the State of South Carolina. 
    PLANNING DIRECTOR: Director of the Planning Department of the City. 
    PLANTING STRIP: A portion of the required landscaping on a site. See Chapter 4, Article 6. 
    PUBLIC PROJECT: In accordance with Section 6-29-540, Code of Laws of South Carolina, any new street, structure, utility, square, park, or other public way, grounds, or open space or public buildings for any use, with the exception of telephone, sewer, and gas utilities or electric suppliers, utilities, and providers, whether publicly or privately owned, whose plans have been approved by a state or federal regulatory agency. 
    PUSHCART : Mobile food vending unit that must be moved by non-motorized means. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A self-propelled or towable vehicle of such size and weight as not to require special highway movement permits, primarily designed, constructed, or modified to provide temporary living quarters or for recreation, camping, or vacation use, and not for commercial purposes or for profit, including, but not limited to, motor homes, travel or camper trailers, pickup campers, boats and boat trailers. This definition does not include mobile or manufactured homes. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Any parcel or tract of land under the control of any person, organization, or governmental entity where two or more recreational vehicle sites are offered for use by the public or members of an organization for overnight stay. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SITE: A specific area within a recreational vehicle park that is set aside for one recreational vehicle. 
    RELOCATION: For the purposes of Chapter 5, any moving of a structure on its site or to another site. 
    REPAIR: For the purposes of Chapter 5, any minor change to a structure that is not construction, relocation, demolition, or alteration. 
    RESIDENTIAL ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY or RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A facility which offers room (regardless of whether leased or owned by the occupant or any other person), board, and a limited degree of personal assistance on a long-term basis for two or more persons, 18 years old or older, unrelated to the operator, but excluding any facility which offers or represents to the public that it offers such services primarily to or specifically for the mentally ill, mentally disabled, or drug or alcohol addicted or provides or purports to provide specific procedures or processes for those diseases or conditions. Personal assistance as used herein shall be interpreted and applied using the applicable provisions in South Carolina Code Annotated Regulation 61-84, or any successor provisions thereto, as guidelines. 
    RIGHT-OF-WAY: Land reserved for use as a highway, street, or road whether or not formally dedicated to the City including the area between the edge of pavement and the abutting property. 
    ROAD: See "Highway; Street; Road." 
    SCDOT: The South Carolina Department of Transportation. 
    SEMI-NUDITY: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    SERVICE LINE: Any utility line that connects a distribution line to an end user. 
    SETBACK LINE: That line that is the required minimum distance from the street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be constructed or placed. A setback line shall also apply to any accessory structure. 
    SHOPPING CENTER: A group of at least two commercial establishments typically planned, constructed, and managed as a single entity, with on-site parking for customers and employees, and with delivery of goods separate from customer access. 
    SIDEWALK: A paved or surfaced area, paralleling and usually separated from a public or private street, used as a pedestrian walkway. 
    SIGN: Any sign, poster panel, free-standing sign, monument sign, projecting sign, pylon sign, illuminated sign, sign painted on a wall, window marquee, awning or canopy, and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, ribbon, banner, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person, business or entity, public or private, when the same is placed in view of the general public, traveling along a public street right-of-way. 
    SIGN, MOBILE OR PORTABLE: Portable advertising signs or identification signs, either illuminated or non-illuminated, mounted on wheels or so constructed as to provide for temporary use. 
    SIGN, READER BOARD: A portion of a sign designed for changeable copy. 
    SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign which is not intended for permanent display. See 4.4.9. 
    SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN: a development plan submitted to the City by a landowner describing with reasonable certainty the types and density or intensity of uses for a specific property or properties. The plan may be in the form of, but is not limited to, the following plans or approvals: planned unit development; subdivision plat; preliminary or general development plan; variance; conditional use or special use permit plan; conditional or special use district zoning plan; or other land-use approval designations as are used by a county or municipality. (Ord. 06132005H) 
    SPECIAL EXCEPTION: A use permitted following approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with 6.2.18. 
    SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The male genitals or the vulva or other parts of the female genitals. 
    SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following: 
1.  Fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
2.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
3.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
4.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in 1 through 3 above. 
    STABLE: A building intended for the accommodation of one or more horses, mules, burros, or ponies. 
    STABLE, PLEASURE: A stable used to shelter horses, mules, burros, or ponies which are kept or ridden for the sole purpose of recreation or pleasure. 
    STABLE, COMMERCIAL: Any stable that does not meet the definition of a pleasure stable. 
    STORY: The vertical distance of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and ceiling next above it. A cellar or basement shall not be considered a story. Attic space is construed as one-half story. 
    STREET: See "Highway; Street; Road." 
    STREET WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side right-of-way lines of a street, road, or highway measured at right angles to the side right-of-way lines. 
    STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, or which is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. The term includes, but is not limited to buildings, gazebos, signs, billboards, tennis courts, backstops for tennis courts, radio and television antennae and satellite dishes, including supporting towers, swimming pools, decks, patios, light standards, walls, and fences. This definition shall not include play equipment, benches, birdbaths, mailboxes, or any other insignificant objects as determined by the Planning Director. 
    SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development for purposes other than agricultural. It includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. 
    SWALE: A grassy depression used to channel storm drainage with sides having a slope gradual enough to be mowed as determined by the City Engineer. 
    SWIMMING POOL: Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep including in-ground, above-ground, and on-ground pools as well as hot tubs and spas. 
    TELECOMMUNICATIONS: As defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
    TEMPORARY SIGN: See "Sign, Temporary." 
    TOWNHOUSE: A single-family dwelling constructed as part of a series of dwellings, all of which are attached to the adjacent dwelling by party walls with no visible space between them. Each dwelling is located on a separately platted lot. 
    TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: Signs; signals, and markings used to regulate, warn, and guide traffic. 
    TRANSMISSION LINE: Any utility line intended to move large quantities of utility service from generation sources to distribution lines but not to the end user. 
    TREE: A usually tall, woody plant, distinguished from a shrub by having comparatively greater height and, characteristically, a single trunk rather than several stems. 
    TREE, CANOPY: A variety of large tree designated by the City Horticulturist that will at maturity provide substantial shade. (Ord. 04082002A) 
    TREE, LARGE: A tree that typically exceeds a height of 30 feet at maturity as determined by the City Horticulturist and that is listed or identified in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual. 
    TREE, SIGNIFICANT: A large tree with a DBH of eight to 24 inches, or a small tree with a DBH of four to eight inches. Unless otherwise specified, this term refers to existing trees on a site. 
    TREE, SMALL: A tree that typically does not exceed a height of 30 feet at maturity as determined by the City Horticulturist and that is listed or identified in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Manual. 
    TREE, GRAND: A large tree with a DBH of 24 inches or more, a small tree with a DBH of eight inches or more, or any tree designated by the City Horticulturist to be of exceptional value because of its type, size, age, or other criteria. Unless otherwise specified, this term refers to existing trees on a site. 
    TREES, REMOVAL OF: Any intentional or negligent act that will cause a tree to decline and die within a period of one year from the act as determined exclusively by the City Horticulturist, including, but not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system of a tree by application of toxic substances; the operation of machinery; the change of natural grade by excavation or filling above the root system or around the trunk of a tree; damages from injury or fire inflicted on trees that result in or permit pest infestation; and improper pruning. 
    UNDERGROWTH: Vines and bushes as determined by the City Horticulturist. 
    UPPER-STORY RESIDENTIAL: A residential dwelling unit located above another use. 
    USE CATEGORY: A mechanism to classify land uses and activities based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, likely impact on surrounding properties, and site conditions. The Use Categories provide a systematic basis for assigning land uses to appropriate zoning districts. See Chapter 3, Article 2. 
    VARIANCE: Permission granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals to vary from the literal requirements of this Ordinance. See 6.2.19. 
    VEHICLE REPAIR: Any building in which, or premises on which, a business involving the maintenance, servicing, repair, or painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered. Vehicle repair does not involve the storage of vehicles for extended periods of time. 
    VEHICULAR USE AREA: Areas covered by pavement intended for use by automobiles and other vehicles for parking or any other purpose. 
    VESTED RIGHT: The right to undertake and complete the development of property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan or a phased development plan as provided in this article and in the local land development ordinances or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 06132005H) 
    VISIBLE FROM A STREET: Able to be seen by a person standing at any point on any public street right-of-way, including, but not limited to, any object that could be seen from a street if not for obstructing trees, vegetation, or fences. 
    YARD: An open space on the same site as a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, including a front yard, side yard, and rear yard. 
    YARD, FRONT: An open space extending the full width of a lot and of a depth measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line. 
    YARD, REAR: An open space extending the full width of a lot and of a depth measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line. 
    YARD, REQUIRED: Any setback area required in this Ordinance. See 4.2.1 and 4.3.1. 
    YARD, SIDE: An open space extending along the side line of a lot between the front yard and the rear yard and of a width measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line. 

    ZONING OFFICIAL: The person appointed by the Planning Director involved in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance (see 7.1.2 and 9.1.1). 
(Ord. No. 04142014B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-14-2014; Ord. No. 11092015 , § 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2015; Ord. No. 07102017A , § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-2017; Ord. No. 11122018C , § 1(Exh. A), 11-12-2018) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 04142014B  4-14-2014 1(Exh. A) 4.5.5 4.4.7 4.4.10, 4.4.11 10.1.2 05122014B  5-12-2014 1(Exh. A) 4.3.8 07142014D  7-14-2014 1(Exh. A) 4.6.6 10132014B 10-13-2014 1(Exh. A) 4.6.6 06222015C  6-22-2015 1(Exh. A) 4.3.8.C.2. 10262015B 10-26-2015 1 4.3.1(table) 11092015 11- 9-2015 1(Exh. A)       Added 3.4.8 10.1.2 12142015C 12-14-2015 1(Exh. A) 4.6.3 4.6.6 02082016B  2- 8-2016 1 7.1.7.J. 02082016C  2- 8-2016 1(Exh. A) 3.3.21 04252016  4-25-2016 1 4.2.9.A 07102017  7-10-2017 1(Exh. A) 4.3.3.C 07102017A  7-10-2017 1(Exh. A)       Added 3.5.7 10.1.2 11122018C 11-12-2018 1(Exh. A) 3.1.6       Added 3.3.16, 3.3.18       Rnbd 3.3.16       as 3.3.17       Rnbd 3.3.17-3.3.26       as 3.3.19-3.3.28 4.5.1 10.1.2  
